PAPERS RELATING TO THE
FOREIGN RELATIONS OF THE
UNITED STATES

1 Pte:

VOLUME I

(IN TWO VOLUMES)

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON

Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1925,

Volume I
United States Government Printing Office
Washington
U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
This ebook was generated on May 26, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition
The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program
to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series,
which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of
FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the
full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications,
including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the
ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.
In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the
original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page
numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this
ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since
document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes
(before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use
page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a
bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.
The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works
on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any
feedback.
To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general,
visit our ebooks homepage , and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr
at HistoryAtState .
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

Contents
Message of the President of the United States to Congress, December 8, 1925
List of Papers
General:
Scrapping of ships by the United States, Great Britain, and Japan in
accordance with the treaty for the limitation of naval armament,
Proposals for the calling by the President of the United States of a
disarmament conference (Documents 5-24)
Disinclination of the United States to be associated in European
security pacts: (1) Geneva protocol; (2) Locarno agreement
(Documents 25-29)
Participation by the United States in the Conference for the
Supervision of the International Traffic in Arms, at Geneva, May
Failure of the United States to secure the adoption of the rules
drafted by the International Commission for the Revision of the
Rules of Warfare (Documents 50-57)
Negotiations on behalf of the World War Foreign Debt Commission
for the settlement of debts owed the United States by foreign
governments
Belgium (Documents 58-66)
Czechoslovakia (Documents 67-77)
France (Documents 78-98)
Greece (Documents 99-102)
Italy (Documents 103-105)
Latvia (Documents 106-106)

Rumania (Documents 107-121)
Yugoslavia (Documents 122-131)
Interest of the United States in the disposition of the proposed
liberation bonds of the Austro-Hungarian succession states
(Documents 132-148)
Refusal by the United States to consent to the adherence of the
Soviet Union to the Spitzbergen treaty of February 9, 1920
(Documents 149-156)
Assent by President Coolidge to provisions in the Polish-Swiss
arbitration treaty for invoking the assistance of the President of the
United States under certain contingencies (Documents 157-158)
Unsuccessful efforts to have American customs attachés accorded
diplomatic status (Documents 159-189)
International convention for the unification of certain rules relating
to bills of lading (Documents 190-190)
Convention between the United States and other powers for the
protection of industrial property, signed November 6, 1925
(Documents 191-193)
Acceptance by the United States of invitation to attend the Third
International Telegraph Conference at Paris in 1925 (Documents
Extension of invitations to the Third International Radiotelegraph
Opposition of the Department of State to participation by the
League of Nations in international conferences of American states
(Documents 202-202)
The Tacna-Arica question: The arbitrator’s award and the
establishment of the Plebiscitary Commission (Documents 203-
265)
Boundary disputes
Colombia and Nicaragua (Documents 266-269)

Colombia and Peru (Documents 270-309)
Costa Rica and Panama (Documents 310-322)
Extension of the sovereignty of the United States over Swain’s
Island by joint resolution of Congress, approved March 4, 1925
(Documents 323-323)
Albania:
Recognition by the United States of the government of Ahmed
Zogu (Documents 324-332)
Renewed representations by the United States for equitable
treatment of American oil interests in Albania (Documents 333-
360)
Approval by the Parliament of Albania of the American-Albanian
(Documents 361-363)
Austria:
Informal agreement between the United States and Austria for
continuation of reciprocal most-favored-nation treatment in
customs matters (Documents 364-365)
Belgium:
Convention between the United States and Belgium for the
prevention of smuggling of intoxicating liquors, signed December
Interest of the United States in German reparation payments to
Belgium (Documents 368-378)
Brazil:
Disapproval by the Department of State of proposed loans from
American bankers to the State of São Paulo (Documents 379-382)
Bulgaria:
Continuance of American capitulatory rights in Bulgaria
(Documents 383-385)

Canada:
Extradition convention between the United States and Canada
applying to offenses against laws for the suppression of traffic in
narcotics (Documents 386-386)
Boundary treaty between the United States and Canada
(Documents 387-387)
Convention and protocol between the United States and Canada to
regulate the level of the Lake of the Woods (Documents 388-390)
Continued protests by the Canadian Government against increased
diversion of the waters of the Great Lakes (Documents 391-397)
Intimation by the Canadian Government of its claim to sovereignty
in the islands of the North (Documents 398-401)
Regulations to give effect to the convention of June 6, 1924,
between the United States and Canada for the suppression of
smuggling (Documents 402-402)
Chile:
Disinclination of the United States to grant asylum during
revolutionary crisis in Chile (Documents 403-412)
The Tacna-Arica question
China:
Renewal of civil war in North China and refusal by the United
States to lend itself to a policy of intervention (Documents 413-
464)
Decision by the United States and other powers to accredit
Ministers to the Provisional Government of China (Documents
Acceptance of the Soviet Ambassador as dean of the diplomatic
corps at Peking and establishment of an informal organization of
Heads of Legation (Documents 479-485)

Further consideration by the American and British Governments of
means for effectively preventing the traffic in arms with China
(Documents 486-490)
Participation by the United States in efforts to solve problems
arising from the disturbances at Shanghai, May 30, 1925
(Documents 491-573)
Spread of antiforeign disturbances in China (Documents 574-597)
Victory of the radical wing of the Kuomintang in Canton
(Documents 598-619)
Intensification of antiforeign feeling in Canton after the firing at
Shameen (Documents 620-634)
Adherence of certain powers to treaties concerning China signed at
Request from the Chinese Government to the Washington
Conference powers for a readjustment of treaty relations
(Documents 637-683)
The Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff
(Documents 684-724)
Convening of the Commission on Extraterritoriality in China,
provided for by resolution V of the Washington Conference
(Documents 725-732)
Continued support by the United States to the Federal Telegraph
Company in efforts to obtain execution of its contract with the
Chinese Government (Documents 733-777)
Executive order by President Coolidge remitting further payments
by China on the Boxer indemnity (Documents 778-778)
Colombia:
Boundary dispute with Nicaragua
Boundary dispute with Peru
Costa Rica:

——uudary dis

mule with Panama
Index

Message of the President of the United States to Congress,
December 8, 1925
MEMBERS OF THE CONGRESS: In meeting the constitutional requirement of informing the Congress
upon the state of the Union, it is exceedingly gratifying to report that the general
condition is one of progress and prosperity. Here and there are comparatively small and
apparently temporary difficulties needing adjustment and improved administrative
methods, such as are always to be expected, but in the fundamentals of government and
business the results demonstrate that we are going in the right direction. The country
does not appear to require radical departures from the policies already adopted so much
as it needs a further extension of these policies and the improvement of details. The age
of perfection is still in the somewhat distant future, but it is more in danger of being
retarded by mistaken Government activity than it is from lack of legislation. We are by
far the most likely to accomplish permanent good if we proceed with moderation.
In our country the people are sovereign and independent, and must accept the resulting
responsibilities. It is their duty to support themselves and support the Government.
That is the business of the Nation, whatever the charity of the Nation may require. The
functions which the Congress are to discharge are not those of local government but of
National Government. The greatest solicitude should be exercised to prevent any
encroachment upon the rights of the States or their various political subdivisions. Local
self-government is one of our most precious possessions. It is the greatest contributing
factor to the stability, strength, liberty, and progress of the Nation. It ought not to be
infringed by assault or undermined by purchase. It ought not to abdicate its power
through weakness or resign its authority through favor. It does not at all follow that
because abuses exist it is the concern of the Federal Government to attempt their
reform.
Society is in much more danger from encumbering the National Government beyond
its wisdom to comprehend, or its ability to administer, than from leaving the local
communities to bear their own burdens and remedy their own evils. Our local habit and
custom is so strong, our variety of race and creed is so great, the Federal authority is so
tenuous, that the area within which it can function successfully is very limited. The
wiser policy is to leave the localities, so far as we can, possessed of their own sources
of revenue and charged with their own obligations.
GOVERNMENT ECONOMY
It is a fundamental principle of our country that the people are sovereign. While they
recognize the undeniable authority of the state, they have established as its instrument a
Government of limited powers. They hold inviolate in their own hands the jurisdiction

over their own freedom and the ownership of their own property. Neither of these can
be impaired except by due process of law. The wealth of our country is not public
wealth, but private wealth. It does not belong to the Government, it belongs to the
people. The Government has no justification in taking private property except for a
public purpose. It is always necessary to keep these principles in mind in the laying of
taxes and in the making of appropriations. No right exists to levy on a dollar, or to
order the expenditure of a dollar, of the money of the people, except for a necessary
public purpose duly authorized by the Constitution. The power over the purse is the
power over liberty.
That is the legal limitation within which the Congress can act. How it will proceed
within this limitation is always a question of policy. When the country is prosperous
and free from debt, when the rate of taxation is low, opportunity exists for assuming
new burdens and undertaking new enterprises. Such a condition now prevails only to a
limited extent. All proposals for assuming new obligations ought to be postponed,
unless they are reproductive capital investments or are such as are absolutely necessary
at this time. We still have an enormous debt of over $20,000,000,000, on which the
interest and sinking-fund requirements are $1,320,000,000. Our appropriations for the
Pension Office and the Veterans’ Bureau are $600,000,000. The War and Navy
Departments call for $642,000,000. Other requirements, exclusive of the Post Office,
which is virtually self-sustaining, brought the appropriations for the current year up to
almost $3,100,000,000. This shows an expenditure of close to $30 for every inhabitant
of our country. For the average family of five it means a tax, directly or indirectly paid,
of about $150 for national purposes alone. The local tax adds much more. These
enormous expenditures ought not to be increased, but through every possible effort
they ought to be reduced.
Only one of these great items can be ultimately extinguished. That is the item of our
war debt. Already this has been reduced by about $6,000,000,000, which means an
annual saving in interest of close to $250,000,000. The present interest charge is about
$820,000,000 yearly. It would seem to be obvious that the sooner this debt can be
retired the more the taxpayers will save in interest and the easier it will be to secure
funds with which to prosecute needed running expenses, constructions, and
improvements. This item of $820,000,000 for interest is a heavy charge on all the
people of the country, and it seems to me that we might well consider whether it is not
greatly worth while to dispense with it as early as possible by retiring the principal debt
which it is required to serve.
It has always been our policy to retire our debts. That of the Revolutionary War period,
notwithstanding the additions made in 1812, was paid by 1835, and the Civil War debt
within 23 years. Of the amount already paid, over $1,000,000,000 is a reduction in cash
balances. That source is exhausted. Over one and two-thirds billions of dollars was
derived from excess receipts. Tax reduction eliminates that. The sale of surplus war

materials has been another element of our income. That is practically finished. With
these eliminated, the reduction of the debt has been only about $500,000,000 each year,
not an excessive sum on so large a debt.
Proposals have been made to extend the payment over a period of 62 years. If
$1,000,000,000 is paid at the end of 20 years, the cost to the taxpayers is the principal
and, if the interest is 4¼ per cent, a total of $1,850,000,000. If the same sum is paid at
the end of 62 years, the cost is $3,635,000,000, or almost double. Here is another
consideration: Compared with its purchasing power in 1913, the dollar we borrowed
represented but 52 cents. As the value of our dollar increases, due to the falling prices
of commodities, the burden of our debt increases. It has now risen to 63½ cents. The
taxpayer will be required to produce nearly twice the amount of commodities to pay his
debt if the dollar returns to the 1913 value. The more we pay while prices are high, the
easier it will be.
Deflation of government after a war period is slower than deflation of business, where
curtailment is either prompt and effective or disaster follows. There is room for further
economy in the cost of the Federal Government, but a comparison of current
expenditures with pre-war expenditures is not unfavorable to the efficiency with which
Government business is now being done. The expenditures of 1916, the last pre-war
great. If we subtract expenditures for debt retirements and interest, veterans’ relief,
increase of pensions, and other special outlays, consisting of refunds, trust investments,
and like charges, we find that the general expenditures of the Government in 1925 were
slightly more than twice as large as in 1916.
same Government must also have increased. But the Government is not the same. It is
more expensive to collect the much greater revenue necessary and to administer our
great debt. We have given enlarged and improved services to agriculture and
commerce. Above all, America has grown in population and wealth. Government
expenditures must always share in this growth. Taking into account the factors I have
mentioned, I believe that present Federal expenses are not far out of line with pre-war
expenses. We have nearly accomplished the deflation.
This does not mean that further economies will not come. As we reduce our debt our
interest charges decline. There are many details yet to correct. The real improvement,
however, must come not from additional curtailment of expenses, but by a more
intelligent, more ordered spending. Our economy must be constructive. While we
should avoid as far as possible increases in permanent current expenditures, oftentimes
a capital outlay like internal improvements will result in actual constructive saving.
That is economy in its best sense. It is an avoidance of waste that there may be the
means for an outlay to-day which will bring larger returns to-morrow. We should

constantly engage in scientific studies of our future requirements and adopt an orderly
program for their service. Economy is the method by which we prepare to-day to afford
the improvements of to-morrow.
BUDGET
A mere policy of economy without any instrumentalities for putting it into operation
would be very ineffective. The Congress has wisely set up the Bureau of the Budget to
investigate and inform the President what recommendations he ought to make for
current appropriations. This gives a centralized authority where a general and
comprehensive understanding can be reached of the sources of income and the most
equitable distribution of expenditures. How well it has worked is indicated by the fact
that the departmental estimates for 1922, before the budget law, were $4,068,000,000
while the Budget estimates for 1927 are $3,156,000,000. This latter figure shows the
reductions in departmental estimates for the coming year made possible by the
operation of the Budget system that the Congress has provided.
But it is evidently not enough to have care in making appropriations without any
restraint upon expenditure. The Congress has provided that check by establishing the
office of Comptroller General.
The purpose of maintaining the Budget Director and the Comptroller General is to
secure economy and efficiency in Government expenditure. No better method has been
devised for the accomplishment of that end. These offices can not be administered in
all the various details without making some errors both of fact and of judgment. But the
important consideration remains that these are the instrumentalities of the Congress and
that no other plan has ever been adopted which was so successful in promoting
economy and efficiency. The Congress has absolute authority over the appropriations
and is free to exercise its judgment, as the evidence may warrant, in increasing or
decreasing budget recommendations. But it ought to resist every effort to weaken or
break down this most beneficial system of supervising appropriations and expenditures.
Without it all the claim of economy would be a mere pretense.
TAXATION
The purpose of reducing expenditures is to secure a reduction in taxes. That purpose is
about to be realized. With commendable promptness the Ways and Means Committee
of the House has undertaken in advance of the meeting of the Congress to frame a
revenue act. As the bill has proceeded through the committee it has taken on a
nonpartisan character, and both Republicans and Democrats have joined in a measure
which embodies many sound principles of tax reform. The bill will correct substantially
the economic defects injected into the revenue act of 1924, as well as many which have

remained as war-time legacies. In its present form it should provide sufficient revenue
for the Government.
The excessive surtaxes have been reduced, estate tax rates are restored to more
reasonable figures, with every prospect of withdrawing from the field when the States
have had the opportunity to correct the abuses in their own inheritance tax laws, the gift
tax and publicity section are to be repealed, many miscellaneous taxes are lowered or
abandoned, and the Board of Tax Appeals and the administrative features of the law are
improved and strengthened. I approve of the bill in principle. In so far as income-tax
exemptions are concerned, it seems to me the committee has gone as far as it is safe to
go and somewhat further than I should have gone. Any further extension along these
lines would, in my opinion, impair the integrity of our income-tax system.
I am advised that the bill will be through the House by Christmas. For this prompt
action the country can thank the good sense of the Ways and Means Committee in
framing an economic measure upon economic considerations. If this attitude continues
to be reflected through the Congress, the taxpayer will have his relief by the time his
March 15th installment of income taxes is due. Nonpartisan effort means certain, quick
action. Determination of a revenue law definitely, promptly and solely as a revenue
law, is one of the greatest gifts a legislature can bestow upon its constituents. I
commend the example of the Ways and Means Committee. If followed, it will place
sound legislation upon the books in time to give the taxpayers the full benefit of tax
reduction next year. This means that the bill should reach me prior to March 15.
All these economic results are being sought not to benefit the rich, but to benefit the
people. They are for the purpose of encouraging industry in order that employment
may be plentiful. They seek to make business good in order that wages may be good.
They encourage prosperity in order that poverty may be banished from the home. They
seek to lay the foundation which, through increased production, may give the people a
more bountiful supply of the necessaries of life, afford more leisure for the
improvement of the mind, the appreciation of the arts of music and literature, sculpture
and painting, and the beneficial enjoyment of outdoor sports and recreation, enlarge the
resources which minister to charity and by all these means attempting to strengthen the
spiritual life of the Nation.
FOREIGN RELATIONS
The policy of our foreign relations, casting aside any suggestion of force, rests solely
on the foundation of peace, good will, and good works. We have sought, in our
intercourse with other nations, better understandings through conference and exchange
of views as befits beings endowed with reason. The results have been the gradual
elimination of disputes, the settlement of controversies, and the establishment of a

firmer friendship between America and the rest of the world than has ever existed at
any previous time.
The example of this attitude has not been without its influence upon other countries.
Acting upon it, an adjustment was made of the difficult problem of reparations. This
was the second step toward peace in Europe. It paved the way for the agreements
which were drawn up at the Locarno Conference. When ratified, these will represent
the third step toward peace. While they do not of themselves provide an economic
rehabilitation, which is necessary for the progress of Europe, by strengthening the
guaranties of peace they diminish the need for great armaments. If the energy which
now goes into military effort is transferred to productive endeavor, it will greatly assist
economic progress.
The Locarno agreements were made by the European countries directly interested
without any formal intervention of America, although on July 3 I publicly advocated
such agreements in an address made in Massachusetts. We have consistently refrained
from intervening except when our help has been sought and we have felt it could be
effectively given, as in the settlement of reparations and the London Conference. These
recent Locarno agreements represent the success of this policy which we have been
insisting ought to be adopted, of having European countries settle their own political
problems without involving this country. This beginning seems to demonstrate that this
policy is sound. It is exceedingly gratifying to observe this progress, which both in its
method and in its result promises so much that is beneficial to the world.
When these agreements are finally adopted, they will provide guaranties of peace that
make the present prime reliance upon force in some parts of Europe very much less
necessary. The natural corollary to these treaties should be further international
contracts for the limitation of armaments. This work was successfully begun at the
Washington Conference. Nothing was done at that time concerning land forces because
of European objection. Our standing army has been reduced to around 118,000, about
the necessary police force for 115,000,000 people. We are not proposing to increase it,
nor is it supposable that any foreign country looks with the slightest misapprehension
upon our land forces. They do not menace anybody. They are rather a protection to
everybody.
The question of disarming upon land is so peculiarly European in its practical aspects
that our country would look with particular gratitude upon any action which those
countries might take to reduce their own military forces. This is in accordance with our
policy of not intervening unless the European powers are unable to agree and make
request for our assistance. Whenever they are able to agree of their own accord it is
especially gratifying to us, and such agreements may be sure of our sympathetic
support.

It seems clear that it is the reduction of armies rather than of navies that is of the first
importance to the world at the present time. We shall look with great satisfaction upon
that effort and give it our approbation and encouragement. If that can be settled, we
may more easily consider further reduction and limitation of naval armaments. For that
purpose our country has constantly through its Executive, and through repeated acts of
Congress, indicated its willingness to call such a conference. Under congressional
sanction it would seem to be wise to participate in any conference of the great powers
for naval limitation of armament proposed upon such conditions that it would hold a
fair promise of being effective. The general policy of our country is for disarmament,
and it ought not to hesitate to adopt any practical plan that might reasonably be
expected to succeed. But it would not care to attend a conference which from its
location on constituency would in all probability prove futile.
In the further pursuit of strengthening the bonds of peace and good will we have joined
with other nations in an international conference held at Geneva and signed an
agreement which will be laid before the Senate for ratification providing suitable
measures for control and for publicity in international trade in arms, ammunition, and
implements of war, and also executed a protocol providing for a prohibition of the use
of poison gas in war, in accordance with the principals of Article 5 of the treaty relating
thereto signed at the Washington Conference. We are supporting the Pan American
efforts that are being made toward the codification of international law, and looking
with sympathy on the investigations being conducted under philanthropic auspices of
the proposal to make agreements outlawing war. In accordance with promises made at
the Washington Conference, we have urged the calling of and are now represented at
the Chinese Customs Conference and on the Commission on Extraterritoriality, where
it will be our policy so far as possible to meet the aspirations of China in all ways
consistent with the interests of the countries involved.
COURT OF INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
Pending before the Senate for nearly three years is the proposal to adhere to the
protocol establishing the Permanent Court of International Justice. A well-established
line of precedents mark America’s effort to effect the establishment of a court of this
nature. We took a leading part in laying the foundation on which it rests in the
establishment of The Hague Court of Arbitration. It is that tribunal which nominates
the judges who are elected by the Council and Assembly of the League of Nations.
The proposal submitted to the Senate was made dependent upon four conditions, the
first of which is that by supporting the court we do not assume any obligations under
the league; second, that we may participate upon an equality with other States in the
election of judges; third, that the Congress shall determine what part of the expenses
we shall bear; fourth, that the statute creating the court shall not be amended without

our consent; and to these I have proposed an additional condition to the effect that we
are not to be bound by advisory opinions rendered without our consent.
The court appears to be independent of the league. It is true the judges are elected by
the Assembly and Council, but they are nominated by the Court of Arbitration, which
we assisted to create and of which we are a part. The court was created by a statute, so-
called, which is really a treaty made among some forty-eight different countries, that
might properly be called a constitution of the court. This statute provides a method by
which the judges are chosen, so that when the Court of Arbitration nominates them and
the Assembly and Council of the League elect them, they are not acting as instruments
of the Court of Arbitration or instruments of the league, but as instruments of the
statute.

This will be even more apparent if our representatives sit with the members of the
council and assembly in electing the judges. It is true they are paid through the league
though not by the league, but by the countries which are members of the league and by
our country if we accept the protocol. The judges are paid by the league only in the
same sense that it could be said United States judges are paid by the Congress. The
court derives all its authority from the statute and is so completely independent of the
league that it could go on functioning if the league were disbanded, at least until the
terms of the judges expired.
The most careful provisions are made in the statute as to the qualifications of judges.
Those who make the nominations are recommended to consult with their highest court
of justice, their law schools and academies. The judges must be persons of high moral
character, qualified to hold the highest judicial offices in that country, or be
jurisconsults of recognized competence in international law. It must be assumed that
these requirements will continue to be carefully met, and with America joining the
countries already concerned it is difficult to comprehend how human ingenuity could
better provide for the establishment of a court which would maintain its independence.
It has to be recognized that independence is to a considerable extent a matter of ability,
character, and personality. Some effort was made in the early beginnings to interfere
with the independence of our Supreme Court. It did not succeed because of the quality
of the men who made up that tribunal.
It does not seem that the authority to give advisory opinions interferes with the
independence of the court. Advisory opinions in and of themselves are not harmful, but
may be used in such a way as to be very beneficial because they undertake to prevent
injury rather than merely afford a remedy after the injury has been done. As a principle
that only implies that the court shall function when proper application is made to it.
Deciding the question involved upon issues submitted for an advisory opinion does not

differ materially from deciding the question involved upon issues submitted by
contending parties. Up to the present time the court has given an advisory opinion
when it judged it had jurisdiction, and refused to give one when it judged it did not
have jurisdiction. Nothing in the work of the court has yet been an indication that this is
an impairment of its independence or that its practice differs materially from the giving
of like opinions under the authority of the constitutions of several of our States.
No provision of the statute seems to me to give this court any authority to be a political
rather than a judicial court. We have brought cases in this country before our courts
which, when they have been adjudged to be political, have been thereby dismissed. It is
not probable that political questions will be submitted to this court, but again up to the
present time the court has refused to pass on political questions and our support would
undoubtedly have a tendency to strengthen it in that refusal.
We are not proposing to subject ourselves to any compulsory jurisdiction. If we support
the court, we can never be obliged to submit any case which involves our interests for
its decision. Our appearance before it would always be voluntary, for the purpose of
presenting a case which we had agreed might be presented. There is no more danger
that others might bring cases before the court involving our interests which we did not
wish to have brought, after we have adhered, and probably not so much, than there
would be of bringing such cases if we do not adhere. I think that we would have the
same legal or moral right to disregard such a finding in the one case that we would in
the other.
If we are going to support any court, it will not be one that we have set up alone or
which reflects only our ideals. Other nations have their customs and their institutions,
their thoughts and their methods of life. If a court is going to be international, its
composition will have to yield to what is good in all these various elements. Neither
will it be possible to support a court which is exactly perfect, or under which we
assume absolutely no obligations. If we are seeking that opportunity, we might as well
declare that we are opposed to supporting any court. If any agreement is made, it will
be because it undertakes to set up a tribunal which can do some of the things that other
nations wish to have done. We shall not find ourselves bearing a disproportionate share
of the world’s burdens by our adherence, and we may as well remember that there is
absolutely no escape for our country from bearing its share of the world’s burdens in
any case. We shall do far better service to ourselves and to others if we admit this and
discharge our duties voluntarily, than if we deny it and are forced to meet the same
obligations unwillingly.
It is difficult to imagine anything that would be more helpful to the world than stability,
tranquillity and international justice. We may say that we are contributing to these
factors independently, but others less fortunately located do not and can not make a like
contribution except through mutual cooperation. The old balance of power, mutual

alliances, and great military forces were not brought about by any mutual dislike for
independence, but resulted from the domination of circumstances. Ultimately they were
forced on us. Like all others engaged in the war whatever we said as a matter of fact we
joined an alliance, we became a military power, we impaired our independence. We
have more at stake than any one else in avoiding a repetition of that calamity. Wars do
not spring into existence. They arise from small incidents and trifling irritations which
can be adjusted by an international court. We can contribute greatly to the advancement
of our ideals by joining with other nations in maintaining such a tribunal.
FOREIGN DEBTS
Gradually, settlements have been made which provide for the liquidation of debts due
to our Government from foreign governments. Those made with Great Britain, Finland,
Hungary, Lithuania, and Poland have already been approved by the Congress. Since the
adjournment,
further
agreements
have
been
entered
into
with
Belgium,
Czechoslovakia, Latvia, Esthonia, Italy, and Rumania. These 11 nations, which have
already made settlements, represent $6,419,528,641 of the original principal of the
loans. The principal sums without interest, still pending, are the debt of France, of
Russia, $192,000,000, which those at present in control have undertaken openly to
repudiate; Nicaragua, $84,000, which is being paid currently; and Austria, $24,000,000,
on which by act of Congress a moratorium of 20 years has been granted. The only
remaining sum is $12,000,000, due from Armenia, which has now ceased to exist as an
independent nation.
In accordance with the settlements made, the amount of principal and interest which is
to be paid to the United States under these agreements aggregates $15,200,688,253.93.
It is obvious that the remaining settlements, which will undoubtedly be made, will
bring this sum up to an amount which will more than equal the principal due on our
present national debt. While these settlements are very large in the aggregate, it has
been felt that the terms granted were in all cases very generous. They impose no undue
burden and are mutually beneficial in the observance of international faith and the
improvement of international credit.
Every reasonable effort will be made to secure agreements for liquidation with the
remaining countries, whenever they are in such condition that they can be made. Those
which have already been negotiated under the bipartisan commission established by the
Congress have been made only after the most thoroughgoing and painstaking
investigation, continued for a long time before meeting with the representatives of the
countries concerned. It is believed that they represent in each instance the best that can
be done and the wisest settlement that can be secured. One very important result is the
stabilization of foreign currency, making exchange assist rather than embarrass our
trade. Wherever sacrifices have been made of money, it will be more than amply

returned in better understanding and friendship, while in so far as these adjustments
will contribute to the financial stability of the debtor countries, to their good order,
prosperity, and progress, they represent hope of improved trade relations and mutual
contributions to the civilization of the world.
ALIEN PROPERTY
Negotiations are progressing among the interested parties in relation to the final
distribution of the assets in the hands of the Alien Property Custodian. Our Government
and people are interested as creditors; the German Government and people are
interested as debtors and owners of the seized property. Pending the outcome of these
negotiations, I do not recommend any affirmative legislation. For the present we should
continue in possession of this property which we hold as security for the settlement of
claims due to our people and our Government.
IMMIGRATION
While not enough time has elapsed to afford a conclusive demonstration, such results
as have been secured indicate that our immigration law is on the whole beneficial. It is
undoubtedly a protection to the wage earners of this country. The situation should,
however, be carefully surveyed, in order to ascertain whether it is working a needless
hardship upon our own inhabitants. If it deprives them of the comfort and society of
those bound to them by close family ties, such modifications should be adopted as will
afford relief, always in accordance with the principle that our Government owes its first
duty to our own people and that no alien, inhabitant of another country, has any legal
rights whatever under our Constitution and laws. It is only through treaty, or through
residence here, that such rights accrue. But we should not, however, be forgetful of the
obligations of a common humanity.
While our country numbers among its best citizens many of those of foreign birth, yet
those who now enter in violation of our laws by that very act thereby place themselves
in a class of undesirables. If investigation reveals that any considerable number are
coming here in defiance of our immigration restrictions, it will undoubtedly create the
necessity for the registration of all aliens. We ought to have no prejudice against an
alien because he is an alien. The standard which we apply to our inhabitants is that of
manhood, not place of birth. Restrictive immigration is to a large degree for economic
purposes. It is applied in order that we may not have a larger annual increment of good
people within our borders than we can weave into our economic fabric in such a way as
to supply their needs without undue injury to ourselves.
NATIONAL DEFENSE
Never before in time of peace has our country maintained so large and effective a
military force as it now has. The Army, Navy, Marine Corps, National Guard, and

Organized Reserves represent a strength of about 558,400 men. These forces are well
trained, well equipped, and high in morale.
A sound selective service act giving broad authority for the mobilization in time of
peril of all the resources of the country, both persons and materials, is needed to perfect
our defensive policy in accordance with our ideals of equality. The provision for more
suitable housing to be paid for out of funds derived from the sale of excess lands,
pending before the last Congress, ought to be brought forward and passed. Reasonable
replacements ought to be made to maintain a sufficient ammunition reserve.
The Navy has the full treaty tonnage of capital ships. Work is going forward in
modernizing the older ones, building aircraft carriers, additional fleet submarines, and
fast scout cruisers, but we are carefully avoiding anything that might be construed as a
competition in armaments with other nations. The joint Army and Navy maneuvers at
Hawaii, followed by the cruise of a full Battle Fleet to Australia and New Zealand,
were successfully carried out. These demonstrations revealed a most satisfactory
condition of the ships and the men engaged.
Last year at my suggestion the General Board of the Navy made an investigation and
report on the relation of aircraft to warships. As a result authorizations and
appropriations were made for more scout cruisers and fleet submarines and for
completing aircraft carriers and equipping them with necessary planes. Additional
training in aviation was begun at the Military and Naval Academies. A method of
coordination and cooperation of the Army and Navy and the principal aircraft builders
is being perfected. At the suggestion of the Secretaries of War and Navy I appointed a
special board to make a further study of the problem of aircraft.
The report of the Air Board ought to be reassuring to the country, gratifying to the
service and satisfactory to the Congress. It is thoroughly complete and represents the
mature thought of the best talent in the country. No radical change in organization of
the service seems necessary. The Departments of War, Navy, and Commerce should
each be provided with an additional assistant secretary, not necessarily with statutory
duties but who would be available under the direction of the Secretary to give especial
attention to air navigation. We must have an air strength worthy of America. Provision
should be made for two additional brigadier generals for the Army Air Service.
Temporary rank corresponding to their duties should be awarded to active flying
officers in both Army and Navy.
Aviation is of great importance both for national defense and commercial development.
We ought to proceed in its improvement by the necessary experiment and investigation.
Our country is not behind in this art. It has made records for speed and for the
excellence of its planes. It ought to go on maintaining its manufacturing plants capable
of rapid production, giving national assistance to the laying out of airways, equipping

itself with a moderate number of planes, and keeping an air force trained to the highest
efficiency.
While I am a thorough believer in national defense and entirely committed to the policy
of adequate preparation, I am just as thoroughly opposed to instigating or participating
in a policy of competitive armaments. Nor does preparation mean a policy of
militarizing. Our people and industries are solicitous for the cause of our country, and
have great respect for the Army and Navy and for the uniform worn by the men who
stand ready at all times for our protection to encounter the dangers and perils necessary
to military service, but all of these activities are to be taken not in behalf of aggression
but in behalf of peace. They are the instruments by which we undertake to do our part
to promote good will and support stability among all peoples.
VETERANS
If any one desires to estimate the esteem in which the veterans of America are held by
their fellow citizens, it is but necessary to remember that the current budget calls for an
expenditure of about $650,000,000 in their behalf. This is nearly the amount of the total
cost of the National Government, exclusive of the post office, before we entered the
last war.
At the two previous sessions of Congress legislation affecting veterans’ relief was
enacted and the law liberalized. This legislation brought into being a number of new
provisions tending more nearly to meet the needs of our veterans, as well as afford the
necessary authority to perfect the administration of these laws.
Experience with the new legislation so far has clearly demonstrated its constructive
nature. It has increased the benefits received by many and has made eligible for
benefits many others. Direct disbursements to the veteran or his dependents exceeding
$21,000,000 have resulted, which otherwise would not have been made. The degree of
utilization of our hospitals has increased through making facilities available to the
incapacitated veteran regardless of service origin of the disability. This new legislation
also has brought about a marked improvement of service to the veteran.
The organizations of ex-service men have proposed additional legislative changes
which you will consider, but until the new law and the modifications made at the last
session of Congress are given a more thorough test further changes in the basic law
should be few and made only after careful though sympathetic consideration.
The principal work now before the Veterans’ Bureau is the perfection of its
organization and further improvements in service. Some minor legislative changes are
deemed necessary to enable the bureau to retain that high grade of professional talent
essential in handling the problems of the bureau. Such changes as tend toward the
improvement of service and the carrying forward to completion of the hospital

construction program are recommended for the consideration of the proper committees
of Congress.
With the enormous outlay that is now being made in behalf of the veterans and their
dependents, with a tremendous war debt still requiring great annual expenditure, with
the still high rate of taxation, while every provision should be made for the relief of the
disabled and the necessary care of dependents, the Congress may well consider whether
the financial condition of the Government is not such that further bounty through the
enlargement of general pensions and other emoluments ought not to be postponed.
AGRICULTURE
No doubt the position of agriculture as a whole has very much improved since the
depression of three and four years ago. But there are many localities and many groups
of individuals, apparently through no fault of their own, sometimes due to climatic
conditions and sometimes to the prevailing price of a certain crop, still in a distressing
condition. This is probably temporary, but it is none the less acute. National
Government agencies, the Departments of Agriculture and Commerce, the Farm Loan
Board, the intermediate credit banks, and the Federal Reserve Board are all cooperating
to be of assistance and relief. On the other hand, there are localities and individuals
who have had one of their most prosperous years. The general price level is fair, but
here again there are exceptions both ways, some items being poor while others are
excellent. In spite of a lessened production the farm income for this year will be about
the same as last year and much above the three preceding years.
Agriculture is a very complex industry. It does not consist of one problem, but of
several. They can not be solved at one stroke. They have to be met in different ways,
and small gains are not to be despised.

It has appeared from all the investigations that I have been able to make that the
farmers as a whole are determined to maintain the independence of their business. They
do not wish to have meddling on the part of the Government or to be placed under the
inevitable restrictions involved in any system of direct or indirect price-fixing, which
would result from permitting the Government to operate in the agricultural markets.
They are showing a very commendable skill in organizing themselves to transact their
own business through cooperative marketing, which will this year turn over about
$2,500,000,000, or nearly one-fifth of the total agricultural business. In this they are
receiving help from the Government. The Department of Agriculture should be
strengthened in this facility, in order to be able to respond when these marketing
associations want help. While it ought not to undertake undue regulation, it should be

equipped to give prompt information on crop prospects, supply, demand, current
receipts, imports, exports, and prices.
A bill embodying these principles, which has been drafted under the advice and with
the approval of substantially all the leaders and managers in the cooperative movement,
will be presented to the Congress for its enactment. Legislation should also be
considered to provide for leasing the unappropriated public domain for grazing
purposes and adopting a uniform policy relative to grazing on the public lands and in
the national forests.
A more intimate relation should be established between agriculture and the other
business activities of the Nation. They are mutually dependent and can each advance
their own prosperity most by advancing the prosperity of the other. Meantime the
Government will continue those activities which have resulted in an unprecedented
amount of legislation and the pouring out of great sums of money during the last five
years. The work for good roads, better land and water transportation, increased support
for agricultural education, extension of credit facilities through the Farm Loan Boards
and the intermediate credit banks, the encouragement of orderly marketing and a
repression of wasteful speculation, will all be continued.
Following every other depression, after a short period the price of farm produce has
taken and maintained the lead in the advance. This advance had reached a climax
before the war. Everyone will recall the discussion that went on for four or five years
prior to 1914 concerning the high cost of living. This history is apparently beginning to
repeat itself. While wholesale prices of other commodities have been declining, farm
prices have been increasing. There is every reason to suppose that a new era in
agricultural prosperity lies just before us, which will probably be unprecedented.

MUSCLE SHOALS
The problem of Muscle Shoals seems to me to have assumed a place all out of
proportion with its real importance. It probably does not represent in market value
much more than a first-class battleship, yet it has been discussed in the Congress over a
period of years and for months at a time. It ought to be developed for the production of
nitrates primarily, and incidentally for power purposes. This would serve defensive,
agricultural, and industrial purposes. I am in favor of disposing of this property to meet
these purposes. The findings of the special commission will be transmitted to the
Congress for their information. I am convinced that the best possible disposition can be
made by direct authorization of the Congress. As a means of negotiation I recommend
the immediate appointment of a small joint special committee chosen from the
appropriate general standing committees of the House and Senate to receive bids,

which when made should be reported with recommendations as to acceptance, upon
which a law should be enacted, effecting a sale to the highest bidder who will agree to
carry out these purposes.
If anything were needed to demonstrate the almost utter incapacity of the National
Government to deal directly with an industrial and commercial problem, it has been
provided by our experience with this property. We have expended vast fortunes, we
have taxed everybody, but we are unable to secure results which benefit anybody. This
property ought to be transferred to private management under conditions which will
dedicate it to the public purpose for which it was conceived.
RECLAMATION
The National Government is committed to a policy of reclamation and irrigation which
it desires to establish on a sound basis and continue in the interest of the localities
concerned. Exhaustive studies have recently been made of Federal reclamation, which
have resulted in improving the projects and adjusting many difficulties. About one third
of the projects is in good financial condition, another third can probably be made
profitable, while the other third is under unfavorable conditions. The Congress has
already provided for a survey which will soon be embodied in a report. That ought to
suggest a method of relief which will make unnecessary further appeals to the
Congress. Unless this can be done, Federal reclamation will be considerably retarded.
With the greatly increased cost of construction and operation, it has become necessary
to plan in advance, by community organization and selective agriculture, methods
sufficient to repay these increasing outlays.

The human and economic interests of the farmer citizens suggest that the States should
be required to exert some effort and assume some responsibility, especially in the
intimate, detailed, and difficult work of securing settlers and developing farms which
directly profit them, but only indirectly and remotely can reimburse the Nation. It is
believed that the Federal Government should continue to be the agency for planning
and constructing the great undertakings needed to regulate and bring into use the rivers
of the West, many of which are interstate in character, but the detailed work of creating
agricultural communities and a rural civilization on the land made ready for
reclamation ought to be either transferred to the. State in its entirety or made a
cooperative effort of the State and Federal Government.
SHIPPING
The maintenance of a merchant marine is of the utmost importance for national defense
and the service of our commerce. We have a large number of ships engaged in that
service. We also have a surplus supply, costly to care for, which ought to be sold. All

the investigations that have been made under my direction, and those which have been
prosecuted independently, have reached the conclusion that the fleet should be under
the direct control of a single executive head, while the Shipping Board should exercise
its judicial and regulatory functions in accordance with its original conception. The
report of Henry G. Dalton, a business man of broad experience, with a knowledge of
shipping, made to me after careful investigation, will be transmitted for the information
of the Congress, the studies pursued under the direction of the United States Chamber
of Commerce will also be accessible, and added to these will be the report of the
special committee of the House.
I do not advocate the elimination of regional considerations, but it has become apparent
that without centralized executive action the management of this great business, like
the management of any other great business, will flounder in incapacity and languish
under a division of council. A plain and unmistakable reassertion of this principle of
unified control, which I have always been advised was the intention of the Congress to
apply, is necessary to increase the efficiency of our merchant fleet.
COAL
The perennial conflict in the coal industry is still going on to the great detriment of the
wage earners, the owners, and especially to the public. With deposits of coal in this
country capable of supplying its needs for hundreds of years, inability to manage and
control this great resource for the benefit of all concerned is very close to a national
economic failure. It has been the subject of repeated investigation and reiterated
recommendation. Yet the industry seems never to have accepted modern methods of
adjusting differences between employers and employees. The industry could serve the
public much better and become subject to a much more effective method of control if
regional consolidations and more freedom in the formation of marketing associations,
under the supervision of the Department of Commerce, were permitted.
At the present time the National Government has little or no authority to deal with this
vital necessity of the life of the country. It has permitted itself to remain so powerless
that its only attitude must be humble supplication. Authority should be lodged with the
President and the Departments of Commerce and Labor, giving them power to deal
with an emergency. They should be able to appoint temporary boards with authority to
call for witnesses and documents, conciliate differences, encourage arbitration, and in
case of threatened scarcity exercise control over distribution. Making the facts public
under these circumstances through a statement from an authoritative source would be
of great public benefit. The report of the last coal commission should be brought
forward, reconsidered, and acted upon.
PROHIBITION

Under the orderly processes of our fundamental institutions the Constitution was lately
amended providing for national prohibition. The Congress passed an act for its
enforcement, and similar acts have been provided by most of the States. It is the law of
the land. It is the duty of all who come under its jurisdiction to observe the spirit of that
law, and it is the duty of the Department of Justice and the Treasury Department to
enforce it. Action to prevent smuggling, illegal transportation in interstate commerce,
abuse in the use of permits, and existence of sources of supply for illegal traffic is
almost entirely imposed upon the Federal Government.
Through treaties with foreign governments and increased activities of the Coast Guard,
revenue agents, district attorneys, and enforcement agents effort is being made to
prevent these violations. But the Constitution also puts a concurrent duty on the States.
We need their active and energetic cooperation, the vigilant action of their police, and
the jurisdiction of their courts to assist in enforcement. I request of the people
observance, of the public officers continuing efforts for enforcement, and of the
Congress favorable action on the budget recommendation for the prosecution of this
work.

WATERWAY DEVELOPMENT
For many years our country has been employed in plans and operations for the
development of our intracoastal and inland waterways. This work along our coast is an
important adjunct to our commerce. It will be carried on, together with the further
opening up of our harbors, as our resources permit. The Government made an
agreement during the war to take over the Cape Cod Canal, under which the owners
made valuable concessions. This pledged faith of the Government ought to be
redeemed.
Two other main fields are under consideration. One is the Great Lakes and St.
Lawrence, including the Erie Canal. This includes stabilizing the lake level, and is both
a waterway and power project. A joint commission of the United States and Canada is
working on plans and surveys which will not be completed until next April. No final
determination can be made, apparently, except under treaty as to the participation of
both countries. The other is the Mississippi River system. This is almost entirely
devoted to navigation. Work on the Ohio River will be completed in about three years.
A modern channel connecting Chicago, New Orleans, Kansas City, and Pittsburgh
should be laid out and work on the tributaries prosecuted. Some work is being done of
a preparatory nature along the Missouri, and large expenditures are being made yearly
in the lower reaches of the Mississippi and its tributaries which contribute both to flood
control and navigation. Preliminary measures are being taken on the Colorado River
project, which is exceedingly important for flood control, irrigation, power

development, and water supply to the area concerned. It would seem to be very
doubtful, however, whether it is practical to secure affirmative action of the Congress,
except under a joint agreement of the several States.
The Government has already expended large sums upon scientific research and
engineering investigation in promotion of this Colorado River project. The actual
progress has been retarded for many years by differences among the seven States in the
basin over their relative water rights and among different groups as to methods. In an
attempt to settle the primary difficulty of the water rights, Congress authorized the
Colorado River Commission which agreed on November 24, 1922, upon an interstate
compact to settle these rights, subject to the ratification of the State legislatures and
Congress. All seven States except Arizona at one time ratified, the Arizona Legislature
making certain reservations which failed to meet the approval of the governor.
Subsequently an attempt was made to establish the compact upon a six-State basis, but
in this case California imposed reservations. There appears to be no division of opinion
upon the major principles of the compact, but difficulty in separating contentions as to
methods of development from the discussion of it. It is imperative that flood control be
undertaken for California and Arizona, preparation made for irrigation, for power, and
for domestic water.
Some or all of these questions are combined in every proposed development. The
Federal Government is interested in some of these phases, State governments and
municipalities and irrigation districts in others, and private corporations in still others.
Because of all this difference of view it is most desirable that Congress should consider
the creation of some agency that will be able to determine methods of improvement
solely upon economic and engineering facts, that would be authorized to negotiate and
settle, subject to the approval of Congress, the participation, rights, and obligations of
each group in any particular works. Only by some such method can early construction
be secured.
WATER POWER
Along with the development of navigation should go every possible encouragement for
the development of our water power. While steam still plays a dominant part, this is
more and more becoming an era of electricity. Once installed, the cost is moderate, has
not tended greatly to increase, and is entirely free from the unavoidable dirt and
disagreeable features attendant upon the burning of coal. Every facility should be
extended for the connection of the various units into a superpower plant, capable at all
times of a current increasing uniformity over the entire system.
RAILROADS

The railroads throughout the country are in a fair state of prosperity. Their service is
good and their supply of cars is abundant. Their condition would be improved and the
public better served by a system of consolidations. I recommend that the Congress
authorize such consolidations under the supervision of the Interstate Commerce
Commission, with power to approve or disapprove when proposed parts are excluded
or new parts added. I am informed that the railroad managers and their employees have
reached a substantial agreement as to what legislation is necessary to regulate and
improve their relationship. Whenever they bring forward such proposals, which seem
sufficient also to protect the interests of the public, they should be enacted into law.
It is gratifying to report that both the railroad managers and railroad employees are
providing boards for the mutual adjustment of differences in harmony with the
principles of conference, conciliation, and arbitration. The solution of their problems
ought to be an example to all other industries. Those who ask the protections of
civilization should be ready to use the methods of civilization.
A strike in modern industry has many of the aspects of war in the modern world. It
injures labor and it injures capital. If the industry involved is a basic one, it reduces the
necessary economic surplus and, increasing the cost of living, it injures the economic
welfare and general comfort of the whole people. It also involves a deeper cost. It tends
to embitter and divide the community into warring classes and thus weakens the unity
and power of our national life.
Labor can make no permanent gains at the cost of the general welfare. All the victories
won by organized labor in the past generation have been won through the support of
public opinion. The manifest inclination of the managers and employees of the
railroads to adopt a policy of action in harmony with these principles marks a new
epoch in our industrial life.
OUTLYING POSSESSIONS
The time has come for careful investigation of the expenditures and success of the laws
by which we have undertaken to administer our outlying possessions. A very large
amount of money is being expended for administration in Alaska. It appears so far out
of proportion to the number of inhabitants and the amount of production as to indicate
cause for thorough investigation. Likewise consideration should be given to the
experience under the law which governs the Philippines. From such reports as reach me
there are indications that more authority should be given to the Governor General, so
that he will not be so dependent upon the local legislative body to render effective our
efforts to set an example of the sound administration and good government, which is so
necessary for the preparation of the Philippine people for self-government under
ultimate independence. If they are to be trained in these arts, it is our duty to provide
for them the best that there is.

RETIREMENT OF JUDGES
The act of March 3, 1911, ought to be amended so that the term of years of service of
judges of any court of the United States requisite for retirement with pay shall be
computed to include not only continuous but aggregate service.
MOTHERS’ AID
The Government ought always to be alert on the side of the humanities. It ought to
encourage provisions for economic justice for the defenseless. It ought to extend its
relief through its national and local agencies, as may be appropriate in each case, to the
suffering and the needy. It ought to be charitable.
Although more than 40 of our States have enacted measures in aid of motherhood, the
District of Columbia is still without such a law. A carefully considered bill will be
presented, which ought to have most thoughtful consideration in order that the
Congress may adopt a measure which will be hereafter a model for all parts of the
Union.
CIVIL SERVICE
In 1883 the Congress passed the civil service act, which from a modest beginning of
14,000 employees has grown until there are now 425,000 in the classified service. This
has removed the clerical force of the Nation from the wasteful effects of the spoils
system and made it more stable and efficient. The time has come to consider
classifying all postmasters, collectors of customs, collectors of internal revenue, and
prohibition agents, by an act covering in those at present in office, except when
otherwise provided by Executive order.
The necessary statistics are now being gathered to form the basis of a valuation of the
civil service retirement fund based on current conditions of the service. It is confidently
expected that this valuation will be completed in time to be made available to the
Congress during the present session. It will afford definite knowledge of existing and
future liabilities under the present law and determination of liabilities under any
proposed change in the present law. We should have this information before creating
further obligations for retirement annuities which will become liabilities to be met in
the future from the money of the taxpayer.
The classification act of 1923, with the subsequent legislative action providing for
adjustment of the compensation of field service positions, has operated materially to
improve employment conditions in the Federal service. The administration of the act is
in the hands of an impartial board, functioning without the necessity of a direct
appropriation. It would be inadvisable at this time to place in other hands the
administration of this act.

FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION
The proper function of the Federal Trade Commission is to supervise and correct those
practices in commerce which are detrimental to fair competition. In this it performs a
useful function and should be continued and supported. It was designed also to be a
help to honest business. In my message to the Sixty-eighth Congress I recommended
that changes in the procedure then existing be made. Since then the commission by its
own action has reformed its rules, giving greater speed and economy in the disposal of
its cases and full opportunity for those accused to be heard. These changes are
improvements and, if necessary, provision should be made for their permanency.
REORGANIZATION
No final action has yet been taken on the measure providing for the reorganization of
the various departments. I therefore suggest that this measure, which will be of great
benefit to the efficient and economical administration of the business of the
Government, be brought forward and passed.
THE NEGRO
Nearly one-tenth of our population consists of the Negro race. The progress which they
have made in all the arts of civilization in the last 60 years is almost beyond belief. Our
country has no more loyal citizens. But they do still need sympathy, kindness, and
helpfulness. They need reassurance that the requirements of the Government and
society to deal out to them even-handed justice will be met. They should be protected
from all violence and supported in the peaceable enjoyment of the fruits of their labor.
Those who do violence to them should be punished for their crimes. No other course of
action is worthy of the American people.
Our country has many elements in its population, many different modes of thinking and
living, all of which are striving in their own way to be loyal to the high ideals worthy of
the crown of American citizenship. It is fundamental of our institutions that they seek
to guarantee to all our inhabitants the right to live their own lives under the protection
of the public law. This does not include any license to injure others materially,
physically, morally, to incite revolution, or to violate the established customs which
have long had the sanction of enlightened society.
But it does mean the full right to liberty and equality before the law without distinction
of race or creed. This condition can not be granted to others, or enjoyed by ourselves,
except by the application of the principle of broadest tolerance. Bigotry is only another
name for slavery. It reduces to serfdom not only those against whom it is directed, but
also those who seek to apply it. An enlarged freedom can only be secured by the
application of the golden rule. No other utterance ever presented such a practical rule of
life.

CONCLUSION
It is apparent that we are reaching into an era of great general prosperity. It will
continue only so long as we shall use it properly. After all, there is but a fixed quantity
of wealth in this country at any fixed time. The only way that we can all secure more of
it is to create more. The element of time enters into production. If the people have
sufficient moderation and contentment to be willing to improve their condition by the
process of enlarging production, eliminating waste, and distributing equitably, a
prosperity almost without limit lies before us. If the people are to be dominated by
selfishness, seeking immediate riches by nonproductive speculation and by wasteful
quarreling over the returns from industry, they will be confronted by the inevitable
results of depression and privation. If they will continue industrious and thrifty,
contented with fair wages and moderate profits, and the returns which accrue from the
development of our natural resources, our prosperity will extend itself indefinitely.
In all your deliberations you should remember that the purpose of legislation is to
translate principles into action. It is an effort to have our country be better by doing
better. Because the thoughts and ways of people are firmly fixed and not easily
changed, the field within which immediate improvement can be secured is very narrow.
Legislation can provide opportunity. Whether it is taken advantage of or not depends
upon the people themselves. The Government of the United States has been created by
the people. It is solely responsible to them. It will be most successful if it is conducted
solely for their benefit. All its efforts would be of little avail unless they brought more
justice, more enlightenment, more happiness and prosperity into the home. This means
an opportunity to observe religion, secure education, and earn a living under a reign of
law and order. It is the growth and improvement of the material and spiritual life of the
Nation. We shall not be able to gain these ends merely by our own action. If they come
at all, it will be because we have been willing to work in harmony with the abiding
purpose of a Divine Providence.
CALVIN COOLIDGE

List of Papers
[Unless otherwise specified, the correspondence is from or to officials in the
Department of State]

GENERAL
SCRAPPING OF SHIPS BY THE UNITED STATES, GREAT BRITAIN, AND JAPAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE TREATY FOR THE LIMITATION OF NAVAL
ARMAMENT, SIGNED FEBRUARY 6, 1922
Date and number Subject
Page
1925
Feb.
17
(29440–
From the Secretary of the Navy
Information that Navy Department has completed
scrapping of vessels as required under the Treaty for
the Limitation of Naval Armament.
(Information communicated to France, Great Britain,
Italy, and Japan.)
1 [Pg. 1 includes
portions of Doc. 1
and Doc. 2]
Feb. 20
To the Secretary of the Navy
Expression of appreciation for Navy Department’s
careful execution of the task imposed by the treaty.
1 [Pg. 1 includes
portions of Doc. 1
and Doc. 2]
Mar. 6 (Foreign
Service
Report
15)
From the Ambassador in Japan
Information that Japan has completed scrapping of
vessels as provided for in the treaty.
2 [Pg. 2 includes
portions of Doc. 3
and Doc. 4]
From the British Ambassador
Information that Great Britain has completed
scrapping of vessels in accordance with the treaty.
2 [Pg. 2 includes
portions of Doc. 3
and Doc. 4]
PROPOSALS FOR THE CALLING BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF A DISARMAMENT CONFERENCE
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Undated
Excerpt From a Memorandum of a Conversation Between the
British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and the American
Opinion of Sir Austen Chamberlain that much could be
accomplished by a naval disarmament conference, and
intimation that he would welcome an invitation from the
United States to hold such a conference.
3 [Pg. 3 is part
of Doc. 5]
Feb.
14
(67)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Mr. Chamberlain’s opinion that France and Japan would
participate in a naval disarmament conference.
4
[Pg.
4
includes portions
of Doc. 5, Doc.
6, and Doc. 7]
Feb.
14
(74)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Instructions to ascertain the basis for Mr. Chamberlain’s belief
that France would join in a conference.
4
[Pg.
4
includes portions

of Doc. 5, Doc.
6, and Doc. 7]
Feb.
17
(71)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Basis of Mr. Chamberlain’s views found to be his inference
from general political situation in France and conversation
with French Premier.
5
[Pg.
5
includes portions
of Doc. 8, Doc.
9, and Doc. 10]
Feb.
19
(74)
From the Chargé in Great Britain (tel.)
Mr. Chamberlain’s reply to a question in the House of
Commons regarding the conference that the matter has been
mentioned informally in conversations with the U. S.
Ambassador and is under consideration.
5
[Pg.
5
includes portions
of Doc. 8, Doc.
9, and Doc. 10]
Feb.
20
(34)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
United Press cablegram reporting consent of England, Japan,
and Italy to conference, and consent of France awaited by
President Coolidge.
5
[Pg.
5
includes portions
of Doc. 8, Doc.
9, and Doc. 10]
Feb.
21
(94)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Resume of what has occurred in regard to discussion of
disarmament conference; assurance for French Government
that no formal negotiations have taken place, as might have
been inferred from press reports, and that if the United States
takes any initiative in the matter, all the other Governments,
including France, will be notified.
6 [Pg. 6 is part
of Doc. 11]
Feb.
21
(19)
To the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Summary of situation concerning possible calling of
conference, and U. S. position; regret that press reports have
made it appear that some special negotiation was going on
with Great Britain.
7
[Pg.
7
includes portions
of Doc. 11 and
Doc. 12]
Mar. 18
(51)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
London press despatch reporting President Coolidge’s alleged
decision, following failure of Geneva Protocol, to proceed with
the conference even if some powers refuse to take part.
Japanese impression that U. S.-British conversations were
significant.
(Footnote: British Government’s announcement, March 12, of
its inability to accept Geneva Protocol.)
8
[Pg.
8
includes portions
of Doc. 12 and
Doc. 13]
Mar. 19
(31)
To the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Secretary’s
explanation
to
Japanese
Ambassador
in
Washington that the subject of a disarmament conference was
introduced by Mr. Chamberlain, that conversations were
informal, and that if the President decided to call a conference
9
[Pg.
9
includes portions
of Doc. 13 and
Doc. 14]

the United States would communicate with Japan as well as
other Governments.
Undated Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of
State and the French Ambassador, March 26, 1925
Opinion of French Government that disarmament is not now
practical. Discussion of security question.
10
[Pg.
10
includes portions
of Doc. 14 and
Doc. 15]
Oct.
22
(385)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Instructions to cable summary of press comment in country to
which accredited regarding the President’s remarks to the press
on possibility of disarmament conference.
(Similar instruction sent to Japan. Instructions to Ambassador
in France to repeat to Great Britain, Germany, and Italy.)
11
[Pg.
11
includes portions
of Doc. 15, Doc.
16, Doc. 17, and
Doc. 18]
Oct.
23
(510)
From the Chargé in France (tel.)
Press comment opposed to any disarmament conference.
11
[Pg.
11
includes portions
of Doc. 15, Doc.
16, Doc. 17, and
Doc. 18]
Oct.
24
(160)
From the Chargé in Italy (tel.)
No press comment in regard to a disarmament conference.
11
[Pg.
11
includes portions
of Doc. 15, Doc.
16, Doc. 17, and
Doc. 18]
Oct.
24
(332)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Ambassador’s feeling that an atmosphere of hostility exists
toward any conference in Washington on land armament, but
that proposition to reduce naval armaments might be favorably
received. General press comment to the effect that with the
Locarno Agreement, initiative has passed from Washington to
Geneva.
12 [Pg. 12 is
part of Doc. 19]
Oct.
24
(322)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Request that Ambassador ascertain informally and unofficially
the attitude of the British Government toward President’s
calling of a disarmament conference, and the opinion of British
officials as to its reception by other European countries.
(Footnote: Telegram from Ambassador, October 26, stating
that Department’s inquiry had been answered by his telegram
No. 332, October 24.)
13
[Pg.
13
includes portions
of Doc. 19 and
Doc. 20]
Oct.
24
(176)
From the Chargé in Japan (tel.)
Absence of editorial comment in Japanese press regarding
President’s remarks. Information that Japan would prefer to see
14
[Pg.
14
includes portions
of Doc. 20, Doc.
21, and Doc. 22]

settlement of obligations arising out of the 1922 Washington
Conference before considering new commitments.
Oct.
26
(183)
From the Ambassador in Germany (tel.)
Information that the President’s remarks have received very
little press comment. Ambassador’s opinion that Germany
would welcome President’s calling of a conference.
14
[Pg.
14
includes portions
of Doc. 20, Doc.
21, and Doc. 22]
Oct.
29
(337)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Probability of the calling of a European conference for the
limitation
of
armament,
excluding
United
States.
Ambassador’s suggestion that the situation might be aided if
President Coolidge were to point out that any so-called
American interference in European affairs has come only when
European powers themselves were unable to agree and had
asked for help.
15
[Pg.
15
includes portions
of Doc. 22 and
Doc. 23]
Nov. 19
(338)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Information that the President will take up the subject in his
message to Congress, December 8.
16
[Pg.
16
includes portions
of Doc. 24 and
Doc. 25]
DISINCLINATION OF THE UNITED STATES TO BE ASSOCIATED IN EUROPEAN SECURITY PACTS: (1) GENEVA PROTOCOL; (2) LOCARNO
AGREEMENT
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Undated
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With
the British Ambassador, January 5, 1925
British efforts for modifications in the Geneva Protocol.
Secretary’s personal views as to aspects of protocol which might
give concern to U. S. Government. Ambassador’s suggestion for
possible reservation by Great Britain, and Secretary’s desire that,
in event of such reservation, nothing be said to the effect that an
arrangement satisfactory to United States had been made
regarding ratification of the protocol.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 24 and
Doc. 25]
Undated Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With
the British Ambassador, January 8, 1925
U. S. desire that Great Britain act entirely on its own
responsibility in dealing with Geneva Protocol, and especially
that no mention be made of any understanding with United
States. Ambassador’s reiteration of British policy to act in
cooperation with United States.
19 [Pg. 19 is
part of Doc.
26]

Undated Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With
the German Ambassador, March 16, 1925
Substance of proposition made by Germany to France and Great
Britain for a joint security pact to secure France, including
proposal that France’s security be guaranteed to United States.
Secretary’s statement that United States is not authorized to join
in any guarantee, nor is question of Germany’s joining the
League of Nations a matter for U. S. comment or suggestion.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 26 and
Doc. 27]
Mar. 16
From the Chargé in Great Britain
German memorandum of January 20 (text printed) handed to
Great Britain, France, Italy, and Belgium on the subject of a
security pact. Information that Great Britain will probably
attempt to induce France to include Germany in any pact, on the
understanding that Germany will first enter the League of
Nations on an equal footing.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 27 and
Doc. 28]
June
5
(123)
To the Minister in Poland
Secretary’s assertion, upon receipt of Polish Legation’s
memorandum of May 28 (text printed) summarizing Polish
position in connection with possible security pacts, that United
States cannot associate itself in any way with a security pact.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 28 and
Doc. 29]
PARTICIPATION BY THE UNITED STATES IN THE CONFERENCE FOR THE SUPER-VISION OF THE INTERNATIONAL TRAFFIC IN ARMS, AT GENEVA, MAY 4–
JUNE 17, 1925
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925 Jan.
192.
1924. IX)
From the Secretary General of the League of Nations
Notification of meeting at Geneva, May 4, 1925, of
international conference to examine the draft convention for the
control of the international traffic in arms adopted July 12,
1924, by the Temporary Mixed Commission of the League of
Nations, and to conclude a convention on the subject. List of
governments having already signified willingness to be present.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 29 and
Doc. 30]
Apr.
16
(1)
To the American Delegation
Instructions for representing United States at the Geneva
conference. Explanation of U. S. position regarding certain
principles underlying the draft convention, namely, the licensing
system; the restriction of sales to recognized governments and
belligerents; and the prohibited zones. U. S. insistence upon
publicity of shipments by governments as well as by private
parties. Consideration of the draft convention article by article.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 30 and
Doc. 31]

(Footnotes: Membership of American delegation and its
technical advisers and secretarial staff.)
Apr.
16
(2)
To the American Delegation
Instructions as to attitude to be taken in the event of Soviet
participation in the conference. Reservation (text printed) to be
made in proposed convention as safeguard against any possible
misconstruction of attitude of United States toward a signatory
or adhering power represented by a regime not recognized by
the United States.
48 [Pg. 48 is
part of Doc.
32]
May
13
(28)
From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Desire of French delegation for provision in draft convention
that signatories will undertake not to authorize the exportation
of war material to countries where domestic legislation
prohibits its importation. Circulation of draft provision to that
effect
by
the
Uruguayan
representative.
Request
for
instructions.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 32 and
Doc. 33]
May
14
(20)
To the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Department’s belief that insertion of provision such as
suggested by the French delegation would be superfluous to the
purposes of the convention.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 34 and
Doc. 35]
May
15
(31)
From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Egyptian delegate’s suggestion of a statement to be included in
convention to provide for possible infractions of the convention
by foreigners in countries where extraterritorial rights are
enjoyed. Views of American delegation and suggestion of
substitute provision.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 34 and
Doc. 35]
May
15
(32)
From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Opinion, after further consideration, that the principle involved
in the Uruguayan proposal (made on French initiative), if
properly phrased, might serve as a useful precedent for securing
cooperation of foreign powers in making effective the
provisions of the U. S. prohibition law.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 35 and
Doc. 36]
May
16
(21)
To the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Information that Department would not object to provision
suggested in regard to extraterritorial countries.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 36, Doc.
37, and Doc.
38]
May
16
(24)
To the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Instructions to oppose proposal of Uruguayan delegate, since
includes

the proposal, even if redrafted in accordance with American
delegation’s suggestion, might prove either useless or
embarrassing.
portions
of
Doc. 36, Doc.
37, and Doc.
38]
May
21
(42)
From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Request for instructions as to whether Department wishes
delegation to endeavor to secure modification of article 31
regarding submission of disputes to arbitration, or to seek a
reservation on the part of the United States.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 39 and
Doc. 40]
May
23
(36)
To the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Opinion of Department that modification of article 31 is not
necessary; authorization, subject to final instructions, to sign
convention without reservations as to article 31.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 39 and
Doc. 40]
June
1
(54)
From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Recommendation of Military and Naval Committee for a
separate international conference to deal with subject of gas
warfare. Suggestion of American delegation that, as means of
retaining initiative in the matter, U. S. President might invite
countries to designate representatives to agree in Washington on
a convention on use of poison gas.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 40 and
Doc. 41]
June
3
(50)
To the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Secretary’s suggestion of resolution regarding use of poison gas
to be proposed to conference; other suggestions for keeping
initiative in hands of United States; plan to consult with
President about possible calling of a conference.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 41 and
Doc. 42]
June
4
(51)
To the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Authorization, as result of Secretary’s consultation with
President, to indicate to powers represented at conference the
President’s willingness to extend invitation as suggested by
American delegation.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 42, Doc.
43, and Doc.
44]
June
4
(60)
From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Information that resolution substantially identical with that
proposed by Secretary was rejected in committee and that other
suggestions were criticized. Request for further instructions.
(Footnote: No indication of further action.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 42, Doc.
43, and Doc.
44]
June
14
(87)
From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Request for authorization to sign convention.
includes
portions
of

Doc. 44 and
Doc. 45]
June
15
(64)
To the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Authorization for signature of convention, provided no new or
objectionable features are introduced, and provided a reasonable
number of other powers are prepared to sign.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 46, Doc.
47, and Doc.
48]
[June 17]
(90)
From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.)
Information that convention, final act, protocol of signature, and
gas protocol have been signed by the chairman and vice
chairman of American delegation.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 46, Doc.
47, and Doc.
48]
June 17
From the Chairman of the American Delegation
Statement (text printed) approving provisions of convention and
consenting to its signature, signed by the three American
delegates who did not join in signing of the treaties.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 46, Doc.
47, and Doc.
48]
July
24
(471)
From the Minister in Switzerland
Transmittal of various acts signed at Geneva June 17, 1925:
Convention for the supervision of the international trade in arms
(text printed), protocol concerning gases (text printed),
declaration regarding the Territory of Ifni, the final act, and the
protocol of signature.
(Footnote: Information concerning the declaration regarding the
Territory of Ifni, the final act, and the protocol of signature.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 48 and
Doc. 49]

FAILURE OF THE UNITED STATES TO SECURE THE ADOPTION OF THE RULES DRAFTED BY THE INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE REVISION OF THE
RULES OF WARFARE
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1924
Jan. 26
(829)
To the Ambassador in France
Instructions to make clear to the Government to which accredited
the readiness of United States, in conjunction with Great Britain,
France, Italy, Japan, and the Netherlands, to accept the two sets of
rules drafted by the International Commission of Jurists in 1923.
Instructions, further, to inquire whether Government would be
includes
portions
of
Doc. 49 and
Doc. 50]

disposed to conclude with United States and other powers
mentioned two conventions (such as were proposed by the
American delegation at The Hague, February 12, 1923), to each of
which one set of rules should be annexed.
(The same to representatives in Great Britain, Italy, Japan, and the
Netherlands.)
Apr. 23
(459–E)
From the Ambassador in Japan
Foreign Office note, April 19, 1924 (text printed), indicating
willingness of Japan to adopt both sets of rules prepared by
Commission of Jurists and to conclude conventions substantially
as suggested by United States.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 50 and
Doc. 51]
July 18
(1061)
To the Ambassador in France
Instructions to bring matter of proposed conventions again to the
attention of Foreign Office, referring to favorable action by Japan
and emphasizing U. S. hope for affirmative reply from France.
(Footnote: Similar instructions to representatives in Great Britain,
Italy, and the Netherlands.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 51 and
Doc. 52]
1925
Jan. 10
(24)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Instructions to endeavor to obtain early favorable decision from
Foreign Office.
(Footnote: Similar telegrams to representatives in Great Britain,
Italy, and the Netherlands.)
includes
portions
of
Doc.
52,
Doc. 53, and
Doc. 54]
Jan. 31
(313)
From the Ambassador in Italy
Foreign Office note, January 29 (text printed), acceding to
principles involved in conventions proposed, but asserting
advisability of considering the review and expansion of the
conventions.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
52,
Doc. 53, and
Doc. 54]
Feb. 12
(398)
From the Minister in the Netherlands
Foreign Office note, February 11 (text printed), replying in detail
to inquiries of United States relative to the proposed conventions
—agreeing in principle with U. S. ideas as to form of conventions,
suggesting convocation of a conference to agree upon details of
rules to be annexed, and explaining inability to accept certain
articles of the rules in their present form.
(Footnote: Foreign Office note, September 1, 1939, explaining that
the Netherlands point of view has undergone certain changes since
1925.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 54 and
Doc. 55]
Mar. 12
(4941)
From the Ambassador in France
Foreign Office note, March 10 (text printed), stating that the rules
proposed reproduce solutions already adopted by France and
105
[Pg.
105 is part of
Doc. 56]

included either in conventions now in force or in practices of
international law.
Apr.
9
(1166)
From the Chargé in Great Britain
Foreign Office note, April 6 (text printed), stating British
Government’s decision to await further international discussion on
question before formulating its views on the rules prepared by the
Commission of Jurists.
106
[Pg.
106 includes
portions
of
Doc. 56 and
Doc. 57]
NEGOTIATIONS ON BEHALF OF THE WORLD WAR FOREIGN DEBT COMMISSION FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF DEBTS OWED THE UNITED STATES BY
FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS
BELGIUM
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Mar. 26
(111)
To the Ambassador in Belgium
Note to be presented to Foreign Office (text printed) referring to
correspondence of 1919 (extracts printed) whereby Belgium
agreed to accord to post-armistice advances by United States as
favorable treatment as that accorded to advances by other nations;
and inquiring, in light of the foregoing, when United States may
expect to receive payments on account of the Belgian post-
armistice relief debt proportionate to payments which Belgium
appears to have made to other creditor nations on similar account.
(Footnote: Note delivered to the Foreign Office April 22.)
107
[Pg.
107 includes
portions
of
Doc. 57 and
Doc. 58]
May 29
(32)
To the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Instructions to inform Belgian officials that United States will not
object to notation of proposed $50,000,000 loan by Belgium,
being negotiated with J. P. Morgan & Co., provided Belgian
Government will undertake at once to refund its entire
indebtedness to United States on certain principles enumerated,
and will set forth in writing its acceptance of these principles and
agree to send a commission to United States to negotiate
settlement with World War Foreign Debt Commission.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 58 and
Doc. 59]
May 31
(62)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Decision of Belgian officials to accept U. S. conditions and to
send note to that effect.
is
part
of
Doc. 60]
June
2
(65)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Foreign Office note (text printed) stating adherence in principle to
U. S. conditions.
is
part
of
Doc. 61]

June
3
(35)
To the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Information that Belgian note is unsatisfactory because it leaves
certain particulars in doubt. Instructions to make a communication
to Belgian Government (text printed), or, if considered preferable,
to proceed along some other line to obtain unequivocal statement
accepting principles set forth by United States.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 61 and
Doc. 62]
June
5
(70)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Unconditional acceptance of U. S. principles as basis of
negotiation. Belgian memorandum, June 5 (text printed), for U. S.
approval.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 62 and
Doc. 63]
June
6
(39)
To the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Instructions to state, upon receipt of written assurance that
Belgium will send a mission to United States in July to negotiate
settlement, that United States considers memorandum of June 5
satisfactory.
120
[Pg.
120 includes
portions
of
Doc. 63 and
Doc. 64]
June
7
(72)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Belgian statement (text printed) giving assurance that mission will
be sent to United States.
121
[Pg.
121 includes
portions
of
Doc. 64, Doc.
65, and Doc.
66]
June
7
(40)
To the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Information that Department has notified the press regarding
Belgian mission to be sent to United States, and hate notified J. P.
Morgan & Co. that it has no objection to the $50,000,000 loan.
(Footnote: Information that Belgian Commission sailed from
Cherbourg on July 30.)
121
[Pg.
121 includes
portions
of
Doc. 64, Doc.
65, and Doc.
66]
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Apr.
4
(252)
To the Minister in Czechoslovakia
Note to be presented to Czechoslovak Government (text printed)
expressing surprise at apparent discrimination against United
States in favor of other creditor governments, in view of the
understanding set forth in 1919 correspondence (texts printed)
regarding U. S. advances to Czechoslovakia for relief and
reconstruction purposes.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 66 and
Doc. 67]

May
2
(12)
From the Minister in Czechoslovakia (tel.)
Information that Dr. Beneš, Czechoslovak Minister of Foreign
Affairs, denies any intention of discriminating against United
States by arranging payment of so-called Nansen relief bonds and
will write Minister in explanation.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 68 and
Doc. 69]
May
5
(11)
To the Minister in Czechoslovakia (tel.)
Résumé of situation in regard to Czechoslovak debt to United
States, emphasizing Czechoslovak pledge in 1919 not to
discriminate against United States and fact that the arrangement
for refunding of relief credits extended by other governments is
in violation of this assurance.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 68 and
Doc. 69]
May 16
(16)
From the Minister in Czechoslovakia (tel.)
Reaffirmation by Dr. Beneš of Czechoslovak intention to honor
all her engagements, and his plan to take up debt question
without delay.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 70 and
Doc. 71]
July
6
(26)
To the Minister in Czechoslovakia (tel.)
Czechoslovak Chargé’s statement that his Government had in
principle agreed to meet all obligations to United States;
enumeration of points agreed to, and desire to know if they
would constitute a basis satisfactory for beginning of
negotiations. Department’s request for any information available
on actual intentions of Czechoslovak Government.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 70 and
Doc. 71]
July 11
(37)
From the Minister in Czechoslovakia (tel.)
Dr. Beneš’ confirmation of Chargé’s statement.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 71, Doc.
72, and Doc.
73]
July 16
(28)
To the Minister in Czechoslovakia (tel.)
Memorandum handed to Czechoslovak Chargé on July 10 (text
printed) stating readiness of World War Foreign Debt
Commission to enter negotiations with a commission from
Czechoslovakia to conclude a settlement of the debt question.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 71, Doc.
72, and Doc.
73]
July 21
(29)
To the Minister in Czechoslovakia (tel.)
Informal memorandum left at Department on July 20 by
Czechoslovak Chargé (text printed) stating readiness of
Czechoslovakia to begin negotiations after the settlement of the
debt question with United States by Belgium, France, and Italy,
and inquiring whether such a time will be acceptable. U. S.
informal reply that no connection exists between these several
includes
portions
of
Doc. 73 and
Doc. 74]

debt questions, and that negotiations should begin in the very
near future.
July 23
(41)
From the Minister in Czechoslovakia (tel.)
Receipt of note from Czechoslovak Government formally
acknowledging indebtedness to United States and stating
difficulty of submitting a full proposal for settlement because of
fiscal and economic condition of Czechoslovakia.
is part of Doc.
75]
Aug. 27
(37)
To the Minister in Czechoslovakia (tel.)
Note to be presented to Czechoslovak Government (text printed)
expressing U. S. confidence that a suitable basis of settlement can
readily
be
reached
at
present
time;
expectation
that
Czechoslovakia will promptly take action looking toward
settlement; and hope that a commission will be sent to United
States at an early date to enter negotiations.
(Footnote: Information that note was presented August 31.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 75 and
Doc. 76]
Sept. 21 From the Czechoslovak Chargé
Membership of Czechoslovak commission to United States and
information that commission will sail from Cherbourg on
September 26.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 76, Doc.
77, and Doc.
78]
FRANCE
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1924
Dec.
8
(550)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Report that French Premier believes France’s debt to United States
should be funded, and that he will submit a plan in the near future
for suggestions and criticisms.
132
[Pg.
132 includes
portions
of
Doc.
76,
Doc. 77, and
Doc. 78]
Dec. 30
(614)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information that Premier Herriot has submitted a memorandum
drawn up by Minister of Finance Clémentel, terms of which
(including suggested moratorium for 10 years) are certain to be
unacceptable to American public opinion. Ambassador’s decision
to confer with Herriot and Clémentel in effort to secure a more
favorable proposal.
133
[Pg.
133 includes
portions
of
Doc. 78 and
Doc. 79]

Dec. 30
(493)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Unfavorable impression in United States caused by press publicity
given to statement of so-called balance sheet of France issued by
Clémentel (extracts printed). Secretary’s assurance to press
correspondents that statement was not an official communication
to U. S. Government and that French Government had never
suggested possible repudiation or cancelation of its debt.
Instructions to confer informally with Herriot and Clémentel and
make clear U. S. position, removing any misunderstanding in
regard to a proposal for partial or entire cancelation of the debt.
134
[Pg.
134 includes
portions
of
Doc. 79 and
Doc. 80]
Dec. 31
(618)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Clémentel’s expression of regret over the entirely mistaken
impression that his report has given in United States, and assertion
that the report (excerpts printed) repeatedly affirmed France’s
responsibility for her debts.
137
[Pg.
137 includes
portions
of
Doc. 80 and
Doc. 81]
1925
Jan.
1
(1)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Belief that Clémentel’s memorandum mentioned in Ambassador’s
confidential.
139
[Pg.
139 includes
portions
of
Doc.
81,
Doc. 82, and
Doc. 83]
Jan.
2
(2)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Probable
difficulty
of
keeping
Clémentel’s
memorandum
confidential, as press already has information that France has made
an offer which includes a 10–year moratorium followed by
payment through 80 years at rate of one-half of 1 percent.
139
[Pg.
139 includes
portions
of
Doc.
81,
Doc. 82, and
Doc. 83]
Jan.
3
(8)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Translation of Clémentel’s memorandum on the state of French
opinion relative to France’s debt to United States (text printed),
containing suggested terms for dealing with debt. Report that
Clémentel considers memorandum only a tentative personal and
unofficial suggestion.
140
[Pg.
140 is part of
Doc. 84]
Jan. 15
(46)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information that Mr. Mellon, Chairman of the World War Foreign
Debt Commission, does not consider terms suggested in
Clémentel’s memorandum satisfactory as a practical basis upon
which to begin negotiations.
143
[Pg.
143 includes
portions
of
Doc. 84 and
Doc. 85]
Jan. 23
(79)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Ambassador’s concern over trend of events in question of debt
settlement and financial crisis which France is facing; suggestion
as to advisability of endeavoring to have the Clémentel proposal
144
[Pg.
144 is part of
Doc. 86]

renewed in an official form in order to pave the way for
examination of financial status of France by representatives of
Debt Commission prior to possible opening of negotiations.
Feb. 6
To the Ambassador in France
Enumeration of difficulties that must be faced and suggestion that
some progress might be made if the French Government were to
send a delegation to United States to show the exact economic
situation and endeavor to bring about a common agreement as to
the underlying facts.
145
[Pg.
145 includes
portions
of
Doc. 86 and
Doc. 87]
Mar. 20
(188)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Clémentel’s realization of importance to France of settlement of
debt question, and Ambassador’s hope that he will modify his
proposals to extent that Debt Commission might regard them as
basis for negotiations.
147
[Pg.
147 includes
portions
of
Doc. 88 and
Doc. 89]
Mar. 31
(206)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Note from Clémentel, March 28 (text printed), enclosing new text
of his memorandum. Ambassador’s hope that the new text, in view
of conciliatory changes in comparison with first proposal, may
serve as a starting point for negotiations.
147
[Pg.
147 includes
portions
of
Doc. 88 and
Doc. 89]
May
5
(184)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Instructions to take up with French authorities the question of the
French debt, in the belief that the statement communicated to the
French Ambassador by Mr. Mellon on December 1, 1924, can
appropriately be used as basis for further discussions. Assertion
that it is preferable to elicit overture from France, if possible.
150
[Pg.
150 includes
portions
of
Doc. 89 and
Doc. 90]
May
7
(268)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Report of conversations with French officials. Opinion of M.
Franklin-Bouillon (member of Chamber of Deputies) that certain
basic principles must be agreed upon, namely: (1) Great Britain to
be paid pari passu with United States; (2) France to be granted a
Request for Mr. Mellon’s views on these principles.
152
[Pg.
152 is part of
Doc. 91]
May
8
(190)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information that basic principles set forth by M. Franklin-
Bouillon are not acceptable. U. S. desire to elicit from French
Government an official proposal to the Debt Commission on basis
of Mr. Mellon’s statement to Ambassador Jusserand, December 1,
1924.
153
[Pg.
153 includes
portions
of
Doc. 91 and
Doc. 92]
May 16
(282)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Further explanation of the first principle put forward by M.
154
[Pg.
154 includes
portions
of

Franklin-Bouillon. Opinion that an official proposal will be made
in the near future.
Doc. 92 and
Doc. 93]
May 18
(203)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Secretary’s statement regarding debt-funding negotiations (text
printed), made for information of newspaper correspondents.
(Instructions
to
repeat
to
representatives
in
Belgium,
Czechoslovakia, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Rumania, and Yugoslavia.)
155
[Pg.
155 is part of
Doc. 94]
June 18
(336)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Report of conversations with French officials. M. Briand’s
statement that he would (1) admit publicly France’s debt to United
States in speech on July 3; (2) in no way link France’s payments to
United States with German reparation payments; (3) open
correspondence with United States regarding details of debt; (4)
send small official commission to confer with Debt Commission.
156
[Pg.
156 includes
portions
of
Doc. 94 and
Doc. 95]
June 23
(235)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Desire that suggestion be made, if possible, that in speech on July
3, M. Briand announce publicly the intention of sending a
commission
to
Washington
to
enter
upon
debt-funding
negotiations.
157
[Pg.
157 includes
portions
of
Doc.
96,
Doc. 97, and
Doc. 98]
July
3
(362)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
M. Briand’s announcement, in his speech, of French Government’s
decision to send a commission to United States in near future to
negotiate debt settlement.
157
[Pg.
157 includes
portions
of
Doc.
96,
Doc. 97, and
Doc. 98]
Sept. 16 From the French Ambassador
Membership of French mission to United States. Information that
mission embarked at Havre on September 16.
157
[Pg.
157 includes
portions
of
Doc.
96,
Doc. 97, and
Doc. 98]
GREECE
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
July
31
(237)
To the Chargé in Greece
Note to be presented to Greek authorities (text printed), calling
attention to fact that no proposal has been received from
includes portions
of Doc. 98 and
Doc. 99]

Greece looking toward settlement or funding of Greek
indebtedness to United States.
Sept.
5
(406)
From the Chargé in Greece
Foreign Office note, August 30 (text printed), stating that the
Greek Minister at Washington has been empowered to
negotiate with the World War Foreign Debt Commission.
includes portions
of Doc. 99, Doc.
100, and Doc.
101]
Nov. 12 Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern
Affairs
Greek Minister’s informal communication to the Department
that new negotiators have been appointed by his Government
to take up funding of Greek indebtedness to United States. Mr.
Dulles’ opinion that any long delay would be unfortunate, and
his hope that the representatives will proceed to United States
at an early date.
includes portions
of Doc. 99, Doc.
100, and Doc.
101]
Dec. 26
From the Greek Minister
Information that the special mission to United States will
arrive in Washington on December 28.
includes portions
of Doc. 101, Doc.
102, and Doc.
103]
ITALY
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Feb. 16
(34)
From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Information that Italian Ambassador, soon to sail for United
States, will be able to explain attitude of his Government on its
war debt to United States.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 101, Doc.
102, and Doc.
103]
May
8
(53)
To the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Italian Ambassador’s statement, in interview with the Secretary,
that his Government does not intend to do anything about
funding of its debt until French funding is arranged, and that
French settlement will be basis for any proposal by Italy. U. S.
inability to recognize this attitude. Secretary’s opinion that Italy
should make effective its assertion, in 1922, of readiness to send
a representative to United States to negotiate with World War
Foreign Debt Commission.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 103 and
Doc. 104]

Sept. 2
(134)
From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Foreign Office announcement of personnel of delegation to go to
Washington in October to discuss debt settlement. Opinion of
Italian press that Italy is unable to pay sums expected of her and
will not undertake to do so.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 104, Doc.
105, and Doc.
106]
LATVIA
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925 July
To the Minister in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania
Information that the Latvian Minister in Washington has
received instructions to negotiate debt-funding agreement,
and that he has been introduced to the secretary of the World
War Foreign Debt Commission, with a view to the
inauguration of negotiations.
164
[Pg.
164
includes portions of
Doc. 104, Doc. 105,
and Doc. 106]
RUMANIA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Feb. 16
(6)
To the Minister in Rumania (tel.)
Report of acceptance by various creditor nations of Rumanian
proposal for refunding her relief debt. Department’s desire for
comments and opinion of Minister as to whether there is any
reason why United States should not call upon Rumania to take
steps toward a similar settlement of her debt to United States.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 106, Doc.
107, and Doc.
108]
Feb. 18
(10)
From the Minister in Rumania (tel.)
Minister’s opinion that there is no reason why United States
should not press for a settlement.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 106, Doc.
107, and Doc.
108]
Feb. 20
(7)
To the Minister in Rumania (tel.)
Department’s decision not to make representations at present, and
desire that initiative in the refunding matter should come from
Rumania, if possible.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 108 and
Doc. 109]

Feb. 22
(12)
From the Minister in Rumania (tel.)
Opinion that attitude of Minister of Finance will probably
hamper any efforts to bring about refunding of debt. Report that
only vague promises have been elicited so far.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 110 and
Doc. 111]
Mar. 17
(13)
To the Minister in Rumania (tel.)
Instructions to present note (text printed) expressing U. S.
surprise at Rumania’s apparent discrimination against United
States in favor of other creditor nations, and declaring U. S.
expectation of a prompt proposal from Rumania for refunding its
indebtedness to United States.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 110 and
Doc. 111]
Mar. 31
(18)
To the Minister in Rumania (tel.)
Department’s unfavorable attitude, made known in reply to an
inquiry, toward any proposal for flotation of a loan either to
Government of Rumania or any of its political subdivisions.
Instructions to present an additional note to Foreign Office (text
printed) if no suitable reply is received by April 3 to previous
representations.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 112 and
Doc. 113]
Apr.
6
(29)
From the Minister in Rumania (tel.)
Minister’s recommendation against too vigorous action at present
because of Rumania’s apparent sincere bid for American
financial support, with corresponding advantages to United
States.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 112 and
Doc. 113]
Apr.
9
(745)
From the Minister in Rumania
Foreign Office note, March 30 (text printed), in reply to U. S.
representations, stating that Rumanian arrangement with other
creditor nations regarding relief bonds was not made at
Rumanian request but was consented to because of its
international character. Suggestion to send representative to
United States to explain Rumanian situation.
is part of Doc.
114]
Apr.
9
(22)
To the Minister in Rumania (tel.)
Assertion that Department finds Rumanian note of March 30
unsatisfactory. Instructions to present further note to the Foreign
Office (text printed) repeating U. S. inability to agree that
Rumania should make no payments to United States while
making payments to other Governments for similar indebtedness,
and expressing opinion that no useful purpose would be served
by the suggested mission to United States to explain Rumanian
position.
is part of Doc.
115]
Apr. 11
(24)
To the Minister in Rumania (tel.)
Information that Rumanian Minister has been advised of U. S.
representations to Rumania and informed of importance attached
includes
portions
of

by U. S. Government to receiving early assurances from
Rumania that appropriate action will be taken in regard to the
funding of its indebtedness to United States.
Doc. 115 and
Doc. 116]
July 18
(44)
To the Chargé in Rumania (tel.)
Advice from Rumanian Minister that his Government is shortly
to make proposals to United States with respect to indebtedness.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 116 and
Doc. 117]
July 21
(66)
From the Chargé in Rumania (tel.)
Statement by Minister of Foreign Affairs (text printed) that
Rumania has decided to send a commission to Washington to
examine bases on which an arrangement might be reached with
United States.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 118 and
Doc. 119]
July 27
(67)
From the Chargé in Rumania (tel.)
Desire of Mr. Culbertson, appointed Minister to Rumania, to
know if Foreign Minister’s oral statement is satisfactory reply to
Department’s representations for a definite proposal from
Rumania.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 118 and
Doc. 119]
July 31
(45)
To the Chargé in Rumania (tel.)
For Culbertson: Department’s inability to regard oral statement
as satisfactory reply; desire for written reply, giving definite
information and assurances regarding the debt mission to United
States.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 120 and
Doc. 121]
Aug. 30
(72)
From the Chargé in Rumania (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s formal written note, presented August 29 (text
printed), confirming Rumania’s decision to send debt mission to
United States; and his statement that mission will probably reach
Washington about October 1.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 120 and
Doc. 121]

YUGOSLAVIA
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1923
Feb. 12
(1795)
From the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes
Résumé of correspondence with Yugoslav officials regarding
desire of World War Foreign Debt Commission for proposal for
settlement or refunding of Yugoslav indebtedness to United
States. Foreign Minister’s statement that question will be studied.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 121 and
Doc. 122]

Apr. 27
(4)
To the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
Instructions to endeavor to impress upon Yugoslav Government
the importance of refunding its obligation to United States and to
report developments as to refunding of debt to France and
England.
(Footnote: Synopsis of correspondence in 1919 which resulted in
Yugoslav assurances to United States of treatment on equal
footing with other creditor nations.)
is part of Doc.
123]
May 11
(6)
From the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes (tel.)
Yugoslav decision to send a mission to Washington in the fall.
(Footnote: Postponement of mission’s departure until February
1924.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 124 and
Doc. 125]
1924
Mar. 18
From the Minister of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes
Information that delegation will arrive in Washington on March
21, and inquiry as to day and hour when they may be presented
to the Secretary.
(Footnote: Secretary’s reception of delegation on March 22 at 12
o’clock. Information that on April 7 the mission appeared before
the Debt Commission and shortly thereafter left the United
States.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 124 and
Doc. 125]
May 13
(14)
To the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
Instructions to present note to Foreign Office (text printed)
expressing regret that the Yugoslav mission found itself unable to
make any definite proposals, and requesting confirmation of U.
S. understanding that Yugoslav Government will take no action
with respect to any of its indebtedness which would result in
placing United States in a less favorable position as a creditor
than that which it now occupies.
is part of Doc.
126]
1925
Feb. 11
(2572)
From the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes
Promise of Minister of Finance to study question and reply to U.
S. note in a few days and his expectation to make definite
proposal in May or June looking to the refunding of the Yugoslav
indebtedness to United States.
is part of Doc.
127]
Mar.
9
(9)
From the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes (tel.)
Report that British Government has demanded Yugoslav
includes
portions
of

agreement to a plan for refunding of its post-war advances in
order to guarantee British share of Blair loan.
Doc. 127 and
Doc. 128]
Mar. 25
(11)
From the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes (tel.)
Finance Minister’s request to know whether, if he accedes to
British refunding demand, the United States will demand a
similar reimbursement plan.
(Footnote: Instructions to the Minister on April 8 to state U. S.
intention to insist on a settlement of Yugoslav indebtedness to
United States simultaneously with any settlement made by
Yugoslavia with another creditor nation.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 128 and
Doc. 129]
May 17
(2680)
From the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes
Foreign Office note, May 14 (text printed), giving assurances
is part of Doc.
130]
Dec. 29 From the Legation of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes
Personnel of commission appointed by Yugoslav Government to
come to Washington. Information that commission will sail from
Cherbourg on January 6, 1926.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 130 and
Doc. 131]
INTEREST OF THE UNITED STATES IN THE DISPOSITION OF THE PROPOSED LIBERATION BONDS OF THE AUSTRO-HUNGARIAN SUCCESSION STATES
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Jan. 21
(75)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
British memorandum, January 8, to be sent to the Ambassadors’
Conference (text printed) proposing that conference reach
decision on behalf of the several Governments concerned in
regard to certain points raised by the Reparation Commission in
connection with disposition of the proposed liberation bonds of
the Austro-Hungarian succession states.
is part of Doc.
132]
Jan. 22
(52)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Instructions to show telegram No. 75, January 21, to Logan (the
U. S. unofficial representative on the Reparation Commission)
and request him to cable comments as to any right or interest he
may feel United States has in bonds in question.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 132, Doc.
133, and Doc.
134]
Jan. 27
(83)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
From Logan: Opinion, in view of considerations enumerated,
includes

that United States should take a definite stand. Suggestion that
United States take no action in Conference of Ambassadors till
March and then request that delivery of bonds be made to
Reparation Commission as trustee, with instructions to the
Commission to make no disposition of bonds or their proceeds
except in agreement with United States.
portions
of
Doc. 132, Doc.
133, and Doc.
134]
Feb.
6
(108)
From the Chargé in France (tel.)
Information that British memorandum has been adopted by
Conference, subject to Chargé’s reservation that no instructions
have been received from United States.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 134, Doc.
135, and Doc.
136]
Feb.
7
(76)
To the Chargé in France (tel.)
Department’s regret that matter of liberation bonds was
permitted to be acted upon by Conference pending Department’s
instructions. Inquiry as to whether it is to be understood that
Conference will not reply to Reparation Commission along lines
proposed in British memorandum until Chargé has received
instructions as to U. S. views regarding British proposal.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 134, Doc.
135, and Doc.
136]
Feb.
9
(115)
From the Chargé in France (tel.)
Information that Conference will not reply to Reparation
Commission until Chargé has received instructions.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 136 and
Doc. 137]
Feb. 17
(126)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Draft resolution of British, French, and Italian Governments
regarding liberation bonds (text printed).
includes
portions
of
Doc. 138 and
Doc. 139]
Feb. 24
(99)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Instructions to inform Conference of U. S. views on draft
resolution, stating that in view of U. S. claims against Austria
and Hungary, the United States cannot concur in an instruction
to Reparation Commission to hold bonds as trustee for British,
French, and Italian Governments alone, but that any final
disposition should be made only in agreement with United
States.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 138 and
Doc. 139]
Feb. 24
(100)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
For Logan: Department’s desire for any information available on
what may be intended in regard to distribution of C bonds or
liberation bonds.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 139 and
Doc. 140]

Mar.
3
(150)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information
that
memorandum
has
been
presented
to
Conference of Ambassadors in pursuance of instructions in
telegram No. 99, February 24, and is being reserved for future
discussion.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 141 and
Doc. 142]
Mar. 10
(169)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
From Logan: Information that C bonds have never been
distributed, and understanding that distribution is not now
contemplated. Statement that the only information available
about possible distribution of liberation bonds is article 2 of the
Spa Agreement.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 141 and
Doc. 142]
May
4
(262)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
British suggestion to Conference that bonds be delivered to
Reparation Commission without requesting it to hold them as
trustee for any particular governments, as previously proposed.
Opinion of Ambassador and Hill (delegated to assist Logan) that
this is unsatisfactory. Request for instructions.
is part of Doc.
143]
May
5
(186)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Department’s
agreement
that
British
suggestion
is
unsatisfactory, and instructions to insist upon U. S. view as set
forth in telegram No. 99, February 24.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 144 and
Doc. 145]
June 12
(326)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Ambassador’s opinion that as his role is only that of an observer
at the Conference of Ambassadors, it will be difficult to prevent
Conference from adopting British proposal, if it wishes.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 144 and
Doc. 145]
June 30
(245)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information that Conference of Ambassadors as such has no
competency to deal with question unless specifically authorized
by the interested Governments, of which United States is one,
hence the fact that Ambassador sits as an observer is immaterial.
is part of Doc.
146]
Oct. 30
From the Unofficial Representative on the Reparation
Commission
French Government’s view that it would be preferable in the
present circumstances not to call for the issue of liberation
bonds.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 146 and
Doc. 147]
Dec. 7
From the Unofficial Representative on the Reparation
Commission
Opinion of British Government that it would be preferable not to
includes
portions
of
Doc. 147, Doc.

call for the issue of liberation bonds in the present
circumstances.
148, and Doc.
149]
REFUSAL BY THE UNITED STATES TO CONSENT TO THE ADHERENCE OF THE SOVIET UNION TO THE SPITZBERGEN TREATY OF FEBRUARY 9, 1920
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Apr. 7
From the French Ambassador
Objection of French Government to terminology used to
designate the Government of Russia in the U. S. draft
agreement handed to the French Ambassador in 1924 relative
to Russian adherence to the Spitzbergen Treaty of February 9,
1920. Suggestion of a substitute designation.
201
[Pg.
201
includes
portions
of Doc. 147, Doc.
148,
and
Doc.
149]
May 12
To the French Ambassador
Draft agreement (text printed) which is believed to be in
harmony with the views of the French Government.
203
[Pg.
203
includes
portions
of Doc. 149 and
Doc. 150]
June 16
From the French Ambassador
French opinion that wording in U. S. draft may not be
acceptable to all the powers signatory to the Spitzbergen
Treaty. Submission of further draft embodying suggested
change, with inquiry as to whether it meets U. S. approval.
205 [Pg. 205 is
part of Doc. 151]
July 3
To the French Ambassador
U. S. inability to accept in its entirety the substitute clause
suggested in latest French draft. Transmittal of a redraft for
consideration.
206
[Pg.
206
includes
portions
of Doc. 152 and
Doc. 153]
July 13
From the French Ambassador
Suggestion of further change in phrasing of draft agreement.
206
[Pg.
206
includes
portions
of Doc. 152 and
Doc. 153]
Aug. 17 From the French Ambassador
Suggestion of slight modification in phrasing of draft
agreement.
207
[Pg.
207
includes
portions
of Doc. 153 and
Doc. 154]
1926
Jan. 7
From the French Chargé
French Government’s desire for a communication from
United States on the question of the proposed adherence of
the Soviet Union to the Spitzbergen Treaty.
208
[Pg.
208
includes
portions
of Doc. 155 and
Doc. 156]
Feb. 2
To the French Ambassador
U. S. inability, in view of the terms of the treaty, to see its
208
[Pg.
208
includes
portions

way to consent to the adherence thereto of the regime
functioning in Russia.
of Doc. 155 and
Doc. 156]

ASSENT BY PRESIDENT COOLIDGE TO PROVISIONS IN THE POLISH-SWISS ARBITRATION TREATY FOR INVOKING THE ASSISTANCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES UNDER CERTAIN CONTINGENCIES
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Apr. 15
From the Polish Minister
Inquiry whether it is agreeable to the President of the United
States that the Governments of Poland and Switzerland should
provide for invoking his assistance in certain circumstances
described in articles 3 and 14 (texts printed) of the Polish-
Swiss Treaty of Arbitration, signed on March 7.
(Footnote: Identic note dated April 16 from the Swiss
Minister.)
includes portions
of Doc. 156 and
Doc. 157]
Apr. 18
To the Polish Minister
Assent by the President to the provisions of articles 3 and 14 of
the treaty.
(Footnote: The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Swiss Minister.)
includes portions
of Doc. 157 and
Doc. 158]
UNSUCCESSFUL EFFORTS TO HAVE AMERICAN CUSTOMS ATTACHÉS ACCORDED DIPLOMATIC STATUS
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Mar. 31
(329)
From the British Ambassador
British memorandum (text printed) setting forth views of British
Government regarding the act of Congress approved January 13,
which provides that customs attachés shall be regularly and
officially attached to U. S. diplomatic missions; and explaining
British objections to activities of U. S. Treasury representatives
in conducting investigations into foreign costs of production.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 158 and
Doc. 159]
Apr. 2
To Certain Diplomatic and Consular Officers
Data regarding the purpose and the nature of the activities abroad
of U. S. customs attachés of the Treasury Department and
representatives of the Tariff Commission, presented for
information and guidance in case the activities of these agents
are questioned by Government to which accredited and the
Department gives instructions to take up the matter.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 159 and
Doc. 160]

Apr.
2
(5038)
From the Ambassador in France
Memorandum prepared by member of the Embassy staff (text
printed) presenting arguments against the examination of foreign
manufacturers’ books by representatives of U. S. Tariff
Commission.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 160 and
Doc. 161]
Apr. 21
(731)
To the Minister in Austria
Instructions to inform the Austrian Government of the
appointment of certain customs attaches to the U. S. Legation
and to request their recognition by the appropriate authorities;
also to explain their duties, making use of information contained
in Department’s circular instruction of April 2.
(Footnote: The same, mutatis mutandis, to Embassies in
Belgium, Germany, Italy, and Spain; to Legations in Bulgaria,
Denmark, Greece, Hungary, Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Rumania, the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes; and on May 5 to Legations in China and Finland.)
is part of Doc.
162]
Apr. 21
(1475)
To the Ambassador in France
Instructions to inform French Government regarding the
appointment of customs attachés and U. S. desire for their
recognition; also to furnish a memorandum giving the detailed
description of their activities contained in Department’s circular
of April 2, and to explain that procedure thus described is the
result of an effort to meet views of the French Government as
expressed in a note from the French Ambassador dated May 26,
1924 (text printed), and at the same time to carry out provisions
of the Tariff Act of 1922.
Brief comment on memorandum transmitted in Ambassador’s
despatch No. 5038, April 2.
is part of Doc.
163]
Apr. 21
(123)
To the Minister in Sweden
Instructions to inform Swedish Government regarding the
appointment of customs attachés and U. S. desire for their
recognition; also to furnish a memorandum giving the detailed
description of their activities contained in Department’s circular
of April 2, and to explain that procedure thus described is the
result of an effort to meet the wishes of the Swedish Government
as expressed in recent representations and at the same time to
carry out provisions of the Tariff Act of 1922.
(Footnote: The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Legation in
Switzerland, April 18.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 164 and
Doc. 165]
May 4
To the British Ambassador
Hope that the British objections to the activities of U. S. customs
attachés will be removed upon receipt of complete information
includes
portions
of

concerning their purpose and the method of procedure to be used
in the future, as contained in instructions to the American
Ambassador in London.
Doc. 164 and
Doc. 165]
June
6
(595)
From the Ambassador in Spain
Information that Spanish Government, while not according
diplomatic status to the customs attachés, is willing to grant to
them, upon request, such customs facilities as are usually
extended to members of diplomatic missions.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 165 and
Doc. 166]
June 16
(799)
From the Chargé in Rumania
Information that Rumanian Government has no objections to
advance in connection with the appointment of customs attachés
to American diplomatic missions.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 166, Doc.
167, and Doc.
168]
June 17
(240)
From the Ambassador in Belgium
Belgian inability to recognize diplomatic status of customs
attaches or to grant them permission to conduct investigations of
costs of production.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 166, Doc.
167, and Doc.
168]
June 23
(485)
From the Chargé in Italy
Inability of Italian Government to accede to U. S. request
regarding customs attachés.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 168 and
Doc. 169]
June 26
(199)
To the Ambassador in Great Britian (tel.)
Department’s suggestion that Ambassador point out to Sir Austen
Chamberlain
certain
considerations
which
the
British
commercial counselor in Washington believes may influence the
Foreign Office to waive its objections to cost-of-production
investigations by customs attachés.
is part of Doc.
170]
June 30
(473)
From the Minister in the Netherlands
Inability of Netherlands Government to accede to U. S. request.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 171 and
Doc. 172]
July
2
(2733)
From the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes
Decision of Yugoslav Government to wait until one or more
other Governments have recognized diplomatic status of customs
attachés before reaching final decision.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 171 and
Doc. 172]

July 10
(324)
To the Ambassador in Italy
U. S. understanding that Italian Government, while unable to
accord diplomatic status to customs attaches, does not intend to
prohibit them from performing in Italy their duties under the
Tariff Act of 1922. Instructions to make informal inquiries to
determine if understanding is correct.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 173 and
Doc. 174]
July 11
(213)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
British refusal of diplomatic status to customs attaches and
maintenance of objections in principle to cost-of-production
investigations.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 173 and
Doc. 174]
July 18
(680)
From the Minister in Hungary
Foreign Office recognition of diplomatic status of U. S. customs
attaché.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 174, Doc.
and Doc. 177]
July 22
(394)
From the Chargé in France (tel.)
French inability to grant diplomatic status to customs attachés.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 174, Doc.
and Doc. 177]
July 23
(529)
From the Chargé in Sweden
Foreign Office note, July 21 (text printed), expressing Swedish
Government’s regret that it cannot give a favorable reply to U. S.
request.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 174, Doc.
and Doc. 177]
July 31
(775)
From the Minister in Austria
Résumé of Minister’s efforts to obtain consent of Austrian
officials to accord diplomatic status to U. S. customs attaches.
Request to be informed if any other nation has taken favorable
action in the matter.
(Footnote: Notification to the Minister on August 20 that
Hungary and Rumania had taken favorable action. Instruction on
December 23 that Department considers informal statements of
Foreign Office officials reported in despatch No. 775 as
equivalent to a refusal of diplomatic status.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 177 and
Doc. 178]
Aug. 8
(551)
From the Chargé in Italy
Information that customs officials will not be prohibited from
includes
portions
of

carrying out their duties in Italy, but that any inspections of
business concerns will depend upon acquiescence of the owners.
Doc. 179 and
Doc. 180]
Aug. 11
(936)
From the Minister in Denmark
Danish Government’s inability to conform to U. S. wishes.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 179 and
Doc. 180]
Aug. 19
(659)
From the Minister in Norway
Information that Norwegian Government has declined to accede
to Department’s request.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 180 and
Doc. 181]
Aug. 20
(198)
From the Ambassador in Germany
German Government’s inability to accord recognition to customs
attaches as requested by United States.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 182 and
Doc. 183]
Sept. 22
(24)
From the Consul General at Hongkong
Withdrawal by the Colonial Government of Hongkong of the
provisional recognition which had been accorded to the assistant
customs attaché at that port.
(Footnote: Information that on May 5 the consul in charge at
Hongkong had been instructed to notify local authorities of the
appointment of an assistant customs attaché.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 182 and
Doc. 183]
Sept. 23
(88)
From the Minister in Poland (tel.)
Negative reply of Foreign Office to U. S. request.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 184, Doc.
185, and Doc.
186]
Oct.
6
(428)
From the Minister in Greece
Hellenic Government’s regret at inability to accede to U. S.
request.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 184, Doc.
185, and Doc.
186]
Oct.
7
(1208)
From the Minister in Portugal
Inability of Portuguese Government to comply with U. S. wishes.
Minister’s request for instructions.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 184, Doc.

185, and Doc.
186]
Nov.
4
(597)
From the Minister in Switzerland
Swiss Government’s inability to accord diplomatic status to
customs representatives.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 186 and
Doc. 187]
Dec. 24 To Certain Diplomatic and Consular Officers
Inadvisability of further efforts to secure recognition of
diplomatic status for customs attachés. Information that
Department’s circular instruction of April 2 remains in effect;
also that in those countries where the attachés have been
recognized as members of the diplomatic mission, they will
continue to be so regarded pending a modification of the act of
Congress of January 13.
252
1926
Feb. 27
(149)
From the Minister in Finland
Finland’s refusal to accord diplomatic status to customs attachés.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 189 and
Doc. 190]
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE UNIFICATION OF CERTAIN RULES RELATING TO BILLS OF LADING
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1924 Aug. 25 International Convention
For the unification of certain rules
relating to bills of lading.
254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of
Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]
CONVENTION BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER POWERS FOR THE PROTECTION OF INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY, SIGNED NOVEMBER 6, 1925
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925 Jan.
From the Netherlands Minister
Invitation to United States to be represented at the
International Conference for the Protection of
Industrial Property, to be opened at The Hague on
October 8.
268 [Pg. 268 includes
portions of Doc. 190,
Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]
Mar. 3
To the Netherlands Minister
U. S. acceptance of invitation extended by the
268 [Pg. 268 includes
portions of Doc. 190,
Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Netherlands Government and appointment of delegates
to attend conference.
Nov. 6
Convention Between the United States and Other
Powers
For the protection of industrial property.
269 [Pg. 269 includes
portions of Doc. 192 and
Doc. 193]
ACCEPTANCE BY THE UNITED STATES OF INVITATION TO ATTEND THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL TELEGRAPH CONFERENCE AT PARIS IN 1925
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
July 17
To the French Ambassador
Views of U. S. Government that subjects to be discussed at the
International Telegraph Conference in Paris should not include
questions relating to radio, as such questions will be considered
at the International Radiotelegraph Conference to be held in
Washington. U. S. willingness, in response to French inquiry, to
postpone the Washington conference till 1926.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 193 and
Doc. 194]
Aug. 17 To the French Ambassador
U. S. acceptance of French Government’s invitation to
conference to be held in Paris September 1. List of U. S.
delegates and technical advisers.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 194 and
Doc. 195]
Aug. 23 From the French Ambassador
Information that the sole program of the Paris conference is to
consider additions and amendments which the telegraphic office
desires to have made in the service regulations and rates in force.
French Government’s doubt that the Radiotelegraph Conference
may be called with advantage before 1927.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 195 and
Doc. 196]
EXTENSION OF INVITATIONS TO THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL RADIOTELEGRAPH CONFERENCE AT WASHINGTON IN 1927
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Aug. 18
(263)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Instructions to extend invitation (text printed) to Government to
which accredited to participate in a radiotelegraph conference to
be held at Washington; also to state subjects which U. S.
Government believes should be taken up at the conference.
Instructions to repeat invitation to the American missions in
various European countries.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 196 and
Doc. 197]

(Footnote: Information regarding invitations to certain other
European countries and to Latin American countries.)
Sept. 19
(80)
To the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.)
Instructions to inform Radiotelegraph Section of International
Telegraph Bureau that United States desires to obtain whatever
additions or modifications to the International Radiotelegraph
Convention that the various Governments desire to have
considered at the conference, and to obtain propositions on
certain subjects to be discussed at conference. Suggestion that
propositions be submitted by February 1, 1926.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 197 and
Doc. 198]
Sept. 24
(121)
From the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.)
List of points in connection with Department’s instruction No.
80, September 19, on which the Director of Radiotelegraph
requests information. Director’s opinion that propositions to be
submitted by the governments could not be printed and
distributed before May 31, 1926.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 198 and
Doc. 199]
Sept. 29
(83)
To the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.)
Instructions to explain fully U. S. desire to hold conference
during fiscal year 1926, and to ascertain shortest time in which
Bureau can print and distribute propositions; also to ask Bureau
to suspend action temporarily on Department’s telegram No. 80,
September 19.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 199, Doc.
200, and Doc.
201]
1926
Mar. 15
To Certain Diplomatic Officers
Postponement of the conference to a later date because of
amount of time required to obtain propositions of the various
governments.
(Footnote: Further instruction, February 11, 1927, containing
information that conference will be postponed till fall of 1927.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 199, Doc.
200, and Doc.
201]
OPPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE TO PARTICIPATION BY THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS IN INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES OF AMERICAN STATES
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925 Jan.
To the Ambassador in Brazil
Department’s views, to be transmitted informally to Brazilian
Foreign Minister, that participation of representatives of the
League of Nations in pan-American conferences would bring
viewpoints and policies of states which are not American states
and thus alter the nature of the conferences.
includes portions
of Doc. 201 and
Doc. 202]
THE TACNA-ARICA QUESTION: THE ARBITRATOR’S AWARD AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PLEBISCITARY COMMISSION

Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Information that the President has signed the Tacna-Arica
decision and that a summary will be cabled, copy of which is to
be handed to the Foreign Minister.
(Footnote: The same to the Ambassador in Peru.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 202 and
Doc. 203]
Mar. 4
Opinion and Award of the Arbitrator
In the matter of the arbitration between the Republic of Chile
and the Republic of Peru with respect to the unfulfilled
provisions of the treaty of peace of October 20, 1883, under the
protocol and supplementary act signed at Washington, July 20,
1922.
is part of Doc.
204]
Mar.
23
(12)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Information that Gen. John J. Pershing has been appointed
President of the Plebiscitary Commission.
(Footnotes: The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in
Peru; information, March 27, to the Ambassadors in Chile and
Peru of appointment of Gen. Jay J. Morrow as American
member of the Special Boundary Commission.)
includes
portions
of
Doc.
205,
Doc. 206, and
Doc. 207]
Mar.
26
(14)
From the Chilean Ambassador
Designation by the Chilean Government of Señor Don Agustín
Edwards as member of the Plebiscitary Commission.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
205,
Doc. 206, and
Doc. 207]
Apr. 2
From the Peruvian Ambassador
Memorial of the Peruvian Commission of Defense (text printed)
submitting views of the Peruvian Government in regard to the
Award of the Arbitrator, informing the Arbitrator of certain acts
said to have been perpetrated against the Peruvian inhabitants of
Tacna and Arica since the date of the Award, and requesting
certain guarantees in regard to the conduct of the plebiscite
decreed under the Award.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
205,
Doc. 206, and
Doc. 207]
Apr. 9
To the Peruvian Ambassador
Ruling and observations of the Arbitrator (text printed) on the
questions presented in the Peruvian memorial of April 2,
emphasizing that the Award is final and without appeal and that
the Plebiscitary Commission shall have complete control over
the plebiscite.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 207 and
Doc. 208]

Apr.
10
(41)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Assertion by an informant that Peruvian people and Congress
oppose participation in the plebiscite, in view of the Arbitrator’s
ruling of April 9; that Government officials, however, desire
participation; and that an American assurance of protection from
outrage in the disputed region during voting would have a
beneficial effect on both popular and governmental opinion.
is part of Doc.
209]
Apr.
14
(29)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Declaration that the Arbitrator could not state that one side will
be protected from so-called atrocities on the part of the other;
that the Award provides amply for consideration by the
Plebiscitary Commission of all questions involved in the voting;
and that Peru might well expedite constitution of the Comission
by appointment of a Peruvian member.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 210 and
Doc. 211]
May 8
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American
Affairs
Bolivian Minister’s inquiry whether U. S. Government would be
prepared, after the holding of the Tacna-Arica plebiscite, to use
its good offices to bring about a settlement of the question of a
revision of the Chilean-Bolivian Treaty of 1904 by which
Bolivia would obtain a seaport. Department’s inability to state at
present what its attitude will be at a future time.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 210 and
Doc. 211]
June 18
From the Peruvian Ambassador
Communication to President Coolidge (text printed) naming Mr.
Manuel de Freyre Santander as the Peruvian member of the
Plebiscitary Commission, and stating certain opinions of the
Peruvian Government which are not in concurrence with the
ruling and observations of the Arbitrator.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 211 and
Doc. 212]
June 30
To the Peruvian Ambassador
Communication from President Coolidge, June 29 (text printed),
expressing satisfaction over the appointment of a Peruvian
member of the Commission, and stating that the Arbitrator
adheres to his ruling of April 9, which leaves nothing to be said
in reply to the Peruvian communication of June 18.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 212 and
Doc. 213]
Aug. 11
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
Instructions
to
report
immediately
concerning
alleged
restrictions by Chilean authorities on movements of Peruvians
in Tacna and Arica; also to report details of Ordonez incident.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 213 and
Doc. 214]

Aug. 14
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Information that the restrictions referred to are
embodied in two decrees regulating travel; that the Ordonez
incident was regrettable but not important; that there is no doubt
of Chilean oppression and intimidation of Peruvians and that
under existing conditions a fair plebiscite is impossible.
is part of Doc.
215]
Aug. 14
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Opinion that the two decrees regulating travel
violate the decision of the Arbitrator. View that Plebiscitary
Commission has power to decide whether any act of Chile’s
administration of Tacna and Arica would obstruct fair and free
vote, and inquiry whether Pershing wishes Secretary to take any
action before matter is decided by Commission.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 215 and
Doc. 216]
Aug. 16
From the President of the Plebiscitary Commission (tel.)
Pershing’s request that Department make no representations at
present, and hope that it will take no action except upon his
request, as the problem is not one that can be hurried.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 216 and
Doc. 217]
Aug. 18
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Secretary’s intention to follow Pershing’s
suggestions; his summary of conversation with Chilean
Ambassador concerning situation in Tacna and Arica.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 217 and
Doc. 218]
Aug.
20
(77)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Ambassador’s inquiry if he should communicate to Pershing
certain information regarding matters bearing on the plebiscite.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 219 and
Doc. 220]
Aug.
21
(49)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Instructions not to forward any information direct to the
Plebiscitary Commission.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 219 and
Doc. 220]
Sept. 6
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Telegram to the Chilean Commissioner (text
printed) advising that situation in Tacna is becoming intolerable
and requesting that Chilean Government take immediate action.
Suggestion that representations be made to Presidents of Chile
and Peru.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 221 and
Doc. 222]
Sept. 10
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Transmittal of report of Ambassador in Chile (text
includes

printed) regarding Chilean complaints as to Peruvian activities
and alleged bids for U. S. sympathy; and efforts of President of
Chile to maintain order and assure fair plebiscite. Secretary’s
inquiry if Pershing still desires that representations be made to
Presidents of Chile and Peru.
portions
of
Doc. 221 and
Doc. 222]
Sept.
11
(55)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Instructions to make clear to Americans in Chile U. S. hope that
they will maintain an absolutely neutral attitude in the Tacna-
Arica controversy.
(Repeated mutatis mutandis to Peru.)
includes
portions
of
Doc.
222,
Doc. 223, and
Doc. 224]
Sept. 13
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Withdrawal of suggestion that representations
be made to Presidents of Chile and Peru at present time.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
222,
Doc. 223, and
Doc. 224]
Sept. 18
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Department’s appreciation of Pershing’s efforts to
arrange for free and fair plebiscite and hope that Chilean
authorities will realize importance of such a plebiscite.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
224,
Doc. 225, and
Doc. 226]
Sept. 21
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Report of methods of violence, intimidation,
and deportation used persistently by Chileans. Opinion that
Commission will fail unless attitude of Chile can be changed.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
224,
Doc. 225, and
Doc. 226]
Sept. 24
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Proposal of a resolution to be laid before the
Plebiscitary Commission embodying prerequisites essential to a
fair plebiscite. Synopsis of opinion of Pershing’s legal advisers
in connection with the resolution.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 226 and
Doc. 227]
Nov. 2
Resolution Adopted by the Plebiscitary Commission
Enumerating prerequisites essential to further progress in the
task of the Commission.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 227 and
Doc. 228]
Sept. 28
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Personal comments and opinion on the legal
includes

questions in the resolution as proposed in telegram of September
24. Request for views as to whether time has come for
representations to Chilean Government.
portions
of
Doc. 228 and
Doc. 229]
Oct. 9
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Opinion that time has arrived for representations
to Chile.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 229 and
Doc. 230]
Oct.
10
(61)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Statement to be read to Chilean officials (text printed) declaring
it to be inadmissible that Chile, after having invoked the
President as Arbitrator, and having insisted upon a plebiscite and
upon the recognition of her administrative authority in the
disputed territory pending the plebiscite, should attempt to use
that authority to thwart a fair plebiscite; and expressing
Secretary’s confidence that Chile will appreciate importance of
taking such action as will assure a free and fair plebiscite.
Instructions to call attention orally to fact that one of the
consequences of a persistence of the Chileans in their present
attitude may be forfeiture of Chile’s right to a plebiscite, and
with it of any right to the disputed territory.
(Footnote: Information that the statement was read on October
13 to certain Chilean officials.)
is part of Doc.
231]
Oct. 12
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Chilean Ambassador’s suggestion that Chilean
troops be confined to barracks instead of withdrawn from
provinces, because of difficulty of withdrawal in present
political situation.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 231 and
Doc. 232]
Oct. 14
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Assertion that Chilean Ambassador’s suggestion
is entirely inadequate to meet situation; that the presence of
troops in the provinces is a menace to a fair plebiscite. Opinion
that demands contained in resolution must be regarded as
minimum and any material modification cannot be accepted.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 232 and
Doc. 233]
Oct. 17
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Emphasis on great importance of carrying out
plebiscite, of not withdrawing from plebiscite, and of taking
every reasonable means to prevent either Chile or Peru from
withdrawing. Opinion that careful consideration should be given
any reasonable suggestion of Chilean Government.
is part of Doc.
234]
Oct. 19
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Information that the new Foreign Minister has
includes

given the Chilean Commissioner instructions to comply with
substance of Pershing’s resolution.
portions
of
Doc. 234 and
Doc. 235]
Oct. 25
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From
Pershing:
Report
of
conversation
with
Chilean
Commissioner, which indicated Chile’s refusal to recognize
authority of Commission or to show sincere attempt to meet its
demands.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 235 and
Doc. 236]
Oct. 26
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Peruvian determination, as indicated in
memorandum to Department, to take part in plebiscite only if
wholly legal and correct and with as full and efficient guarantees
for Peruvians as for Chileans.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 236 and
Doc. 237]
Oct.
27
(75)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Opinion that Peru would not consider a diplomatic settlement of
the Tacna-Arica question; that any suggestion coming from U.
S. Government would be misunderstood and would cause
resentment.
is part of Doc.
238]
Oct. 27
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: View that if any reasonable basis can be found
by Arbitrator upon which to abandon plebiscite and initiate
diplomatic negotiations, it would be wise to adopt it, as
conditions are most unfavorable to holding of plebiscite.
is part of Doc.
239]
Oct. 29
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Transmittal of Chilean Ambassador’s request for
assurance that no session of Commission will be called during
proposed absence of Chilean Commissioner, who is to be called
to Santiago for consultation.
is part of Doc.
240]
Oct. 29
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Opinion that plebiscite should not be suspended,
as suggested by Chilean Government.
is part of Doc.
241]
Oct. 31
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Message from Ambassador in Chile, October 30
(text printed), transmitting Chilean request that Secretary
instruct Pershing to postpone action on resolutions. Secretary’s
assertion that authority rests with Pershing, and he is
transmitting Chilean request for Pershing’s consideration.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 241 and
Doc. 242]
Oct. 31
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Secretary’s view, in connection with Chile’s
suggestions for diplomatic settlement, that if negotiations reach
point where both countries are ready to invite U. S. good offices,
includes
portions
of

United States might be in position to assist them to reach an
agreement.
(Footnote: The same to Embassies in Chile and Peru.)
Doc. 242 and
Doc. 243]
Nov.
9
(117)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Inquiry whether Department wishes steps taken to investigate
complaints of Peruvians detained in Santiago against their will.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
243,
Doc. 244, and
Doc. 245]
Nov.
11
(72)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Request for certain information concerning detention of
Peruvians in Santiago and possible attitude of Chile should the
matter be taken up with Government informally.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
243,
Doc. 244, and
Doc. 245]
Nov.
12
(118)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Chilean Government’s willingness to have United States make
inquiries in connection with any complaints. Ambassador’s
opinion that U. S. diplomatic and consular officers in Chile
should be free to hear and investigate all complaints and should
then inform Chilean authorities, giving them opportunity to
explain or refute.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 245 and
Doc. 246]
Nov.
19
(74)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Instructions to discuss informally with Chilean Foreign Minister
the matter of Peruvian complaints.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
246,
Doc. 247, and
Doc. 248]
Nov. 20
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Résumé of correspondence regarding U. S. policy
on question of good offices in settling Tacna-Arica controversy.
Inquiry if there is any way Pershing might ascertain what Peru’s
attitude might be.
(Footnote: Departure of Pershing from Arica on January 27,
1926, for temporary stay in United States.)
includes
portions
of
Doc.
246,
Doc. 247, and
Doc. 248]
Nov. 22
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Chilean Commissioner’s assertion that hereafter
Chile will not participate in meetings of Commission unless
directly concerned with registration and election regulations and
with providing for fixed dates for registration and voting.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 248 and
Doc. 249]

Nov. 23
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Suggestion that election rules and regulations be
enacted as soon as possible, but that notification be given that
compliance with decisions of Commission is expected.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 249 and
Doc. 250]
Nov. 25
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Telegram from Ambassador in Chile, November
24 (text printed), summarizing his observations on recent
developments and opinions of various groups regarding the
situation.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 250 and
Doc. 251]
Nov. 26
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Readiness to proceed with work on election
regulations as rapidly as possible, and belief that they can be
reported out of committee in about 30 days.
is part of Doc.
252]
Nov. 27
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Information that Chilean Ambassador had been
called to Department and impressed with necessity of
complying with Pershing’s position concerning election
regulations.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 253 and
Doc. 254]
Nov. 27
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Department’s regret, expressed to Chilean
Ambassador, over policy which Chilean Government is
pursuing in its newspaper campaign of vilification against the
American Plebiscitary Commission.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 253 and
Doc. 254]
Nov.
28
(123)
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Chilean Commissioner’s statement at meeting
of Commission, apparent object of which was to confuse the
issue and bring proceedings of the Commission to an end in
such a way as to enable Chile to escape her just responsibility.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 254 and
Doc. 255]
Nov.
28
(8)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Report that powerful influences outside the Government are
working to obtain diplomatic settlement of Tacna-Arica question
on basis of division of territory or sale of all rights in the
province to Bolivia.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
255,
Doc. 256, and
Doc. 257]
Dec.
1
(77)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Secretary’s favorable attitude toward a diplomatic settlement,
and willingness to advise settlement and lend aid if asked by
both parties for his good offices.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
255,
Doc. 256, and
Doc. 257]

Dec.
2
(126)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s regret over publication in Chilean press of
articles impugning motives of the Arbitrator and his
representatives.
(Footnote: Information that last paragraph of Department’s
telegram of November 27, concerning campaign of vilification,
had been telegraphed to the Ambassador in Chile.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 257 and
Doc. 258]
Dec.
3
(78)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Expression of regret that Chilean press is continuing to abuse
Pershing and impugn motives of United States. Information that
Secretary has given no statements to the press. Request for any
suggestions Ambassador may care to make.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 258 and
Doc. 259]
Dec. 5
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Intention to present a motion to the Commission
fixing tentatively the schedule of dates for the plebiscite, which
will be the same as previously suggested except that it will be
necessary to postpone all dates two weeks.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 259 and
Doc. 260]
Dec. 8
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Disappointment over suggested postponement of
election; President’s feeling that delay may furnish ground for
complaint. Inquiry whether matter of adopting regulations could
be disposed of early in January.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 260 and
Doc. 261]
Dec. 11
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Information that under existing circumstances
any attempt to fix dates for registration and election is
guesswork.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 261 and
Doc. 262]
Dec.
12
(142)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Public statement of Chilean Foreign Minister (text printed)
announcing Chile’s exercise of the right of appeal, owing to
failure of the Commission to fix dates of plebiscite earlier.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
262,
Doc. 263, and
Doc. 264]
Undated
[Rec’d
Dec. 17]
From the President of the Plebiscitary Commission (tel.)
For the Arbitrator: Resolution of the Plebiscitary Commission
(text printed) certifying to the Arbitrator Chile’s dissenting
opinion and appeal from the action of the Commission on
December 9, and authorizing transmittal to the Arbitrator of
certain related documents.
(Footnote: Information that Commission’s resolution of
period of one month’s registration, February 15–March 15; that
includes
portions
of
Doc.
262,
Doc. 263, and
Doc. 264]

days.)
Dec. 22
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Arbitrator’s order that, until further determination
by him, the Commission shall proceed with performance of its
duties under the opinion and award of March 4. Secretary’s
opinion that appeal period should be devoted to work of
preparatory nature necessary to avoid loss of time should the
decision of the Arbitrator affirm the resolution of December 9.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
264,
Doc. 265, and
Doc. 266]
BOUNDARY DISPUTES
COLOMBIA AND NICARAGUA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Mar. 21
(212)
To the Chargé in Nicaragua
U. S. note to Nicaragua (text printed) stating Department’s
decision not to accede to Nicaragua’s request to recommend to
Colombia an arbitration dealing solely with the ownership of the
San Andres Archipelago, as the Mosquito Coast and the Corn
Islands are also involved in the dispute. Department’s suggestion
that controversy might be settled on the basis proposed by
Colombia, which would recognize sovereignty of Nicaragua over
the Mosquito Coast and Corn Islands and sovereignty of
Colombia over the San Andres Archipelago.
431
[Pg.
431 includes
portions
of
Doc.
264,
Doc. 265, and
Doc. 266]
Apr. 20
(19)
From the Chargé in Nicaragua
Nicaraguan
Foreign
Minister’s
unwillingness
to
discuss
desirability of settling the controversy by accepting the proposal
made by Colombia.
434
[Pg.
434 includes
portions
of
Doc.
266,
Doc. 267, and
Doc. 268]
Sept. 24
(831)
To the Minister in Colombia
Nicaraguan Minister’s assertion of his Government’s desire to
submit question to the mediation of United States. Instructions to
discuss matter informally with Foreign Minister, if deemed
advisable, and ascertain views of Colombian Government as to
possible U. S. mediation with a view to ultimate arbitration.
434
[Pg.
434 includes
portions
of
Doc.
266,
Doc. 267, and
Doc. 268]
Nov. 19
(769)
From the Minister in Colombia
Information that Foreign Minister accepted representations in
friendly spirit but has not subsequently commented upon them.
435
[Pg.
435 includes
portions
of

Doc. 268 and
Doc. 269]
COLOMBIA AND PERU
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Transmittal of Colombian proposal for settlement of boundary
question between Colombia and Brazil, on condition that Brazil
withdraw its memorandum protesting against Peru’s ratification
of the Colombian-Peruvian boundary treaty of 1922. Instructions
to state as personal opinion, in case matter should come up for
discussion with Brazilian authorities, that United States might be
disposed to use its good offices if Brazil should express readiness
to negotiate settlement on basis suggested.
is part of Doc.
270]
Jan.
19
(3)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Secretary’s desire to have boundary question settled if possible
before his leaving office on March 4.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 270 and
Doc. 271]
Jan.
23
(5)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Information as to Colombian willingness to accept settlement of
Colombian-Brazilian boundary along the Apaporis- Tabatinga
line on certain conditions. U. S. desire for reply on the
Colombian
proposal
transmitted
on
January
7
before
communicating this information officially to Brazil.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
271,
Doc. 272, and
Doc. 273]
Jan.
24
(7)
From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Assertion that the stumbling block appears to be the
embarrassment that would be occasioned Brazil by having
formally to withdraw her opposition to Peru’s ratification of the
Peruvian-Colombian boundary treaty.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
271,
Doc. 272, and
Doc. 273]
Jan.
26
(6)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Department’s opinion that an agreement with Colombia on the
Apaporis-Tabatinga line would remove cause for Brazil’s
opposition to the treaty. Suggestion of one document to cover all
points of difficulty, namely, a procès-verbal of a meeting of the
Brazilian Chargé, the Colombian Minister, and the Peruvian
Ambassador in the Secretary’s office.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 273 and
Doc. 274]

Feb.
6
(10)
From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Foreign Office acceptance of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as the
boundary between Brazil and Colombia.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
274,
Doc. 275, and
Doc. 276]
Feb. 21
(15)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Draft of proposed procès-verbal of a meeting to be held in the
Secretary’s office (text printed); instructions to express hope that
Foreign Minister will instruct Brazilian Chargé to attend the
meeting and sign procès-verbal.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
274,
Doc. 275, and
Doc. 276]
Feb. 21
(2)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Transmittal of draft of procès-verbal, and instructions to express
hope that Peruvian Ambassador will receive instructions to take
part in proposed meeting.
(Footnote: Similar telegram to the Minister in Colombia.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 277 and
Doc. 278]
Feb. 23
(3)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian President’s statement that withdrawal of Brazil’s protest
would remove his only objection to ratification of the boundary
treaty; his opinion that arrangement as stated in proposed procès-
verbal seemed a happy solution of question.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 277 and
Doc. 278]
Feb. 24
(4)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s statement that it is impossible to take action
until he can hear from Brazilian Government.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
278,
Doc. 279, and
Doc. 280]
Feb. 24
(16)
From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Information that Foreign Minister approves procès-verbal, but
suggests verbal changes, including alteration of words “formal
protest,” and a more explicit description of boundaries.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
278,
Doc. 279, and
Doc. 280]
Feb. 25
(16)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Acceptance of minor verbal changes by Colombian Minister and
Peruvian Ambassador; withdrawal by Brazilian Foreign Minister,
at U. S. request, of modifications of boundary line, in order not
to delay matter beyond March 4.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
280,
Doc. 281, and
Doc. 282]

Feb. 25
(3)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information that Colombian Minister has received instructions to
sign procès-verbal. Instructions to endeavor to have Peruvian
Ambassador authorized to sign without delay.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
280,
Doc. 281, and
Doc. 282]
Feb. 26
(18)
From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Information from Foreign Office that Brazilian Chargé has been
instructed by telegraph to sign procès-verbal.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
282,
Doc. 283, and
Doc. 284]
Feb. 26
(5)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s inability to instruct Peruvian Ambassador
until he has heard from Brazilian Government.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
282,
Doc. 283, and
Doc. 284]
Feb. 26
(4)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information that instructions are being sent Brazilian Chargé to
sign procès-verbal. Desire that Peruvian Ambassador receive his
instructions so that document may be signed February 28 if
possible.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
284,
Doc. 285, and
Doc. 286]
Feb. 27
(6)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s promise to send instructions immediately, and
his suggestion of a modification in the Peruvian-Colombian
treaty.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
284,
Doc. 285, and
Doc. 286]
Feb. 27
(5)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information that Brazilian Chargé has received instructions to
sign procès-verbal.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 286 and
Doc. 287]
Feb. 27
(6)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Department’s surprise at suggestion for modification in treaty, in
view of Peruvian President’s statement that withdrawal of
Brazilian protest would remove his only objection to the treaty.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
287,
Doc. 288, and
Doc. 289]

Feb. 28
(8)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
President’s disapproval of Foreign Minister’s suggestion for
modification in treaty; his promise that draft instructions for
Ambassador in Washington would be ready shortly.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
287,
Doc. 288, and
Doc. 289]
Feb. 28
(9)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Sec. 1. Foreign Minister’s assurance that instructions will be
cabled to Peruvian Ambassador before 1 p.m., February 28.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
289,
Doc. 290, and
Doc. 291]
Feb. 28
(9)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Sec. 2. Insistence of President and Foreign Minister on certain
changes in procès-verbal, as contained in proposed instructions
to Peruvian Ambassador.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
289,
Doc. 290, and
Doc. 291]
Feb. 28
(8)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Instructions to point out to Peruvian Government that insistence
on the modifications in procès-verbal, as contained in Peru’s
instructions to Ambassador, will necessitate reopening of
negotiations with Colombia and Brazil, thus making it
impossible to conclude matter before March 4.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 291 and
Doc. 292]
Mar.
1
(10)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
President’s insistence on two of the modifications in
procèsverbal; his willingness to make a substitution in the third
modification.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 292 and
Doc. 293]
Mar.
2
(17)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Instructions to inquire if Brazilian Government will accept
procès-verbal with modifications specified by Peru, and to
endeavor to expedite Brazil’s reply.
is part of Doc.
294]
Mar.
2
(11)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Ambassador’s expression of opinion, in reply to Colombian
Minister’s inquiry, that it would be advantageous to Colombian
Government to authorize the signing of the modified procès-
verbal.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
294,
Doc. 295, and
Doc. 296]
Mar.
2
(9)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Instructions to endeavor to have Peruvian Government send
includes

instructions authorizing the substitution to be made in one of the
modifications specified.
portions
of
Doc.
294,
Doc. 295, and
Doc. 296]
Mar.
3
(21)
From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Foreign Office opinion that instructions already sent to Chargé
are adequate.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
297,
Doc. 298, and
Doc. 299]
Mar.
3
(12)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian promise to forward substitute modification (text
printed).
includes
portions
of
Doc.
297,
Doc. 298, and
Doc. 299]
Mar.
3
(13)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Report of conversations with President and Foreign Minister.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
297,
Doc. 298, and
Doc. 299]
Mar.
3
(10)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information that Peruvian Ambassador has received instructions
as promised, but that certain words in the substitute modification
are objected to on behalf of Colombia. U. S. desire to know if
Peru will delete words or agree to one of several acceptable
alternatives.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 299 and
Doc. 300]
Mar.
4
(15)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
View of Ambassador and Colombian Minister, after consultation,
that all parties should sign procès-verbal immediately in
accordance with last instructions sent to Peruvian Ambassador,
as reopening of negotiations with Peru would be hazardous, and
the words objected to cannot be construed as having any material
effect on agreement.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
300,
Doc. 301, and
Doc. 302]
Mar. 4
To the Peruvian Ambassador
Transmittal of copies of procès-verbal (text printed) of a meeting
between the Secretary of State, the Peruvian Ambassador, the
Colombian Minister, and the Brazilian Chargé, March 4, 1925.
(Similar notes to the Colombian Minister and the Brazilian
Chargé.)
includes
portions
of
Doc.
300,
Doc. 301, and
Doc. 302]

Mar.
4
(11)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information that procès-verbal was signed March 4. Appreciation
of Ambassador’s cooperation.
(Footnote: The same to the Ambassador in Brazil; first sentence
to the Minister in Colombia.)
includes
portions
of
Doc.
302,
Doc. 303, and
Doc. 304]
Mar. 10
From the Peruvian Ambassador
Ambassador’s expression of inability to concur in certain points
which he considers to be changes in procès-verbal.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
302,
Doc. 303, and
Doc. 304]
Mar. 24
To the Peruvian Ambassador
Secretary’s conclusion after reviewing the steps leading to
signature of the procès-verbal, that there are no changes in the
procès-verbal and that it forms an equitable basis for the
settlement of questions pending between the three countries.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 304 and
Doc. 305]
July
3
(47)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Information concerning a conversation between the Secretary
and the Brazilian Ambassador as to the carrying out of the
procès-verbal, with suggestion that Ambassador might discuss
the matter with Foreign Minister.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 305 and
Doc. 306]
Oct.
30
(62)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information that Colombia has ratified Colombian-Peruvian
boundary treaty; indication that similar action by Peru would be
welcome.
(Footnote: First paragraph sent also to Brazil.)
includes
portions
of
Doc.
306,
Doc. 307, and
Doc. 308]
Undated Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With
the Colombian Minister, October 31, 1925
Ecuadoran protest to United States that Colombian- Peruvian
treaty would make it more difficult for Ecuador to agree with
Peru as to the boundary between those two countries. Secretary’s
inability to see how treaty could affect Ecuadoran interests or to
offer U. S. good offices unless requested by all countries
involved.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
306,
Doc. 307, and
Doc. 308]
Nov. 30
(477)
From the Ambassador in Peru
Report of representations on behalf of boundary treaty; opinion
of leader of the Government party that favorable action could be
obtained on the treaty when the Tacna-Arica plebiscite had made
further progress or had been disposed of.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 308 and
Doc. 309]

COSTA RICA AND PANAMA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Jan. 23
(10)
To the Minister in Panama (tel.)
Information that, as Costa Rican Government has approached
United States with a view to delimitation of the boundary
between Panama and Costa Rica, the United States would be
glad to have Panama appoint its engineer to delimit, in
conjunction with those appointed by the arbitrator and by Costa
Rica, the boundary as set forth in the arbitral award.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 309 and
Doc. 310]
Feb.
2
(628)
From the Minister in Panama
Foreign Minister’s note, January 29 (text printed), expressing
opinion that settlement of the pecuniary claim on Costa Rica
should be considered precedent to the demarcation of the
frontier. Foreign Minister’s note, January 30 (text printed),
stating that in order to proceed with nomination of the Panaman
engineer, it is essential that a previous agreement be reached
along lines indicated in his note of January 29.
is part of Doc.
311]
Feb.
6
(17)
To the Minister in Panama (tel.)
U. S. note to Foreign Minister (text printed) declaring U. S.
willingness to await for a reasonable time the outcome of such
direct negotiations as Panama may undertake with Costa Rica;
readiness to proceed in January 1926 with the demarcation of the
boundary line, if no agreement has been reached by that time.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 311 and
Doc. 312]
Apr.
9
(46)
From the Minister in Panama (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s statement that Panama is willing to enter into
direct negotiations with Costa Rica only to settle indemnity
question.
(Repeated to Costa Rica.)
(Footnote: Minister’s report, June 25, of appointment of Julio
Fabrega as Panaman confidential agent to go to Costa Rica to
solve the boundary controversy.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 312, Doc.
313, and Doc.
314]
Sept. 22
(16)
To the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.)
Instructions to use good offices informally with the President to
further success of the negotiations.
(Footnote: Arrival of Señor Fabrega in San José on September
18.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 312, Doc.
313, and Doc.
314]

Nov. 10
(21)
To the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.)
Information concerning a compromise settlement of boundary
line which Panama might accept. Inquiry as to what solution, in
Minister’s opinion, would be acceptable to Costa Rica, if
Panaman proposal is not.
(Footnote: Repeated to Panama.)
is part of Doc.
315]
Nov. 11
(22)
To the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.)
Information as to minimum amount acceptable to Panama,
including straightening of the boundary line.
(Footnote: Repeated, except for first paragraph, to Panama.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 315 and
Doc. 316]
Dec. 11
(82)
To the Minister in Panama (tel.)
Costa Rican Minister’s opinion that he might be able to induce
Costa Rica to accept a solution on basis of the convention
providing for demarcation of the boundary according to the
award, the matter of indemnity to be submitted to arbitration.
Instructions to discuss the matter informally with President and
Foreign Minister to determine if some such arrangement could
be agreed upon.
(Footnote: Repeated to Costa Rica.)
is part of Doc.
317]
Dec. 18
(121)
From the Chargé in Panama (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s statement of Panama’s unwillingness to
accept Department’s suggestion at present, as they still hope
Costa Rica will accept Fabrega’s proposition for straightening
the boundary line.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 317 and
Doc. 318]
Dec. 18
(54)
From the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.)
Information that Panaman proposal was rejected by Costa Rica
but that counterproposal has been submitted to Panaman
representative.
is part of Doc.
319]
Dec. 27
(123)
From the Chargé in Panama (tel.)
Fabrega’s rejection of Costa Rican proposal and submission of a
counterproposal for rectification of the boundary.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 319 and
Doc. 320]
Dec. 29
(29)
To the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.)
Instructions to endeavor to find out whether Costa Rica has
accepted counterproposal of Fabrega for rectification of the
boundary or has agreed to put off further negotiations till May.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 321, Doc.
322, and Doc.
323]

1926
Jan.
7
(2)
From the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.)
Costa Rica’s rejection of Fabrega’s counterproposal and of his
proposal to postpone the negotiations till May.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 321, Doc.
322, and Doc.
323]
EXTENSION OF THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE UNITED STATES OVER SWAIN’S ISLAND BY JOINT RESOLUTION OF CONGRESS, APPROVED MARCH 4,
1925
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1924
May 22
To President Coolidge
Résumé of U. S. Government’s relation to Swain’s Island for
more than 50 years; discussion of status of the island so far as
jurisdiction of the United States is concerned; draft of
proposed joint resolution of Congress (text printed) extending
U. S. sovereignty over Swain’s Island and making the island a
part of American Samoa.
(Footnote: Approval by Congress of the joint resolution on
March 4, 1925.)
includes portions
of Doc. 321, Doc.
322, and Doc.
323]

ALBANIA
RECOGNITION BY THE UNITED STATES OF THE GOVERNMENT OF AHMED ZOGU
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Jan. 5
From the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Request for instructions as to attitude to be assumed toward
the government of Ahmed Zogu, in view of his having been
sentenced as one of those responsible for the murder of
Coleman and De Long, American citizens, in 1924.
489
[Pg.
489
includes portions of
Doc. 324 and Doc.
325]
Jan. 8 (3) From the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Report on possible attitude of other governments toward the
government of Ahmed Zogu.
489
[Pg.
489
includes portions of
Doc. 324 and Doc.
325]
Jan.
10
(2)
To the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Information that Department would not be disposed to
withhold recognition because of the charges that Zogu was
implicated in the killing of Coleman and De Long.
Instructions to maintain informal relations with authorities
pending further instructions.
490
[Pg.
490
includes portions of
Doc.
325,
Doc.
326, and Doc. 327]
Jan.
14
(4)
From the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Report that in order to clear Zogu officially, the case of the
murder of Coleman and De Long is to be reopened.
490
[Pg.
490
includes portions of
Doc.
325,
Doc.
326, and Doc. 327]
Jan.
22
(3)
To the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Information that if Minister can secure definite assurances
from Zogu that the prosecution will be pressed, Department
would consider sending early instructions to accord
recognition. Inquiry as to what definite action has been taken
by other powers.
491
[Pg.
491
includes portions of
Doc.
327,
Doc.
328, and Doc. 329]
Jan.
25
(6)
From the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Report that the Assembly gave vote of confidence January
19; that all but the American representative sent
acknowledgment in reply to official notification of
establishment of the republic, which was proclaimed January
21.
491
[Pg.
491
includes portions of
Doc.
327,
Doc.
328, and Doc. 329]
Jan.
29
(8)
From the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Assertion by Zogu’s government that every possible measure
492
[Pg.
492
includes portions of

has been taken for the arrest and exemplary punishment of
those responsible for the murders.
Doc.
330,
Doc.
331, and Doc. 332]
Jan.
31
(5)
To the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Authorization to extend recognition to the new regime and to
acknowledge receipt of official notification of the
establishment of the republic.
492
[Pg.
492
includes portions of
Doc.
330,
Doc.
331, and Doc. 332]
Feb.
3
(10)
From the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Compliance with Department’s instructions of January 31.
492
[Pg.
492
includes portions of
Doc.
330,
Doc.
331, and Doc. 332]
RENEWED REPRESENTATIONS BY THE UNITED STATES FOR EQUITABLE TREATMENT OF AMERICAN OIL INTERESTS IN ALBANIA
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Feb.
4
(6)
To the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Information that Standard Oil Co. of New York has received
word of renewed activity on the part of the Anglo-Persian Oil
Co. in Albania and is disposed to send a representative to
Albania if the situation warrants. Instructions to report briefly.
includes portions
of Doc. 333 and
Doc. 334]
Feb.
4
(11)
From the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Report of interview with President and Foreign Minister, who
promised to give a statement on February 7 defining Albanian
attitude regarding oil concessions.
includes portions
of Doc. 333 and
Doc. 334]
Feb.
5
(12)
From the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Report that Yugoslav Chargé has urged postponement of
decision on oil concession until assembly of the new
Parliament.
includes portions
of Doc. 335, Doc.
336, and Doc.
337]
Feb. 10
(15)
From the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s announcement that two projects to facilitate
entry of foreign capital will soon be presented to the Assembly.
includes portions
of Doc. 335, Doc.
336, and Doc.
337]
Feb. 10
(7)
To the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Information that Mr. Sheffield, Standard Oil representative, is
to arrive in Tirana about February 28.
includes portions
of Doc. 335, Doc.
336, and Doc.
337]
Feb. 11
(16)
From the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s assertion that if the Assembly remains in
includes portions

session about 20 days more, the granting of the oil concession
will be considered.
of Doc. 338 and
Doc. 339]
Feb. 13
(8)
To the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Instructions to make representations, if the situation justifies,
to the Albanian Government for the protection of American
companies interested in the granting of oil concessions.
includes portions
of Doc. 338 and
Doc. 339]
Feb. 13
(9)
To the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Message of Standard Oil Co. to Albanian Foreign Minister
(text printed) stating that reports that the company is no longer
interested in obtaining an oil concession in Albania is
erroneous.
includes portions
of Doc. 340 and
Doc. 341]
Feb. 13
(18)
From the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Representations on behalf of American interests, because of
critical situation in regard to the oil concession question.
Italian and Servian protests to Albanian Government.
Request for instructions to govern further steps.
includes portions
of Doc. 340 and
Doc. 341]
Feb. 16
(10)
To the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Department’s approval of representations and desire that matter
be followed up vigorously.
includes portions
of Doc. 341, Doc.
342, and Doc.
343]
Feb. 16
(20)
From the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Albanian Assembly’s ratification of the Anglo-Persian
concession.
includes portions
of Doc. 341, Doc.
342, and Doc.
343]
Feb. 23
(36)
From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Ambassador’s belief, in view of British-Italian negotiations,
that Italy may be granted one-fourth of the Albanian
concession and that Anglo-Persian Co. may thus secure hold
on Italian oil.
includes portions
of Doc. 344 and
Doc. 345]
Feb. 26
(39)
From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Intimation by a Foreign Office official that Italy would not be
satisfied with a share in the Anglo-Persian concession in
Albania but wished a distinct and separate concession.
includes portions
of Doc. 344 and
Doc. 345]
Mar.
2
(13)
To the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Instructions to consult with Standard Oil representative
(shortly to arrive in Tirana) and to communicate his views of
the situation, with Chargé’s comments, to the Department.
includes portions
of Doc. 346 and
Doc. 347]
Mar.
6
(27)
From the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Mr. Sheffield’s view that his company should regard the
includes portions

petroleum situation as an accomplished fact and proceed to
investigate desirability of making further proposals. Report of
rumors that Italians have already formed an agreement with the
Anglo-Persian Co.
of Doc. 346 and
Doc. 347]
Mar. 10 From the Vice President of the Standard Oil Co. of New York
Cable from Mr. Sheffield, March 4 (text printed), reporting
Anglo-Persian contract for concession and reporting his own
efforts to learn where Anglo-Persian is to choose areas and
whether there is a chance for similar concession to Standard
Oil Co.
includes portions
of Doc. 347, Doc.
348, and Doc.
349]
Mar. 10
(29)
From the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s reiteration of assurances given in 1922 for
most-favored-nation treatment to American interests in
Albania. Information given to Standard Oil representative,
upon his proposal for second choice as to oil areas, that
Albania has practically agreed to give Italians second choice.
includes portions
of Doc. 347, Doc.
348, and Doc.
349]
Mar. 11
(30)
From the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Decree granting extensive rights to Italy. Albanian willingness
to grant third choice to American interests, should they accept
at once. Chargé’s opinion that U. S. position regarding equality
of opportunity for American interests, as set forth in 1923, had
not been met by Albania.
includes portions
of Doc. 349 and
Doc. 350]
Mar. 17
(15)
To the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Instructions to inform Albanian Government that situation is
unsatisfactory, and to endeavor to obtain text of Italian
agreement with Albania concerning the period within which
the second choice of oil areas is to be made.
includes portions
of Doc. 350 and
Doc. 351]
Mar. 22
(32)
From the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Information that Albanian decree provides for Italian choice
exploitation may be chosen within research period of 3 years,
with possible extension.
includes portions
of Doc. 351, Doc.
352, and Doc.
353]
Mar. 26
(54)
From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Opinion that inasmuch as the Italian Government has more
interest in the political and strategic situation than in
petroleum, the American interests might well go ahead and
take their chances with third choice.
includes portions
of Doc. 351, Doc.
352, and Doc.
353]
Mar. 30
(419)
From the Chargé in Albania
Representations as authorized by Department’s No. 15 of
March 17 concerning the state of Albanian-American relations;
Albanian reply, March 23 (text printed). Chargé’s assertion that
includes portions
of Doc. 353 and
Doc. 354]

Foreign Minister’s attitude and informal comments, as well as
formal reply, indicated that he did not understand seriousness
of the situation.
Mar. 31
(20)
To the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Report from Standard Oil Co. that the granting of third choice
has been conditioned upon the payment of a contribution of
between $20,000 and $40,000 by the company. Instructions to
inform Albanian Government orally of U. S. failure to
understand the proposal of such a condition.
includes portions
of Doc. 354, Doc.
355, and Doc.
356]
June
1
(453)
From the Chargé in Albania
Report on recent developments in the oil concession situation.
Information that Standard Oil representative is continuing his
negotiations to obtain a third choice of territory and that his
proposals have been accepted by all Cabinet members except
the Foreign Minister.
includes portions
of Doc. 354, Doc.
355, and Doc.
356]
July
8
(45)
From the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Information that Cabinet has approved concession proposed by
Standard Oil Co. and referred it to Parliament.
includes portions
of Doc. 357 and
Doc. 358]
July 13
(473)
From the Chargé in Albania
Ratification of Standard Oil proposals by Chamber of
Deputies, and expectation of favorable vote in the Senate.
includes portions
of Doc. 357 and
Doc. 358]
July 20
(48)
From the Chargé in Albania (tel.)
Completion of ratification of Standard Oil Co.’s concession in
Albania.
includes portions
of Doc. 358, Doc.
359, and Doc.
360]
Oct.
7
(30)
From the Minister in Albania
Report that Standard Oil Co. has completed the selection of
lands under the concession ratified by Parliament.
includes portions
of Doc. 358, Doc.
359, and Doc.
360]

APPROVAL BY THE PARLIAMENT OF ALBANIA OF THE AMERICAN-ALBANIAN AGREEMENT EFFECTED BY AN EXCHANGE OF NOTES JUNE 23 AND 25,
1922
Date and
number
Subject
Page

1922
Aug.
2
(3)
From the Commissioner in Albania
Transmittal of notes exchanged between United States and
U. S.-Albanian relations.
511
[Pg.
511
includes portions of
Doc. 360 and Doc.
361]
1925 Dec.
From the Minister in Albania
Parliament’s approval of the 1922 agreement by exchange
of notes. Transmittal of the proposed law approving the
agreement and of the report rendered by the Foreign
Minister (texts printed).
512
[Pg.
512
includes portions of
Doc. 361 and Doc.
362]
Dec.
29
(46)
From the Minister in Albania
Information that Albania’s pledges of June 25, 1922, to the
U. S. Government became law on December 28, 1925, by
publication in the Official Gazette.
514
[Pg.
514
includes portions of
Doc. 362 and Doc.
363]

AUSTRIA
INFORMAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND AUSTRIA FOR CONTINUATION OF RECIPROCAL MOST-FAVORED-NATION TREATMENT IN
CUSTOMS MATTERS
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
June
25
(25)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Instructions to inquire whether Austrian Foreign Office
intends the continuance of most-favored-nation treatment to
American commerce pending the conclusion of a treaty of
friendship, commerce, and consular rights between the two
countries.
516 [Pg. 516 is
part of Doc. 364]
July
4
(45)
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Informal understanding for the continuance of reciprocal
most-favored-nation treatment until the conclusion and entry
into force of the treaty under negotiation.
517
[Pg.
517
includes portions
of Doc. 364 and
Doc. 365]

BELGIUM
CONVENTION BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND BELGIUM FOR THE PREVENTION OF SMUGGLING OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS, SIGNED DECEMBER 9,
1925
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925 Sept.
8
To the Belgian Chargé
Presentation of a draft liquor convention almost identic
with the one concluded with France on June 30, 1924.
518 [Pg. 518 is
part of Doc. 366]
Dec. 9
Convention Between the United States of America and
Belgium
For the prevention of liquor smuggling into the United
States.
519 [Pg. 519 is
part of Doc. 367]

INTEREST OF THE UNITED STATES IN GERMAN REPARATION PAYMENTS TO BELGIUM
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1924
Dec. 4
(118)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Belgian Government’s fear that the British Treasury is seeking to
do away with the Belgian priority to German reparation payments,
and desire for U. S. assistance in support of the Belgian equities.
(Copy to Logan.)
522
[Pg.
522
includes
portions of
Doc.
367
and
Doc.
368]
1925
Jan.
3
(11)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
For Logan: Assertion that the points on which Belgian priority has
been contested have not been made clear. Reference to Belgian debt
question, with the statement that the United States must maintain its
position of looking to Belgium for payment.
523
[Pg.
523
includes
portions of
Doc.
368
and
Doc.
369]
Jan. 11
(32)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
From Logan: Tentative agreement (text printed) providing for
reimbursement of Belgian war debt from German reparation
payments, with 12 percent as the amount allotted to Belgium on
account of its debt to the United States.
524
[Pg.
524
includes
portions of
Doc.
369

and
Doc.
370]
Jan. 13
(32)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
For Herrick, Kellogg, and Logan: Department’s failure to
understand differences in percentages as shown in the tentative
agreement from those indicated in a previous letter.
525
[Pg.
525
includes
portions of
Doc.
371
and
Doc.
372]
Jan. 14
(45)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
From Logan: Article 4 (text printed) of the agreement of January 14
regarding distribution of the Dawes annuities, showing percentages
as indicated in the tentative agreement. Information that the 12
percent to be received by Belgium, “by reason of her debt to the
United States,” is only tentative and “pending the final settlement;”
and that the Belgians agree to turn this money over to the United
States on account of their debt to the United States. Suggestion that
a letter be obtained from the Belgians which will meet the U. S.
angle of the situation and will arrange for form of payments to
avoid possible difficulties in foreign exchange.
525
[Pg.
525
includes
portions of
Doc.
371
and
Doc.
372]
Jan. 22
(53)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
For Logan: Draft by U. S. Treasury of letter to be obtained from
Belgians, as suggested in Ambassador’s telegram No. 45, January
14, and of reply to be made (texts printed).
526
[Pg.
526
includes
portions of
Doc.
372
and
Doc.
373]
Jan. 29
(88)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
From Logan: Belgian suggestions for changes in the proposed
letters.
528
[Pg.
528 is part
of Doc. 374]
Feb.
7
(78)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
For Logan: Authorization that the proposed letters be exchanged,
with the suggested modifications and further minor insertions, on
the basis that it be made clear by an additional letter that the
position of the United States as to the Belgian debt is in no way
changed.
529
[Pg.
529
includes
portions of
Doc.
374
and
Doc.
375]
Feb. 17 From the Unofficial Representative on the Reparation Commission
Transmittal of letter received from tire Belgians (text printed) and
of Logan’s letters in reply.
530
[Pg.
530
includes
portions of
Doc.
375

and
Doc.
376]
Mar. 31
(140)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
For Hill: U. S. position, to be conveyed to the Belgian Government,
that the United States is in no way committed to the decision of the
Reparation Commission as to the amount of the debt owed by
Belgium to the United States—that this is a question solely
between the two Governments.
531
[Pg.
531
includes
portions of
Doc.
376
and
Doc.
377]
Apr.
2
(208)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
From Hill: Information that Belgian representative understood
perfectly the U. S. position, as communicated in accordance with
Department’s instructions.
532
[Pg.
532
includes
portions of
Doc.
377
and
Doc.
378]

BRAZIL
DISAPPROVAL BY THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE OF PROPOSED LOANS FROM AMERICAN BANKERS TO THE STATE OF SAO PAULO
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Undated
Memorandum by Mr. Stokeley W. Morgan, of the Division
of Latin American Affairs, of a Conversation With Mr.
Earle Bailie, August 18, 1925
Inquiry by Mr. Bailie as to whether the Department would
have any objection to a projected loan by his company (J.
& W. Seligman & Co.) to the Paulista Institute for the
Permanent Defense of Coffee of São Paulo.
533 [Pg. 533 is part
of Doc. 379]
Aug. 21
To Mr. Earle Bailie
Department’s inability to approve the proposed loan.
534
[Pg.
534
includes portions of
Doc. 379, Doc. 380,
and Doc. 381]
Nov. 4
From Speyer & Co.
Inquiry as to Department’s attitude regarding a loan for 25
to 35 million dollars being negotiated with the State of
Sao Paulo to finance agricultural and commercial
interests.
534
[Pg.
534
includes portions of
Doc. 379, Doc. 380,
and Doc. 381]
Nov. 6
To Speyer & Co.
Department’s inability to approve the proposed loan, in
view of the policy of coffee valorization followed by the
authorities of Sao Paulo.
535
[Pg.
535
includes portions of
Doc. 381 and Doc.
382]

BULGARIA
CONTINUANCE OF AMERICAN CAPITULATORY RIGHTS IN BULGARIA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1924
July
1
(503)
From the Minister in Bulgaria
Report of French inquiry as to whether the exchange of
ratifications of the U. S.-Bulgarian extradition treaty should be
taken as an indication of U. S. relinquishment of its capitulatory
rights in Bulgaria.
536
[Pg.
536 is part of
Doc. 383]
1925
Sept. 23
(141)
To the Minister in Bulgaria
Department’s opinion that no direct relation exists between U. S.
capitulatory rights in Bulgaria and the provisions of the extradition
treaty. Assertion that Department’s interest in capitulations is
limited to securing most-favored-nation treatment for its nationals.
Request for Minister’s comments on present situation and attitude
of the various capitulatory powers.
537
[Pg.
537 is part of
Doc. 384]
Dec.
6
(743)
From the Chargé in Bulgaria
Résumé of capitulations in Bulgaria from the Treaty of Berlin of
1878. Attitude of Ministry of Foreign Affairs that capitulations no
longer exist. Information that the attitude of Great Britain, France,
and Italy is more or less conciliatory; that at present American
citizens in Bulgaria receive the same treatment as that accorded
the nationals of other countries. Opinion that best policy for
United States would be to hold capitulatory rights in reserve
against either the possible defense of a national or to use for some
commercial preference.
538
[Pg.
538 includes
portions
of
Doc.
384
and
Doc.
385]

CANADA
EXTRADITION CONVENTION BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA APPLYING TO OFFENSES AGAINST LAWS FOR THE SUPPRESSION OF TRAFFIC IN
NARCOTICS
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925 Jan.
8
Convention Between the United States of America and
Great Britain in Respect of the Dominion of Canada
For enlarging the list of crimes on account of which
extradition may be granted under previous conventions
between the two countries.
542 [Pg. 542 includes
portions of Doc. 385 and
Doc. 386]
BOUNDARY TREATY BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925 Feb.
24
Treaty Between the United States of America and Great
Britain in Respect of the Dominion of Canada
To define more accurately, to complete, and to maintain the
demarcation of the boundary between the United States and
Canada.
544 [Pg. 544 is
part of Doc. 387]
CONVENTION AND PROTOCOL BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA TO REGULATE THE LEVEL OF THE LAKE OF THE WOODS
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925 Feb.
24
Convention Between the United States of America
and Great Britain in Respect of the Dominion of
Canada
To regulate the level of the Lake of the Woods.
550 [Pg. 550 includes
portions of Doc. 387 and
Doc. 388]
Feb. 24
Protocol
Accompanying the convention to regulate the level
of the Lake of the Woods.
555 [Pg. 555 includes
portions of Doc. 388 and
Doc. 389]
Feb. 24
Agreement
Accompanying the convention and protocol to
regulate the level of the Lake of the Woods.
556 [Pg. 556 includes
portions of Doc. 389 and
Doc. 390]
CONTINUED PROTESTS BY THE CANADIAN GOVERNMENT AGAINST INCREASED DIVERSION OF THE WATERS OF THE GREAT LAKES

Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Feb. 13
To the British Ambassador
Transmittal of notice issued by the Secretary of War, February
10 (text printed), of a hearing to be held on February 20 on an
application made by the Sanitary District of Chicago for a
permit to divert an annual average of 10,000 cubic feet of water
per second from Lake Michigan.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 390 and
Doc. 391]
Feb. 24
(198)
From the British Ambassador
Canadian Government’s reiteration of protest against the
abstraction of water from the St. Lawrence basin as injurious to
Canadian
interests
as
regards
navigation
and
power
development. Expression of confidence that no permit will be
granted for the diversion of any water not essential to
safeguarding the health of the population of Chicago.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 391 and
Doc. 392]
Mar. 21 To the British Ambassador
Information that on March 3 a permit was issued by the War
Department to the Sanitary District of Chicago (text printed)
authorizing the temporary withdrawal from Lake Michigan of
subject to certain conditions.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 392 and
Doc. 393]
May
7
(467)
From the British Ambassador
Canadian Government’s inquiries as to the extent to which the
new permit will modify the actual conditions which obtained
during the year immediately preceding March 3, 1925.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 393 and
Doc. 394]
June 15 To the British Chargé
Information in reply to the inquiries made by the Canadian
Government, to the effect that net result will make possible a
reduction in the flow of water passing Lockport.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 394 and
Doc. 395]
Sept. 15
(813)
From the British Chargé
Canadian Government’s opinion that the permit of March 3 will
authorize a greater diversion of water than is now being made,
and inquiry as to whether the U. S. authorities intend to take
measures to insure future curtailment.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 395 and
Doc. 396]
Nov. 24 To the British Ambassador
Assertion that Canadian Government is correct in concluding
that no immediate reduction is provided, but that its conclusion
that no definite reduction is assured and that the effect of the
includes
portions
of
Doc. 396 and
Doc. 397]

permits will actually be to authorize a greater diversion than is
now being made cannot be confirmed.

INTIMATION BY THE CANADIAN GOVERNMENT OF ITS CLAIM TO SOVEREIGNTY IN THE ISLANDS OF THE NORTH
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
June
15
(627)
From the British Chargé
Information of Canadian Government’s readiness to lend
assistance of Canadian officers in the far North and posts of
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to proposed MacMillan
scientific expedition, and to furnish the necessary permits for
entering Canadian northern territories.
570 [Pg. 570 is
part of Doc. 398]
June 19
To the British Chargé
Route of proposed expedition; request for information as to
what constitutes a post of the Royal Mounted Police, where
such posts have been established, whether they are
permanently occupied, and if so, by whom.
571
[Pg.
571
includes
portions
of Doc. 399 and
Doc. 400]
July
2
(676)
From the British Chargé
Information regarding posts and duties of the Royal Mounted
Police.
571
[Pg.
571
includes
portions
of Doc. 399 and
Doc. 400]
July 18
To the British Chargé
Promise of reply to the Chargé’s notes of June 15 and July 2
when necessary study of the matter has been completed.
(Footnote: Information that apparently no further reply was
made to these British notes.)
573
[Pg.
573
includes
portions
of Doc. 400, Doc.
401, and Doc. 402]
REGULATIONS TO GIVE EFFECT TO THE CONVENTION OF JUNE 6, 1924, BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA FOR THE SUPPRESSION OF SMUGGLING
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Sept. 19
Executive Order No. 4306
Approving regulations to give effect to the smuggling
convention of June 6, 1924, between the United
States and Great Britain in respect of Canada.
573 [Pg. 573 includes
portions of Doc. 400, Doc.
401, and Doc. 402]

CHILE
DISINCLINATION OF THE UNITED STATES TO GRANT ASYLUM DURING REVOLUTIONARY CRISIS IN CHILE
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925 Jan.
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Report of revolutionary movement by the Army and
formation of New Junta de Gobierno.
581
[Pg.
581
includes portions of
Doc. 403 and Doc.
404]
Jan.
25
(9)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Fear of certain members of the late regime for the safety of
those members being held virtual prisoners, and request for
action by the Ambassador on their behalf. Ambassador’s
desire for instructions.
581
[Pg.
581
includes portions of
Doc. 403 and Doc.
404]
Jan.
26
(12)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Report that situation is grave, with possibility of civil war.
Opinion that it is not necessary to send ships to Chile, but
would be desirable to send some very close to Chilean
ports.
582
[Pg.
582
includes portions of
Doc. 404 and Doc.
405]
Jan.
26
(3)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Department’s opinion that, in view of the fact that the
members of the late regime are under guard by order of the
present authorities, any action by the Ambassador in their
behalf would not be justified.
583
[Pg.
583
includes portions of
Doc. 405 and Doc.
406]
Jan.
27
(4)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Outline of Department’s position with regard to asylum;
maintenance of view that the granting of shelter to any
person not exempt from the local jurisdiction cannot be
viewed with favor except under very exceptional
circumstances.
584 [Pg. 584 is
part of Doc. 407]
Jan.
27
(5)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Department’s feeling that the presence of American war
vessels in Chilean ports would cause an unfavorable
impression; willingness to send them only if American lives
were in danger.
585
[Pg.
585
includes portions of
Doc. 407, Doc. 408,
and Doc. 409]
Jan.
27
(13)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Report that acute crisis appears to be settled; that Alessandri
has been declared constitutional President; that new
585
[Pg.
585
includes portions of
Doc. 407, Doc. 408,
and Doc. 409]

constitutional convention is to be called and political
prisoners released.
Feb.
12
(19)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Request of a religious order for protection for its property in
Chile, on the ground that the title is in the name of an
American citizen. Desire for instructions.
586
[Pg.
586
includes portions of
Doc. 409 and Doc.
410]
Feb.
14
(6)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Instructions not to extend protection if the property
mentioned is actually owned by the order and only the title
is recorded in name of the American citizen; otherwise, to
inform Department as to particulars.
587
[Pg.
587
includes portions of
Doc. 411 and Doc.
412]
Mar. 19
(11)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Instructions that upon Alessandri’s resumption of office,
formal relations may be maintained with him.
(Footnote: Alessandri’s resumption of office on March 20.)
587
[Pg.
587
includes portions of
Doc. 411 and Doc.
412]

CHINA
RENEWAL OF CIVIL WAR IN NORTH CHINA AND REFUSAL BY THE UNITED STATES TO LEND ITSELF TO A POLICY OF INTERVENTION
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925 Jan.
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of unsettled conditions in North China, both military
and political: Military power of Chang Tso-lin, shared by Feng
Yu-hsiang; arrival of Sun Yat-sen at Peking. Plans of Marshal
Tuan, the Chief Executive, for reorganization conference for
solution of the complicated situation. Reports of anti- Christian
agitation in Canton and in Chekiang Province.
is part of Doc.
413]
Jan.
13
(22)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Chang Tso-lin’s announcement of his departure from Tientsin
for Mukden with the statement, “All my troops will also be
instructed to return to Mukden successively.”
includes
portions
of
Doc. 414 and
Doc. 415]
Jan.
15
(23)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of informal conversation with Chief Executive, in which
latter stated that 19 out of 22 provinces had accepted invitations
to his rehabilitation conference. Report that the conference,
however, is the subject of constant attack by the Kuornintang.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 414 and
Doc. 415]
Jan.
16
(26)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from consul general at Shanghai, January 15 (text
printed), reporting an incident involving American and French
sailors and resulting in several casualties to Chinese soldiers
interned at Haig reserve school.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 415, Doc.
416, and Doc.
417]
Jan.
18
(28)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Conference with British Minister regarding proposal of the
British acting consul general at Shanghai, in telegram dated
January 16 (extract printed), at the behest of British interests
there, that measures be taken, including the sending of an
international military force, to prevent a recurrence of fighting
near Shanghai. Minister’s opinion that such measures would
constitute forcible intervention on Chinese territory; British
Minister’s concurrence in this view.
Telegram from American consul general at Shanghai, January
17 (text printed), indicating a similar proposal by a meeting of
the consular body at Shanghai; Minister’s reply, January 17
includes
portions
of
Doc. 415, Doc.
416, and Doc.
417]

(text printed), setting forth questions as to various details of the
proposal, and requesting consul general to consult with Admiral
McVay and send information requested.
Jan.
19
(29)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Message from Admiral McVay (extract printed) that the force
available for protection of the International Concession at
Shanghai is considered by senior naval officers to be sufficient;
that American sailors have been cleared of any responsibility in
the shooting of the Chinese previously reported.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 417, Doc.
418, and Doc.
419]
Jan.
21
(35)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul at Shanghai, January 14 (extract
printed), reporting decision of the consuls general of the powers
to request the diplomatic body to authorize the consular body to
forbid right of asylum to all Chinese military leaders so long as
conditions remain unsettled. Resolution adopted by diplomatic
body, January 19 (text printed), authorizing such action.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 417, Doc.
418, and Doc.
419]
Jan.
24
(45)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of military attaché, January 23 (extract printed), sent to
Shanghai by the Minister, expressing opinion that present force
available is ample to handle conditions.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 419, Doc.
420, and Doc.
421]
Jan.
27
(47)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Radiogram from Admiral McVay, January 26 (text printed),
transmitting message from General Wang that Woosung fort
would not fire on foreign vessels during daylight only.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 419, Doc.
420, and Doc.
421]
Jan.
28
(49)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Radiogram from Admiral McVay, January 27 (extract printed),
reporting that senior naval officers had sent message to
Woosung fort of their inability to accept a wireless warning,
closing the fort during the night constituting an interference
with foreign shipping.
(Footnote: Admiral McVay’s telegram of January 28 reading,
“Woosung fort has agreed to abide by notice sent yesterday.”)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 421, Doc.
422, and Doc.
423]
Jan.
29
(2740)
From the Minister in China
Report of insistence by Americans as well as British in
Shanghai on their demands for protection; request for
instructions as to policy to be adopted by the United States in
the event of a repetition of the recent situation in Shanghai.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 421, Doc.
422, and Doc.
423]

Jan.
31
(56)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Radiogram from Admiral McVay, January 30 (text printed),
reporting that a detachment of Chang Tso-lin’s army has arrived
in Shanghai and taken charge, and that Chang is now master of
the eastern section of North China from Harbin to Shanghai.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 423, Doc.
424, and Doc.
425]
Feb.
5
(Circular
30)
From the Netherlands Minister in China, Senior Minister, to the
American Minister
Note from the Waichiaopu, February 4 (text printed), stating
that, in accord with the Senior Minister’s request, the Chief
Executive had been requested to give instructions to the
military authorities in Kiangsu Province for the prohibition of
troops in or near the foreign settlement.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 423, Doc.
424, and Doc.
425]
Feb.
5
(59)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of request by consular body at Shanghai that the foreign
ministers suggest that the Chinese Government dismantle the
Woosung forts and evacuate the troops there. Minister’s request
for instructions as to whether he should join in such a
suggestion.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 425 and
Doc. 426]
Feb.
7
(19)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Department’s inability to authorize the Minister to join in
representations to Chinese Government regarding Woosung
forts.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 426, Doc.
and Doc. 429]
Mar.
12
(102)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Death of Sun Yat-sen, March 12.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 426, Doc.
and Doc. 429]
Mar.
21
(120)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report from consul at Mukden of an interview with Chang, in
which Chang indicated his determination to oust Feng.
Minister’s belief that it is inevitable that Chang should fight it
out with Feng before long.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 426, Doc.
and Doc. 429]

Mar.
27
(309)
From the British Ambassador
Information that the British Government has instructed its
Ambassador in Tokyo to inquire of the Japanese Government
whether it would desire to make any proposals with a view to
international consultation or the use of diplomatic pressure
upon the rival Chinese groups to prevent the hostilities now
threatened. Request for U. S. views.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 429 and
Doc. 430]
Mar.
27
(56)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for comments on the British proposal as set forth in the
British Ambassador’s note No. 309 of March 27. Secretary’s
opinion that it would not be wise for the United States to join in
a request to Japan for suggestions.
(Instructions to repeat to Tokyo.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 430 and
Doc. 431]
Mar.
28
(36)
To the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Instructions to telegraph opinion of the British proposal and
any pertinent information.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 432 and
Doc. 433]
Mar.
29
(127)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Views as to possible motives of Great Britain. Opinion that
neither international consultation, peaceful action, nor pressure
would prevent hostilities if they are to occur; that the powers
should avoid even the appearance of intervening on either side;
and that the United States should pursue its traditional policy of
helpful cooperation with the Chinese.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 432 and
Doc. 433]
Mar.
29
(55)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Report that the Japanese Foreign Office has had no news of the
impending strife between Chang and Feng. Opinion that the
form of the British suggestion is objectionable; suggestions as
to possible U. S. course of action.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 433 and
Doc. 434]
Mar.
30
(877)
To the Minister in China
Department’s assertion, in reply to Minister’s despatch No.
2740 of January 29, of the impracticability of setting forth in
advance its attitude toward a particular situation; concurrence
in Minister’s view, as set forth in telegram No. 28, January 18,
that the sending of an international military force to Shanghai
would be an act of forcible intervention.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 434 and
Doc. 435]
Apr. 2
To the British Ambassador
Summary of U. S. views regarding British suggestion in note
No. 309 of March 27; conclusion that U. S. Government cannot
adopt the course of action proposed.
includes
portions
of

Doc. 435 and
Doc. 436]
May
2
(179)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Report of mobilization of Feng forces, and other circumstances
which make clash between Chang and Feng appear more
imminent.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 436 and
Doc. 437]
May
26
(189)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Chang’s intention to come to Tientsin shortly, and to Peking
immediately thereafter, and to secure military control of Peking
and environs.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 437, Doc.
438, and Doc.
439]
May
30
(194)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Arrival of Chang Tso-lin at Tientsin.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 437, Doc.
438, and Doc.
439]
July
2
(259)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Chang’s continued desire to crush Feng, to come to Peking and
take control of affairs, and his efforts to obtain British support;
Feng’s support by Soviet and radical Kuomintang assistance,
and his antiforeign propaganda.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 440 and
Doc. 441]
July
9
(686)
From the British Chargé
Summary of the Chinese situation as it appears to the British
Government: Increase of Feng’s military power in and around
Peking, his support from Russia, and his anti-British
declarations; danger of renewed disorders in the Yangtze
Valley; aggressive attitude of Communist Government at
Canton. Inquiry as to U. S. views of the situation, and what
steps the United States considers should be taken.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 440 and
Doc. 441]
July 13
To the British Chargé
Expression of general accord with the British Government as to
the seriousness of the situation in China; information that up to
the present the United States has not considered any action
other than the maintenance of its present military and naval
forces for the protection of the lives and property of its citizens
in China.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 441 and
Doc. 442]
July
25
(290)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Press reports of Chang Tso-lin’s arrival at Mukden.
includes

portions
of
Doc. 442, Doc.
and Doc. 445]
July
27
(712)
From the British Chargé
Information that according to reports received by the British
Government the situation in China has eased somewhat, and
therefore no special measures have been taken beyond the
despatch of one aircraft carrier to Hongkong.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 442, Doc.
and Doc. 445]
Oct.
17
(448)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Existence of tense situation between forces of Chang in
Kiangsu and the Chekiang forces under Sun Chuan-fang, who
is believed to be acting upon an understanding with Feng and
Wu Pei-fu to drive Chang back into Manchuria; consequent
possibility that all North China will be involved in a new civil
war between Feng and Chang, with the possession of Peking
and control of the Central Government as the principal
objective.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 442, Doc.
and Doc. 445]
Oct.
17
(451)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Shanghai (text printed) stating that forces of
Sun Chuan-fang have completely occupied Shanghai without
resistance.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 446 and
Doc. 447]
Nov.
5
(475)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that negotiations between representatives of Chang and
Feng for peaceful division of power have failed; that Chang
appears to be confronted by Feng, Wu Pei-fu, and Sun Chuan-
fang. Mobilization of troops by both sides.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 446 and
Doc. 447]
Nov.
18
(488)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Diminution of the possibility of immediate conflict between
Chang and Feng, due to a sudden compromise agreement.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 447 and
Doc. 448]
Nov.
25
(497)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that Chang has been placed under confinement at
Mukden by order of Manchurian General and that there is
dissension among Manchurian commanders at Shanhaikwan.
Factional
fighting
among
Manchurian
forces.
Recommendation, in view of the military and political
instability throughout China, for the holding in readiness of
certain U. S. military and naval forces.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 448, Doc.
449, and Doc.
450]

Nov.
28
(502)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that telegram No. 497, November 25, was partially
erroneous, as Chang Tso-lin is still in control at Mukden.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 448, Doc.
449, and Doc.
450]
Nov.
30
(508)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Demonstrations against the Central Government by students
and workmen, and distribution of leaflets and cartoons, some
issued by Chinese Communist Society and some by
Kuomintang.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 450 and
Doc. 451]
Dec.
7
(517)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul at Mukden, December 6 (text
printed), reporting that Chang has suffered complete debacle
and that his position is hopeless.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 452, Doc.
453, and Doc.
454]
Dec.
9
(521)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul at Mukden, December 8 (text
printed), reporting determination of Chang and his son to make
a hard fight.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 452, Doc.
453, and Doc.
454]
Dec.
11
(524)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Attack on international train between Peking and Tientsin;
occupation of the railway station at Yangtsun by Feng forces.
Plans of Minister and Senior Minister at Peking to protest to
Feng’s Peking representative against the occupation of the
Yangtsun station as a violation of article 9 of the 1901 protocol.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 452, Doc.
453, and Doc.
454]
Dec.
12
(527)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Arrival of international train at Peking with all on board unhurt
and well.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 454, Doc.
455, and Doc.
456]
Dec. 14
From the Consul General at Tientsin (tel.)
Successful resistance by Li Ching-lin, Military Governor of
Chihli, against advance Feng forces from Peking on a line more
than 6 miles from Tientsin.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 454, Doc.
455, and Doc.
456]

Dec.
14
(528)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Aide-mémoire (text printed) to be presented to the Chief
Executive by the Ministers of the protocol powers, urging
measures to bring about free communication between Peking
and Tientsin in accordance with the protocol of 1901.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 457 and
Doc. 458]
Dec.
23
(542)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report
that
international
train
between
Tientsin
and
Shanhaikwan was fired upon by Feng forces, halted, and forced
to return to Tientsin. Further representations by the Senior
Minister to Feng’s representative and to the Chinese
Government. Approval by Feng and Li Ching-lin, after much
negotiation, of arrangements for operation of international
trains.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 457 and
Doc. 458]
Dec. 24
From the Consul at Chefoo (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Tientsin (text printed)
reporting that Li Ching-lin’s forces are retreating from Tientsin
and Feng’s troops are entering the city.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 459 and
Doc. 460]
Dec.
24
(544)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Identic telegram to their respective governments agreed upon
by the Ministers of the protocol powers (text printed)
requesting instructions, in view of the possible necessity for the
use of force to restore the operation of the international train in
spite of assurances given.
Report that since the telegram was drafted, Feng has ordered
that the train be allowed to pass unhindered.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 459 and
Doc. 460]
Dec. 24
From the Consul at Mukden (tel.)
Chang Tso-lin’s defeat of the forces of Kuo Sung-ling,
commander of Manchurian forces attempting to overthrow
Chang.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 460, Doc.
and Doc. 463]
Dec.
24
(347)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Department’s disapproval of the use of force, as mentioned in
identic telegram quoted in Minister’s telegram No. 544,
December 24, unless lives of U. S. citizens are in danger.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 460, Doc.
and Doc. 463]
Dec.
25
(545)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Arrival of international train at Tientsin from Peking;
resumption of commercial service with depleted equipment.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 460, Doc.

and Doc. 463]
Dec.
28
(549)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Issuance by Tuan of mandates adding a cabinet to the system of
the Provisional Government; abolishing supreme control by the
Chief Executive and vesting it in the Premier, the Cabinet, and
the Chief Executive jointly; and appointing Hsu Shih-ying as
Premier.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 464 and
Doc. 465]
DECISION BY THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER POWERS TO ACCREDIT MINISTERS TO THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT OF CHINA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Apr.
6
(69)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Instructions to report whether the Chinese Government will
consider acceptable the appointment of Mr. John V. A. Mac
Murray as Minister to China.
includes
portions of Doc.
464 and Doc.
465]
Apr.
9
(146)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that the appointment of Mr. MacMurray will be
satisfactory to the Chinese Government; that the Belgian and
French Ministers have not yet presented their credentials.
includes
portions of Doc.
466 and Doc.
467]
Apr. 10
(150)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Assertion that the real reason for the failure of the Belgian and
French Ministers to present credentials is that Tuan’s
government is only de facto, and such action would constitute
de jure recognition.
includes
portions of Doc.
466 and Doc.
467]
Apr. 27
(174)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Presentation of credentials by the Spanish Minister, April 24.
Report that the French and Belgian Ministers have telegraphed
for instructions.
includes
portions of Doc.
468 and Doc.
469]
Apr. 30
(178)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Belgian Minister’s receipt of authorization to present his
credentials if he considers it to be in accordance with the
collective declaration of December 9, 1924. Plans for discussion
of the question of presentation of letters of credence at meeting
of the Washington Conference powers, May 6.
includes
portions of Doc.
468 and Doc.
469]

May
2
(91)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Department’s feeling that it is impractical to consider in
connection
with
the
presentation
of
credentials,
the
qualifications which may have been attached to the recognition
of the Peking regime in December 1924, in view of the relations
that the powers are actually maintaining with that regime.
includes
portions of Doc.
469 and Doc.
470]
May
6
(181)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Identic telegram (text printed) to be sent by the representatives
of the treaty powers to their respective governments. General
opinion among the representatives that unless certain
reservations were made, the Chinese Government would
consider the presentation of credentials as de jure recognition.
includes
portions of Doc.
470 and Doc.
471]
May
9
(93)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Department’s belief that there would be no advantage in
withholding action which would merely confirm a relationship
already practically existing.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 473]
May 13
(186)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Chargé’s suggestion that, as even Tuan and the Chinese
themselves consider Tuan’s regime as only provisional, it would
be preferable to address the new Minister’s credentials to the
Chief Executive of the Provisional Chinese Government rather
than to the President of the Republic of China, thus avoiding
recognition of the unstable transitional regime as the de jure
Government of China.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 473]
May 27
(98)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Memorandum from the British Embassy, May 16 (text printed),
requesting U. S. views as to whether recognition is at present
possible. Secretary’s suggestion to the British Ambassador that
letters be addressed to the Chief Executive of the Provisional
Government of China.
includes
portions of Doc.
473 and Doc.
474]
June 23
(116)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Memorandum from the French Embassy, presented June 22
(text printed), requesting U. S. views as to the postponement of
the presentation of credentials by the Ministers of the powers
until the Boxer indemnity claims have been given satisfaction.
Department’s unwillingness to have Mr. Mac- Murray postpone
the presentation of his credentials on this basis.
includes
portions of Doc.
475 and Doc.
476]
July
2
(258)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Presentation of letters of credence by the Belgian Minister on
June 30 and by the French Minister on July 1.
includes
portions of Doc.

475 and Doc.
476]
July
7
(266)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From MacMurray: Arrival in Peking, July 7.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 479]
July 15
(273)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Presentation of credentials, July 15.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 479]
ACCEPTANCE OF THE SOVIET AMBASSADOR AS DEAN OF THE DIPLOMATIC CORPS AT PEKING AND ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INFORMAL ORGANIZATION OF
HEADS OF LEGATION
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Feb. 28
(30)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Authorization, in view of the Soviet Ambassador’s status as dean
of the diplomatic body in Peking, to join colleagues whenever it
may seem expedient in conveying to the Soviet Ambassador an
intimation of readiness to cooperate with him in such matters as
are of general concern to the entire diplomatic body.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 477, Doc.
478, and Doc.
479]
Mar. 11
(100)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Plan agreed to by Heads of Legation to limit the diplomatic body
to ceremonial functions and to establish a group embracing all
the ministers now in Peking as an unofficial instrument for the
transaction of common treaty business with the Chinese
Government and consular bodies. Appointment of committee to
draft communication in this sense to Karakhan (the Soviet
Ambassador) and the Chinese Government.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 479 and
Doc. 480]
Mar. 14
(41)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Department’s opinion that the communications to Karakhan and
the Chinese Government should be as informal as possible.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 480, Doc.
481, and Doc.
482]
Apr. 21
(161)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Communication for Karakhan and the Chinese Government (text
includes

printed) stating the recognition of Karakhan as dean of the
diplomatic corps for ceremonial purposes.
portions
of
Doc. 480, Doc.
481, and Doc.
482]
Apr. 25
(172)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Request for instructions as to attitude to be adopted in respect of
relations with Karakhan as dean of the diplomatic body.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 482 and
Doc. 483]
Apr. 30
(89)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Reference to Department’s telegram of August 28, 1924, to
Helsingfors (text printed) for guidance with regard to relations
with Karakhan. Assertion that U. S. nonrecognition of Soviet
regime should not preclude purely social and unofficial
relationships.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 484 and
Doc. 485]
May
4
(2962)
From the Chargé in China
Karakhan’s inquiry, upon receiving notification of his
recognition as dean, whether he was also dean of the protocol
powers; negative reply agreed upon by Heads of Legation.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 484 and
Doc. 485]
FURTHER CONSIDERATION BY THE AMERICAN AND BRITISH GOVERNMENTS OF MEANS FOR EFFECTIVELY PREVENTING THE TRAFFIC IN ARMS WITH
CHINA
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Mar. 12
(252)
From the British Ambassador
British Government’s opinion, after exchange of views with the
French Government, that there is no hope of success for a
tripartite agreement prohibiting the export of aircraft to China;
that it is doubtful whether the Arms Embargo Agreement of
1919 can be strengthened. Intention, however, to continue
policy of doing all in their power to make the embargo a reality.
includes
portions of Doc.
485 and Doc.
486]
Mar. 16
From the British Ambassador
Possibility that at the forthcoming Geneva arms conference the
question may arise whether China should be scheduled as a
prohibited area. Request for U. S. views on such a proposal, or
suggestions as to other means of effective international
cooperation.
includes
portions of Doc.
486 and Doc.
487]
Mar. 25
(302)
From the British Ambassador
Insistence of the French Government that aircraft of
includes

commercial type cannot legally be detained in transit to the Far
East. Request for U. S. views as to possibility of U. S. pressure
on the French Government to stop this traffic.
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 489]
Apr. 8
To the British Ambassador
U. S. concurrence in British opinion as to the doubtful success
of a tripartite agreement at present. Intention to continue to
emphasize to the French Government the nonexistence of
commercial aviation in China and the view that all aircraft
destined for China should come within the scope of the
embargo.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 489]
Apr. 15
To the British Ambassador
Expression of doubt as to whether any useful purpose could be
served by a discussion of the China arms question at the
Geneva conference. U. S. inclination not to favor a suggestion
to place China in the so-called prohibited areas.
646 [Pg. 646 is
part
of
Doc.
490]
PARTICIPATION BY THE UNITED STATES IN EFFORTS TO SOLVE PROBLEMS ARISING FROM THE DISTURBANCES AT SHANGHAI, MAY 30, 1925
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925 May
31
From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.)
Report of violence in International Settlement following
demonstrations by Chinese students, resulting in several
casualties and arrests among the students.
647
[Pg.
647 includes
portions
of
Doc.
491
and
Doc.
492]
June 1
From the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Italian
Minister in China, Senior Minister
Formal protest in regard to the occurrence in Shanghai, May 30.
Request for release of the arrested persons and for instructions to
Shanghai consular authorities to prevent a recurrence of the
incident.
647
[Pg.
647 includes
portions
of
Doc.
491
and
Doc.
492]
June 3
From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.)
Report of general strike resolutions passed by students and
various associations, to become effective June 1; also of
demands made and resolutions passed on all conceivable
questions.
648
[Pg.
648 includes
portions
of
Doc.
492
and
Doc.
493]
June 3
From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.)
Information that 49 of those arrested have been arraigned in the
Mixed Court on a charge of rioting. Chinese attack upon police
649
[Pg.
649 includes
portions
of

and volunteers; increase of immediate need for additional war
vessels; extensive spread of strike among workmen.
Doc.
493
and
Doc.
494]
June 3
From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.)
Resolutions passed by various meetings held on June 2;
circulation of propaganda advocating extension of the strike to
the public utilities and workmen indispensable to foreigners.
650
[Pg.
650 includes
portions
of
Doc.
494
and
Doc.
495]
June 4
From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.)
Further spread of the strike.
651
[Pg.
651 includes
portions
of
Doc.
495,
Doc.
496,
and
Doc.
497]
June 4
To the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.)
Department’s desire that all needful measures be taken to prevent
the further spread of trouble and to protect American lives and
property.
651
[Pg.
651 includes
portions
of
Doc.
495,
Doc.
496,
and
Doc.
497]
June
4
(202)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Demonstrations by students in Peking, upholding certain
demands against foreigners in connection with the Shanghai
incident.
652
[Pg.
652 includes
portions
of
Doc.
497
and
Doc.
498]
June
4
(203)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Note handed to the Chinese Foreign Office by the Senior
Minister (text printed) specifying the circumstances under which
the police were led to the use of arms in the Shanghai
disturbance of May 30; and expressing the hope that the Chinese
Government will regard the incident with a conciliatory spirit
pending the reestablishment of order.
Information that Karakhan has addressed a note of sympathy to
the Waichiaopu regarding the Shanghai incident.
653
[Pg.
653 includes
portions
of
Doc.
498
and
Doc.
499]
June 4
From the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Italian
Minister in China, Senior Minister
Protest that alleged violent attitude of the authorities of the
International Concession at Shanghai has resulted in gravest
654
[Pg.
654 includes
portions
of
Doc.
499

consequences, notably general strikes; request for urgent
instructions to the consular authorities that firing cease.
and
Doc.
500]
June
5
(204)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Karakhan’s note of sympathy to the Chinese Foreign Office (text
printed). Information that Karakhan has transmitted to the Heads
of Legation a telegram of protest received by him from the
Shanghai Union of Teachers.
655
[Pg.
655 includes
portions
of
Doc.
500
and
Doc.
501]
June
6
(6320–
From the Secretary of the Navy
Disposition of U. S. naval forces at Shanghai, as given in a
despatch from the commander in chief of the Asiatic Fleet.
656
[Pg.
656 includes
portions
of
Doc.
501,
Doc.
502,
and
Doc.
503]
June 6
From the Italian Minister in China, Senior Minister, to the
Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs
Assertion, in reply to the Foreign Office note of June 4, that the
diplomatic representatives have decided to send a delegation to
Shanghai to study the situation there and report to the diplomatic
body. Assurances that the police of the Settlement have always
had orders to use arms only if attacked.
656
[Pg.
656 includes
portions
of
Doc.
501,
Doc.
502,
and
Doc.
503]
June 6
Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State
Conversation with the Chinese Minister regarding the situation at
Shanghai. U. S. willingness that the Minister telegraph to his
Government and let it be known in Shanghai that U. S. forces are
there solely for the protection of American lives and property.
657
[Pg.
657 includes
portions
of
Doc.
503
and
Doc.
504]
June
6
(206)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Personnel of the delegation to study the situation at Shanghai and
report back to the Heads of Legation.
658
[Pg.
658 includes
portions
of
Doc.
504
and
Doc.
505]
June
8
(211)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Decision by the Heads of Legation to suggest to the consular
body at Shanghai the reembarkation of part of the landing force
if the local situation permits, publicity to be given to such
measures if taken.
Chang Tso-lin’s intention to send his son to investigate situation
in Shanghai, and to despatch forces to maintain order.
660
[Pg.
660 includes
portions
of
Doc.
506
and
Doc.
507]

June 9
From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.)
Report that trial of the rioters is proceeding. Consul general’s
proposal that he support at the consular body meeting the
appointment of an international foreign mission to investigate
actions of the police on May 30 and that a Chinese representative
be invited to watch the proceedings.
660
[Pg.
660 includes
portions
of
Doc.
506
and
Doc.
507]
June 10
From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.)
Report that conditions have improved since June 3 and 4 except
in regard to the strike, which is spreading.
661
[Pg.
661 includes
portions
of
Doc.
507
and
Doc.
508]
June 10
To the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.)
Suggestion concerning the advisability of consultation with the
diplomatic body and with its commission of investigation before
considering the appointment of an international foreign mission
of investigation, so that a duplication of effort may be avoided.
662
[Pg.
662 includes
portions
of
Doc.
508
and
Doc.
509]
June 11
From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.)
Improvement of general conditions but no perceptible subsiding
of strike. Information from Admiral McVay that naval vessels
have been stationed at practically every treaty port.
663
[Pg.
663 includes
portions
of
Doc.
509,
Doc.
510,
and
Doc.
511]
June 12
From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.)
Telegram to the Legation (text printed) reporting that Mixed
Court trial of rioters was completed June 11, with extreme
leniency shown to the accused.
663
[Pg.
663 includes
portions
of
Doc.
509,
Doc.
510,
and
Doc.
511]
June
12
(107)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Information that press articles appearing in United States which
suggest the existence of a plot by European powers and Japan to
draw United States into action oppressive of China in order to
further their own interests, have received no sanction whatever
from the Department.
(Instructions to repeat to Tokyo and Shanghai.)
664
[Pg.
664 includes
portions
of
Doc.
511,
Doc.
512,
and
Doc.
513]
June
12
(217)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Note from the Waichiaopu to the Senior Minister, June 11,
criticizing action of the Settlement authorities; reply drafted by
664
[Pg.
664 includes
portions
of

Heads of Legation stating that diplomatic delegation at Shanghai
has been instructed to consider with the consular body and
Chinese delegates the best means to remedy the distressing
situation, and recalling to the Chinese Government its grave
responsibility for maintaining order throughout China.
Opinions of Chang Tso-lin and Feng Yu-hsiang regarding
Shanghai disturbances.
Doc.
511,
Doc.
512,
and
Doc.
513]
June
14
(225)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Report from the consul at Shanghai that part of defense forces
have been withdrawn, owing to improved situation.
666
[Pg.
666 includes
portions
of
Doc.
513
and
Doc.
514]
June
17
(112)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Information that the purport of telegram No. 107, June 12, to
Peking, has been conveyed to the Foreign Minister, who
expressed gratification.
667
[Pg.
667 includes
portions
of
Doc.
515
and
Doc.
516]
June
19
(237)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Inability of diplomatic delegation at Shanghai to reach an
agreement with the Chinese Government delegates in respect of
the Shanghai incidents; departure of the delegation for Peking.
Decision of Heads of Legation to constitute the Italian and the
French Ministers and the U. S. Chargé^ as a committee to
negotiate with the Chinese Government for settlement of the
incidents and, if so agreed by the Governments concerned, for a
reorganization
of
the
International
Settlement
and
the
administration of justice in the Settlement.
667
[Pg.
667 includes
portions
of
Doc.
515
and
Doc.
516]
June
20
(238)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Chinese Government’s preference for Shanghai as the place for
negotiations; desire of Heads of Legation, conveyed to the
Foreign Minister, that negotiations be held in Peking.
669
[Pg.
669 is part of
Doc. 517]
June
23
(242)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Shanghai, June 22 (text
printed), reporting belief that there will be no relaxation in strike
until June 26; also that no practical assistance for maintaining
order has yet been received from Chang Tso-lin.
670
[Pg.
670 includes
portions
of
Doc.
518
and
Doc.
519]
June
26
(Circular
187 bis)
From the Italian Minister in China, Senior Minister, to the
American Chargé
Note from the Waichiaopu, June 24 (text printed), submitting the
670
[Pg.
670 includes
portions
of

13 demands formulated by the Chinese delegation at Shanghai
and the Chinese views concerning treaty revision, for
consideration during the forthcoming negotiations at Peking.
Doc.
518
and
Doc.
519]
June
27
(252)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Shanghai, June 26 (text
printed), reporting the reopening of all Chinese banks and most
shops.
672
[Pg.
672 includes
portions
of
Doc.
519,
Doc.
520,
and
Doc.
521]
July
2
(255)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Opinion of Heads of Legation, conveyed to the Foreign Minister,
that the Chinese Government’s 13 points cannot seriously be
considered as basis for negotiations.
Suggested possibility of referring settlement of the Shanghai
incidents to the Permanent Court of International Justice in
conjunction with the League of Nations.
672
[Pg.
672 includes
portions
of
Doc.
519,
Doc.
520,
and
Doc.
521]
July
2
(257)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Instructions from the Heads of Legation to the senior consul at
Shanghai to be communicated to the Municipal Council (text
printed), containing recommendations for revision of the police
regulations of the International Settlement and for the
replacement of Colonel McEuen, commissioner of police,
because of negligence in connection with the incident of May 30.
674
[Pg.
674 includes
portions
of
Doc.
521
and
Doc.
522]
July
2
(129)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Department’s desire that in the negotiations for settlement of the
Shanghai incidents, every effort be made to see that the Chinese
point of view receives fair and just consideration.
676
[Pg.
676 includes
portions
of
Doc.
523
and
Doc.
524]
July
3
(262)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Request from the consular body at Shanghai, acceded to by
Heads of Legation, for a delay until July 6 in presentation to the
Municipal Council of the decisions of the Heads of Legation
described in telegram No. 257, July 2. Intention to communicate
the decisions to the Chinese Government and to the press on July
6.
676
[Pg.
676 includes
portions
of
Doc.
523
and
Doc.
524]
July
6
(264)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Information that British Government has instructed its Chargé to
cause suspension of communication of decisions of the Heads of
Legation to the Chinese Government and to the press, pending
further instructions.
677
[Pg.
677 includes
portions
of
Doc.
524,
Doc.
525,

and
Doc.
526]
July
6
(133)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Instructions to refrain from joining any move to refer to the
Permanent Court of International Justice or to the League of
Nations any question in which U. S. Government is concerned,
as United States is not a member of either body.
677
[Pg.
677 includes
portions
of
Doc.
524,
Doc.
525,
and
Doc.
526]
July
7
(684)
From the British Chargé
British Government’s instructions to its Chargé in Peking to
satisfy himself, before taking any further action, that the
decisions of the diplomatic body will not meet with any effective
resistance from the Municipal Council of Shanghai, and that the
U. S. and Japanese representatives have been officially
authorized to make the proposed communications to the Chinese
Government and to the press. Hope that the U. S. Chargé will be
given similar instructions.
678
[Pg.
678 is part of
Doc. 527]
July
9
(267)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Information that the decisions of the Heads of Legation have
been transmitted to the Municipal Council.
Displeasure among certain members of the diplomatic body,
particularly the French Minister, over action of British
Government as described in telegram No. 264, July 6.
Compromise suggested by U. S. Chargé, and ultimately agreed
upon, whereby the Municipal Council would be allowed to take
the proposed action as on its own initiative, announcing that such
action followed discussion with the consular body and approval
by the representatives of the powers concerned at Peking; identic
telegram in this sense to the U. S., British, and Japanese consuls
at Shanghai.
679
[Pg.
679 includes
portions
of
Doc.
527
and
Doc.
528]
July
10
(268)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Refusal of the Municipal Council of Shanghai to accede to the
conclusions of the diplomatic representatives; no reply to the
identic telegram to the U. S., British, and Japanese consuls.
Identic telegram from the Heads of Legation to their respective
governments (text printed) requesting authorization to undertake,
if necessary, negotiations for the modification of existing land
regulations in the International Settlement.
681
[Pg.
681 includes
portions
of
Doc.
528
and
Doc.
529]
July
11
(271)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
French Minister’s statement of his inability to continue as a
member of the diplomatic commission delegated by the Heads of
683
[Pg.
683 includes
portions
of

Legation to negotiate in their behalf with the Chinese authorities
for the settlement of the Shanghai incident.
Doc.
529
and
Doc.
530]
July
13
(146)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Authorization as requested in the identic telegram described in
Chargé’s telegram No. 268, July 10.
684
[Pg.
684 includes
portions
of
Doc.
530,
Doc.
531,
and
Doc.
532]
July
17
(217)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
British Government’s proposed telegram to its Chargé in Peking
(text printed), expressing opinion that a public judicial inquiry
should be held in regard to the Shanghai incident, and suggesting
a communication from the diplomatic body to the Municipal
Council in this sense; and stating that pending the result of this
inquiry the police commissioner should be suspended without
prejudice.
Hope of the British Government that similar instructions may be
sent to the representatives at Peking of the United States, France,
and Japan.
684
[Pg.
684 includes
portions
of
Doc.
530,
Doc.
531,
and
Doc.
532]
July
18
(159)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for comments on the British proposal.
686
[Pg.
686 includes
portions
of
Doc.
532
and
Doc.
533]
July
20
(282)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Recommendation that the United States accede to the British
proposal with a qualification that the commission of inquiry
should include a Chinese jurist.
687
[Pg.
687 is part of
Doc. 534]
July
22
(236)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Instructions to inform the British Government that the United
States is prepared to acquiesce in its proposal for the holding of a
judicial inquiry provided the proposed commission shall include
a Chinese jurist of high standing.
689
[Pg.
689 includes
portions
of
Doc.
534
and
Doc.
535]
July
30
(236)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
British Government’s approval of the suggestion that the
proposed commission include a Chinese jurist.
690
[Pg.
690 includes
portions
of
Doc.
536

and
Doc.
537]
Aug. 3
To the British Chargé
Acknowledgment of the British Chargé’s note No. 684, of July 7,
and assertion that since receipt of the note the situation has been
altered by the proposal for a judicial inquiry.
690
[Pg.
690 includes
portions
of
Doc.
536
and
Doc.
537]
Aug.
14
(245)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Foreign Office note (extract printed) stating that the French,
Japanese, and Italian Governments have agreed in principle to
the establishment of a judicial inquiry, and requesting U. S.
support in British efforts to obtain cooperation of certain other
countries.
691
[Pg.
691 includes
portions
of
Doc.
537,
Doc.
538,
and
Doc.
539]
Aug.
5
(248)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Information that the U. S. representatives in certain European
capitals have been instructed to support their British colleagues
as requested by the British Government.
691
[Pg.
691 includes
portions
of
Doc.
537,
Doc.
538,
and
Doc.
539]
Aug.
6
(192)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Chinese Minister’s statement to the Secretary that his
Government could not see any need for the proposed judicial
inquiry into the Shanghai matter.
692
[Pg.
692 includes
portions
of
Doc.
540
and
Doc.
541]
Aug.
8
(319)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Review of the critical situation in China, including Foreign
Minister’s objection to a judicial inquiry; British draft document
for constitution of the commission of inquiry, which, in
Minister’s opinion, confuses functions of inquiry with political
considerations;
and
continued
agitations
at
Shanghai.
Recommendation of a plan of action to be urged upon the British
Government, to consist of: (1) Immediate acceptance of Colonel
McEuen’s resignation; (2) opening of negotiations with the
Chinese Government; (3) holding of judicial inquiry, if insisted
upon, to be limited to finding of facts.
692
[Pg.
692 includes
portions
of
Doc.
540
and
Doc.
541]
Aug.
10
(322)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Shanghai, August 7 (text printed), reporting
695
[Pg.
695 includes
portions
of

decision of the naval authorities that the landing forces, except to
guard public utilities, will be withdrawn on August 10.
Doc.
541
and
Doc.
542]
Aug.
10
(197)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of Minister’s proposed plan of action as set forth in
telegram No. 319, August 8; authorization to discuss the matter
with the Japanese Minister. Information that the Embassy at
London is being instructed to take the matter up with the Foreign
Office.
696
[Pg.
696 includes
portions
of
Doc.
542,
Doc.
543,
and
Doc.
544]
Aug.
15
(257)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Foreign Office note (text printed), in reply to U. S. Ambassador’s
informal note, objecting to the acceptance of McEuen’s
resignation, but recommending that he be suspended by the
Municipal Council pending outcome of the inquiry; agreeing to
the immediate opening of negotiations with the Chinese
Government; and agreeing to certain modification of its draft
terms of reference in order to proceed with the judicial inquiry.
696
[Pg.
696 includes
portions
of
Doc.
542,
Doc.
543,
and
Doc.
544]
Aug.
21
(272)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Opinion of the Minister in China that McEuen’s resignation is
necessary. Authorization to communicate this view to the British
Government and to express the hope that it may be able to
reconsider its position in this regard.
698
[Pg.
698 includes
portions
of
Doc.
544
and
Doc.
545]
Aug.
27
(354)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that it now appears that the British Government
desires that even McEuen’s suspension should not be put into
effect or announced until immediately before the commission of
inquiry convenes.
699
[Pg.
699 includes
portions
of
Doc.
545,
Doc.
546,
and
Doc.
547]
Aug.
27
(274)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Conversation with Sir Austen Chamberlain, in which he
expressed desire of British Government to act in concert with the
United States and Japan; fear of certain complications, however,
if McEuen’s resignation is permitted before a public inquiry has
been made.
699
[Pg.
699 includes
portions
of
Doc.
545,
Doc.
546,
and
Doc.
547]
Aug.
29
(362)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Shanghai (text printed) reporting cancelation of
the state of emergency and reembarkation of all U. S. landing
forces.
700
[Pg.
700 includes
portions
of
Doc.
547,

Doc.
548,
and
Doc.
549]
Aug.
30
(364)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Recommendation, in reply to Department’s request for comments
and suggestions, that British Government be informed that in
order to avoid an indefinite delay in settlement of the Shanghai
affair, the United States will not insist upon McEuen’s
resignation before the inquiry but feels that assurances should be
given that he will be retired in the event of his vindication by the
inquiry.
700
[Pg.
700 includes
portions
of
Doc.
547,
Doc.
548,
and
Doc.
549]
Aug.
31
(282)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Instructions to convey to the British Government the U. S.
position as recommended by the Minister in China, together with
the understanding that McEuen’s suspension will be arranged to
take effect as soon as possible without awaiting the
commencement of the judicial inquiry.
702
[Pg.
702 is part of
Doc. 550]
Sept.
1
(278)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Information that the Foreign Office will instruct the British
Chargé at Peking to cooperate with his U. S. colleague in accord
with Department’s position as stated in telegram No. 282, August
31.
703
[Pg.
703 includes
portions
of
Doc.
551
and
Doc.
552]
Sept.
4
(379)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Formula drafted by the U. S. Minister, Japanese Minister, and
British Chargé (extract printed), based upon the British Foreign
Office draft for the terms of reference to judicial inquiry of the
matters related to the Shanghai incident. Request for
authorization to sign the formula, if satisfactory to Department.
703
[Pg.
703 includes
portions
of
Doc.
551
and
Doc.
552]
Sept.
4
(283)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Instructions to inform Foreign Office that the United States
would consider acceptable a definite pledge from it as suggested
by the British Chargé in China, to the effect that the British
Government would, if necessary, at the close of the judicial
inquiry, exert its influence to bring about McEuen’s retirement.
704
[Pg.
704 includes
portions
of
Doc.
552
and
Doc.
553]
Sept.
4
(232)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Department’s approval of the formula transmitted in telegram
No. 379, September 4, and authorization to sign it or any
modification thereof importing no substantial alteration.
705
[Pg.
705 includes
portions
of
Doc.
554,
Doc.
555,
and
Doc.
556]

Sept.
9
(385)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Acceptance of terms of reference by interested colleagues, with
certain modifications. Assertion that action awaits selection of
American and Japanese judges.
705
[Pg.
705 includes
portions
of
Doc.
554,
Doc.
555,
and
Doc.
556]
Sept.
9
(238)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that Associate Justice E. Finley Johnson, of the
Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands, will be named as the
American judge to serve on the commission of inquiry at
Shanghai.
705
[Pg.
705 includes
portions
of
Doc.
554,
Doc.
555,
and
Doc.
556]
Sept.
10
(389)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Letter received from the British Chargé transmitting British
Government’s pledge in regard to McEuen’s retirement. Inquiry
if assurance is satisfactory.
706
[Pg.
706 includes
portions
of
Doc.
557
and
Doc.
558]
Sept.
11
(241)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Instructions to inform the British Chargé that the assurance given
is satisfactory, and that the Minister is ready to proceed with
negotiations with the Chinese Government regarding the
Shanghai incident.
706
[Pg.
706 includes
portions
of
Doc.
557
and
Doc.
558]
Sept.
15
(Circular
259)
From the Netherlands Minister in China, Senior Minister, to the
American Minister
Telegram from the senior consul at Shanghai stating that the
Municipal Council confirms its agreement to conform to the
conclusions of the judicial commission and to suspend the
commissioner of police before the first meeting of the
commission.
Letter to the Chinese Foreign Minister (text printed) transmitting
a certified copy of the terms of reference for the commission of
inquiry.
707
[Pg.
707 is part of
Doc. 559]
Oct.
3
(Circular
273)
From the Netherlands Minister in China, Senior Minister, to the
American Minister
Note from the Chinese Foreign Minister, October 2 (text
printed), stating that the Chinese Government maintains its
attitude that a judicial inquiry is unnecessary and will only
involve a waste of time.
708
[Pg.
708 includes
portions
of
Doc.
559
and
Doc.
560]

Oct.
9
(431)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
First meeting of commission of inquiry, October 7. Telegram
from Johnson, October 7 (text printed), reporting adjournment of
sessions until October 12 to enable all parties to prepare their
evidence; stating that apparently the Chinese witnesses will not
appear; and asking if the inquiry should proceed. Minister’s reply
that the inquiry should proceed.
(Footnote: Personnel of the commission.)
710
[Pg.
710 includes
portions
of
Doc.
560
and
Doc.
561]
Oct.
14
(435)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Johnson (text printed) reporting the existence of
general opposition to the inquiry.
711
[Pg.
711 includes
portions
of
Doc.
561
and
Doc.
562]
Oct.
15
(291)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Instructions to inform Johnson that he is free to take any
necessary action to bring out facts and truth, even though this
should compel him to make a minority report.
712
[Pg.
712 includes
portions
of
Doc.
563,
Doc.
564,
and
Doc.
565]
Oct.
16
(446)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Johnson (text printed) stating that a minority
report is imminent.
712
[Pg.
712 includes
portions
of
Doc.
563,
Doc.
564,
and
Doc.
565]
Oct.
28
(467)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Message from Johnson reading, “Court has finished inquiry and I
will make report in 6 to 10 days.”
712
[Pg.
712 includes
portions
of
Doc.
563,
Doc.
564,
and
Doc.
565]
Nov.
21
(492)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Summary of Johnson’s report, with list of the three concluding
recommendations; comment that the report exceeds the terms of
reference, as it gives conclusions and recommendations beyond
the scope of the inquiry. Minister’s opinion that it is unfortunate
that dicta of a controversial political nature should be contained
in a judicial finding intended to be published at this time.
713
[Pg.
713 is part of
Doc. 566]

Nov.
24
(324)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Department’s surprise that Johnson took up matters outside the
scope of the inquiry. Request for information as to whether
matters of the same general nature are also dealt with in reports
of the other judges.
715
[Pg.
715 includes
portions
of
Doc.
566
and
Doc.
567]
Nov.
25
(498)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that the British and Japanese judges in their reports
keep within the limits of the terms of reference.
716
[Pg.
716 includes
portions
of
Doc.
567,
Doc.
568,
and
Doc.
569]
Nov.
27
(500)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram to Shanghai (text printed) quoting message of the U.
S., British, and Japanese Ministers to their respective consuls in
Shanghai which outlined the differences in the findings of the
judicial commission and suggested the desirability of certain
action by the Municipal Council, including the offer of generous
compensation to the victims of the Shanghai incident, and the
devising of ways of dispensing with the services of the police
commissioner and the officers actually involved in the incident.
716
[Pg.
716 includes
portions
of
Doc.
567,
Doc.
568,
and
Doc.
569]
Dec.
3
(355)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Résumé of information contained in telegram No. 500,
November 27, from the Minister in China. Authorization to state
to the Foreign Office that, while it is regrettable that the
commission should have disagreed in its findings, the U. S.
Government feels that it would be disastrous at present to
suppress, edit, or delay the publication of the findings of the
judicial commission.
(Footnote: Authorization to Ambassador in Japan to repeat
substantially the same views to the Japanese Foreign Office.)
717
[Pg.
717 includes
portions
of
Doc.
569
and
Doc.
570]
Dec.
12
(525)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Authorization by the diplomatic body for certain Ministers to
suggest to the Municipal Council the adoption of measures to
settle the affair of May 30, namely, the resignation of the
responsible police officers and the offer of reasonable amounts to
the Chinese victims.
720
[Pg.
720 is part of
Doc. 571]
Dec.
21
(538)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Withdrawal of objections by Japan to the publication of the
reports. Adoption by the Municipal Council of the suggestions
outlined by the diplomatic body.
721
[Pg.
721 includes
portions
of
Doc.
572

and
Doc.
573]
Dec.
22
(540)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that the interested Ministers have authorized the
Senior Minister to release to the press on December 23 certain
documents relative to the judicial inquiry, and that publication of
full texts of the reports will follow in due course.
(Footnote: Minister’s report, January 22, 1926, that texts of the
reports were to be released to the press on January 23.)
721
[Pg.
721 includes
portions
of
Doc.
572
and
Doc.
573]
SPREAD OF ANTIFOREIGN DISTURBANCES IN CHINA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Jan. 12
(15)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Article in Shanghai conservative press declaring that a serious
wave of antiforeign and anti-Christian feeling is sweeping across
China. Information from the consul general at Shanghai, in reply
to the Minister’s inquiry, that missionaries and educators have
received reports from interior correspondents concerning anti-
Christian move.
is part of Doc.
574]
Jan. 16
(27)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from consul general at Shanghai, January 15 (text
printed), giving opinion of Dr. Pott, missionary educator in
China, that the anti-Christian move looks worse than he thought
at first and he regards it as political.
Quotation from editorial in the Chinese Recorder, monthly
journal of the Christian movement in China, concerning the
critical situation.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 574 and
Doc. 575]
Feb.
5
(60)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Canton, February 4 (text printed), reporting
continuation of antiforeign campaign.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 575, Doc.
576, and Doc.
577]
June
4
(201)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul at Changsha, June 3 (text printed),
reporting strike of students in Changsha because of the Shanghai
incident of May 30.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 575, Doc.
576, and Doc.
577]

June
6
(207)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul at Amoy (text printed) reporting
student demonstration and strong feeling against Japanese and
British.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 578, Doc.
579, and Doc.
580]
June
7
(208)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul at Nanking, June 6 (text printed),
reporting serious rioting in Chinkiang British Concession.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 578, Doc.
579, and Doc.
580]
June 10
(214)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul at Antung, June 9 (text printed),
reporting attack of Japanese police on Salt Gabelle patrol
attempting to arrest Korean smugglers off shore of Japanese
Concession, killing five Chinese.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 578, Doc.
579, and Doc.
580]
June 13
(218)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Reports of student strikes and parades at Foochow, Tsinan, and
Tsingtau, and other disturbances at Swatow and Canton.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 581 and
Doc. 582]
June 13
(219)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Hankow, June 12 (text
printed), reporting incident at British Concession resulting in
several casualties among Chinese.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 581 and
Doc. 582]
June 13
(220)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from Swatow, June 10 (excerpt printed), stating that
there is reason to believe effort is being made by Bolshevik
agitators to involve the United States, but up to the present time
students and other organizations have shown no definite anti-
American feeling.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 582, Doc.
583, and Doc.
584]
June 14
(226)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Report, through radio from Admiral McVay, that Japanese and
British consulates at Kiukiang were destroyed by mob on June
13; no casualties reported.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 582, Doc.
583, and Doc.
584]

June 15
(228)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Consideration by Heads of Legation of an offer from Chang Tso-
lin to send 10,000 soldiers to Peking to restore order; Chargé’s
statement that the acceptance of such aid might compromise U.
S. neutrality; similar expression by the British Chargé. Decision
by Heads of Legation to reply to Chang in the affirmative,
however, not opposed by U. S. and British representatives, but
formula (text printed) worded in such a way as probably not to
compromise neutrality.
is part of Doc.
585]
June 15
(229)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Report of British and Japanese consulates and British municipal
building at Kiukiang looted and bank of Taiwan burned; serious
situation at Chungking and Hankow.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 586 and
Doc. 587]
June 16
(231)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Information that the Senior Minister called on the Chief
Executive and secured from him assurance of protection of life
and property of foreign residents in Peking. Some relief of
tension at Peking. Report of recent satisfactory interview with
representative of Shanghai students.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 586 and
Doc. 587]
June 16
(108)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Department’s approval of Chargé’s attitude as set forth in his
telegram No. 228, June 15.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 587 and
Doc. 588]
June 17
(234)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Note from Heads of Legation to be presented to the Waichiaopu
reviewing the Hankow, Kiukiang, and Chinkiang incidents and
recent murder of foreigners near the Shanghai Settlement; and
calling to the serious attention of the Chinese Government the
gravity of the present situation and the necessity incumbent upon
it to meet the situation.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 589 and
Doc. 590]
June 18
(110)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Secretary’s informal statement to the Chinese Minister, June 15
(text printed), that the Department views with apprehension the
continued antiforeign demonstrations and disturbances in China
and feels that something should be done by the Chinese
Government to prevent the spread of those disturbances.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 589 and
Doc. 590]

June 19
(235)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Message from consul at Chungking (text printed) stating that no
reports have yet been received justifying advice to Americans to
be in readiness to leave.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 590 and
Doc. 591]
June 24
(246)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul at Amoy, June 23 (text printed),
reporting grave situation and recommending that naval
assistance, with landing party of about 100, be sent immediately.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 592 and
Doc. 593]
June 27
(251)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Offer of assistance from Chang Hsueh-liang, son of Chang Tso-
lin, made to Heads of Legation to bring about a speedy
conclusion of the Shanghai incident; reply, as suggested by U. S.
and British Chargés, conveying a polite rejection of the offer.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 592 and
Doc. 593]
July 16
(275)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul at Swatow, July 11 (text printed),
reporting that Cantonese troops attacked and looted British
mission at Wukingfu on July 9.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 593 and
Doc. 594]
July 31
(303)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Message from Amoy (text printed) recommending U. S.
cooperation with the British in the matter of naval protection;
opinion that presence of a naval vessel will have a restraining
influence on the extremist elements.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 595 and
Doc. 596]
Aug. 30
(363)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report from the consul at Amoy that the situation is quiet;
presence of naval vessel no longer necessary.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 595 and
Doc. 596]
Sept. 9
(384)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
General abatement of the tensity of Chinese feeling, such as to
warrant hope that crisis has passed.
is part of Doc.
597]
VICTORY OF THE RADICAL WING OF THE KUOMINTANG IN CANTON
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
May 29
(192)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, May 28 (substance
printed), reporting breach in the Kuomintang, conservative
includes
portions of Doc.

members being allied with Yunnan and Kwangsi military
groups, and the radicals, including the present civil
administration, with Cantonese troops and Russian-trained
volunteers.
598 and Doc.
599]
June
2
(195)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, June 1 (text
printed), reporting local conditions critical, with every
indication of the Government’s intention to fight, despite its
denial that it is Communist.
includes
portions of Doc.
598 and Doc.
599]
June
(205)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, June 5 (text
printed), reporting military preparations of both sides and the
understanding that General Hsu’s Cantonese army is within 40
miles of Canton.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 602]
June
9
(212)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, June 7 (text
printed), reporting that fighting has begun, and that all
Americans are safe so far.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 602]
June
9
(213)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, June 8 (text
printed), reporting continued firing by the opposing forces.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 602]
June 14
(223)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, June 13 (text
printed), reporting the Yunnanese routed and all in the city
surrendered to the Cantonese, June 12; also that seamen’s strike
will begin in Canton and Hongkong on June 15 in sympathy
with the Shanghai students.
includes
portions of Doc.
602 and Doc.
603]
June 15
(227)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, June 14 (text
printed), reporting antiforeign agitation and considerable
uneasiness in Canton and other cities; also domination of the
local situation by the Whampoa military school cadets, who
were responsible for the destruction of the Yunnan army.
includes
portions of Doc.
604 and Doc.
605]
July 22
(284)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Message from Canton (text printed) that the central executive
committee of the Kuomintang has called a preliminary people’s
conference to be held in Peking after August 1 to cancel
unequal treaties; and that it has urged the Chief Executive to
includes
portions of Doc.
604 and Doc.
605]

accept the Kuomintang’s advice rather than that of Chang Tso-
lin.
Aug. 24
(347)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Substance of two telegrams from Canton reporting the
assassination on August 20 of Liao Chung-hoi, head of the local
radical movement.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 608]
Aug. 27
(355)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Canton, August 25 (text printed), stating that the
Whampoa cadets have occupied Canton and arrested over 100
government officials supposedly implicated in the assassination
of Liao Chung-hoi.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 608]
Aug. 30
(365)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Canton, August 27 (extracts printed), reporting
city in complete control of the Whampoa cadets and the civil
administration badly disorganized.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 608]
Aug. 31
(369)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, August 28 (text
printed), stating that according to fairly reliable reports, the
strike committee has decided to confine the strike and boycott
to the British.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 610]
Sept.
4
(382)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, September 1 (text
printed), reporting inability of the strike committee to agree to
confine the strike and boycott to the British only.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 610]
Sept. 25
(416)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, September 21
(text printed), reporting that General Hsu has been relieved of
his command and has left hurriedly for Shanghai.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 613]
Oct.
7
(428)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Canton, October 2 (text printed), reporting
mobilization of the Canton army.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 613]
Oct. 16
(447)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Canton, October 15 (text printed), reporting that
a state of emergency has been declared in the Boca-Tigris fort
area and that all adjacent waters have been mined; also
includes
portions of Doc.

suggesting a statement as to U. S. attitude regarding the safe
conduct of U. S. vessels, and possible protest against the
placing of mines. Request for authorization to approve the
consul general’s recommendations.
and Doc. 613]
Oct. 24
(463)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Canton, October 20 (text printed), reporting
severe fighting in eastern Kwangtung.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 615]
Oct. 29
(308)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Authorization to approve recommendations of the consul
general at Canton as suggested in telegram No. 447, October
16.
includes
portions of Doc.
and Doc. 615]
Nov.
6
(477)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Swatow, November 4 (excerpt printed),
reporting the Cantonese in possession of the city.
includes
portions of Doc.
Doc. 618, and
Doc. 619]
Nov.
9
(478)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Swatow, November 7 (text printed), reporting
arrival of Chiang Kai-shek, November 6, with several thousand
troops.
includes
portions of Doc.
Doc. 618, and
Doc. 619]
Nov. 23
(493)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Inquiry from the consul at Swatow whether, in view of the
possibility that the Canton Government may take over the
maritime customs at Swatow, action should be taken similar to
that of the consul general at Canton in 1923. Request for
instructions.
includes
portions of Doc.
Doc. 618, and
Doc. 619]
Nov. 23
(321)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Secretary’s assertion that he questions the advisability at this
time of conducting an international naval demonstration such as
was carried out at Canton in 1923. Approval of formal
representations if necessary, however.
includes
portions of Doc.
Doc. 618, and
Doc. 619]
INTENSIFICATION OF ANTIFOREIGN FEELING IN CANTON AFTER THE FIRING AT SHAMEEN

Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
June 19
(236)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, June 18 (text
printed), reporting the imminence of a general strike against
foreigners and the consul general’s warning to American women
and children to leave.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 619, Doc.
620, and Doc.
621]
June 22
(239)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, June 21 (text
printed), reporting announcement of a general strike and boycott
against the British, Japanese, and Americans.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 619, Doc.
620, and Doc.
621]
June 23
(243)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, June 22 (text
printed), reporting assurances from the local authorities that
foreigners will be protected, and giving further details in regard
to the strike and boycott.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 622 and
Doc. 623]
June 24 From the Consul General at Canton (tel.)
Rifle and machine-gun firing between Chinese soldiers and
British and French sailors on June 23 during a demonstration of
students, laborers, and soldiers passing by Shameen.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 622 and
Doc. 623]
June 26
(336)
From the Consul General at Canton
Detailed account of the firing which took place at Shameen,
June 23, including estimation of casualties and information as to
evacuation of refugees. Tenseness and uncertainty of the
situation.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 623 and
Doc. 624]
June 26 From the Consul General at Canton (tel.)
Continuation of tense situation, each side accusing the other of
firing the first shot, and no overtures for a peaceful settlement
yet possible.
Chinese request that the consul general sit on an international
commission of inquiry; request for expression of U. S. attitude.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 624 and
Doc. 625]
June 28 From the Consul General at Canton (tel.)
Information that the local government has sent notes to the
British consul general and the French consul demanding
retrocession of Shameen, apology, remuneration to the families
of the killed, punishment of officials responsible for shooting,
and withdrawal of warships.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 625, Doc.
626, and Doc.
627]

June 28 From the Consul General at Canton (tel.)
Recommendation that the Department suggest to Great Britain
and France that an international commission be created and that
the Canton affair be dealt with separately from Peking.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 625, Doc.
626, and Doc.
627]
July 1
To the Consul General at Canton (tel.)
Instructions, in reply to the consul general’s telegram of June 26,
to decline to sit on the proposed commission of inquiry except
under certain circumstances, in which case further instructions
should be sought.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 627, Doc.
628, and Doc.
629]
July
3
(260)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from the consul general at Canton, July 1 (text
printed), stating that nothing is being said at present in regard to
the proposed commission of investigation.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 627, Doc.
628, and Doc.
629]
July
8
(340)
From the Consul General at Canton
Information that Americans who volunteered in militia and
police forces of Shameen withdrew upon finding British and
French authorities did not intend asking for assistance of
American naval forces. Consul general’s encouragement to
Americans, however, to lend aid in maintaining public services
of nonmilitary character.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 630 and
Doc. 631]
July 31
(301)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegrams from Canton, July 27 and July 28 (texts printed),
reporting general situation apparently less strained but no
indications of a settlement locally, and rumor that the radicals
will attempt to seize the local government on August 1.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 630 and
Doc. 631]
Aug. 14
(329)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Inquiry as to U. S. policy, in view of possible attack on the
French and British Concessions at Shameen, regarding the
utilization of U. S. naval forces. Recommendation that the U. S.
forces remain in order to protect American citizens and that they
be authorized to unite in such defense measures as the
commander may deem necessary to accomplish that end after
mediation appears no longer possible.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 631 and
Doc. 632]
Aug. 15
(202)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of policy as recommended by the Minister, with the
understanding that U. S. forces should not participate in the
includes
portions
of

defense of Shameen unless specifically requested to do so by the
naval authorities of the countries concerned.
Doc. 632 and
Doc. 633]
Oct. 16
(304)
From the Consul General at Canton to the Minister in China
Improvement in general attitude toward Americans, but
conditions still too unsettled to advise American women and
children to return.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 634 and
Doc. 635]
ADHERENCE OF CERTAIN POWERS TO TREATIES CONCERNING CHINA SIGNED AT WASHINGTON, FEBRUARY 6, 1922
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Aug. 6
To the Ambassador in Spain (circular tel.)
Note for the Foreign Minister (text printed) stating that the
treaty relating to the revision of the Chinese customs tariff,
signed at Washington, February 6, 1922, has been ratified by
the signatory Governments, and inviting the adherence of
Spain to the treaty.
(Footnote: Sent, mutatis mutandis, to representatives in
Denmark, Norway, and Sweden.)
(Note: Dates of adherence of Denmark, Sweden, Spain, and
Norway.)
includes portions
of Doc. 634 and
Doc. 635]
Oct.
1
(288)
To the Ambassador in Spain
Communication inviting the adherence of Spain to the treaty
relating to the principles and policies to be followed in matters
concerning China, signed at Washington, February 6, 1922.
(Footnote: Sent, mutatis mutandis, to representatives in certain
European and Latin American countries and Persia.)
(Note: Dates of adherence of Norway, Bolivia, Sweden,
Denmark, and Mexico.)
includes portions
of Doc. 635 and
Doc. 636]
REQUEST FROM THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT TO THE WASHINGTON CONFERENCE POWERS FOR A READJUSTMENT OF TREATY RELATIONS
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
June
24
(247)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Identic note from the Chinese Foreign Office addressed to the
representatives of the Washington Conference powers (text
printed) requesting a readjustment of China’s treaty relations with
foreign powers.
763
[Pg.
763 includes
portions
of
Doc.
636
and
Doc.
637]

June
26
(249)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Identic telegram from the representatives of the Washington
Conference powers to their respective Governments (text printed)
requesting
instructions
with
reference
to
the
Chinese
Government’s identic note of June 24. Chargé’s opinion that the
reply, while reaffirming the principles and policies of the
Washington Conference, should indicate the practical difficulties
involved and the necessity for facing facts.
(Telegram repeated to Tokyo.)
765
[Pg.
765 includes
portions
of
Doc.
637
and
Doc.
638]
June
30
(116)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Agreement with views of the Chargé in China; feeling that the
Chinese proposal should be neither rebuffed nor received in such
a manner as to convey an impression that the powers are yielding
under pressure.
766
[Pg.
766 includes
portions
of
Doc.
638
and
Doc.
639]
July
1
(125)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Department’s opinion that the reply to the Chinese proposal
should express a willingness to consider sympathetically the
modification of existing treaties in measure as the Chinese
authorities demonstrate their willingness and ability to fulfill their
obligations to protect foreign rights. U. S. desire also to expedite
preparations for the special conference on the Chinese customs
tariff
and
for
the
despatch
of
the
Commission
on
Extraterritoriality, said commission to be requested to make
recommendations for a definite program to be followed.
767
[Pg.
767 includes
portions
of
Doc.
639
and
Doc.
640]
Undated Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
Statement by the Secretary, in conversations with the Chinese
Minister, June 30 and July 1, that the United States would be
willing to urge upon the other interested powers the hastening of
the calling of the conference on tariff matters, and also the
sending of the Commission on Extraterritoriality.
768
[Pg.
768 includes
portions
of
Doc.
640
and
Doc.
641]
July
3
(677)
From the British Chargé
Opinion of the British Government that the powers should
indicate an unwillingness to discuss particular reforms or to
review treaty relations until order has been restored and the
Chinese Government has evidenced its determination to repress
antiforeign agitations and enforce protection of foreigners;
unfavorable attitude toward a promise to expedite the meeting of
the Commission on Extraterritoriality.
770
[Pg.
770 is part
of Doc. 642]
July
5
(263)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Conversation with the Japanese Minister in regard to settlement
of the Shanghai affair; belief of the Japanese Minister that his
771
[Pg.
771 includes
portions
of

Government contemplates a larger cooperation between the U. S.,
British, and Japanese Governments with respect to China than
merely cooperation regarding the Shanghai affair.
Doc.
642
and
Doc.
643]
July
6
(134)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram dated July 4 from Mahlon F. Perkins, on special mission
in London (text printed), conveying opinion of British Foreign
Office official that it would be preferable to concentrate efforts on
the early convening of the special conference on Chinese customs
tariff rather than upon meeting of the extraterritoriality
commission.
774
[Pg.
774 includes
portions
of
Doc.
643
and
Doc.
644]
July
6
(682)
From the British Chargé
British Government’s sympathy with the U. S. aims as set forth in
Department’s telegram No. 125, July 1, to the Chargé in China;
doubt expressed, however, as to the wisdom of laying down such
definite
terms
of
reference
for
the
Commission
on
Extraterritoriality as those suggested by the Department.
775
[Pg.
775 is part
of Doc. 645]
July
7
(683)
From the British Chargé
Proposal of a joint declaration (text printed) to be made publicly
by the treaty powers in reply to the Chinese note of June 24.
Inquiry as to U. S. attitude.
776
[Pg.
776 includes
portions
of
Doc.
645
and
Doc.
646]
July 10
From the Secretary to the President (Sanders) to the Acting
Secretary of State
President’s opinion that the Secretary of State should cooperate as
far as possible with the other interested powers, using great care
not to have China think there is a division of counsel.
777
[Pg.
777 includes
portions
of
Doc.
646
and
Doc.
647]
July
10
(270)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Mac Murray: Opinion that, in the face of the present
agitation against foreign treaty rights, a strict adherence to the
Washington Conference program is the only safe road.
778
[Pg.
778 includes
portions
of
Doc.
647
and
Doc.
648]
July
12
(124)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Foreign Office views of the primary importance of complete
accord between the United States, Great Britain, and Japan.
Information that the Japanese position will be defined shortly.
779
[Pg.
779 includes
portions
of
Doc.
648
and
Doc.
649]

July 13
To the British Chargé
U. S. accord with British opinion that China must be impressed
with the necessity of giving concrete evidence of its ability to
suppress disorders and protect foreigners; feeling, however, that
existing conditions in China can best be met by consistent and
scrupulous observance by the powers of the obligations
undertaken by them at the Washington Conference. Further
exposition of U. S. attitude on the instructions to be given the
Commission on Extraterritoriality. Opinion that the present is not
an opportune moment for a joint public declaration such as
proposed by the British Government in its note No. 683, July 7.
(Footnote: Substance repeated to the representatives in Japan,
France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, and Portugal.)
780
[Pg.
780 is part
of Doc. 650]
Undated From the Japanese Embassy
Memorandum presented July 16 stating willingness of the
Japanese Government to support a policy looking toward a
readjustment of treaty relations in China conjointly with the other
powers, provided the Chinese Government shows a determination
to carry out its obligations and provided certain questions are
settled.
783
[Pg.
783 includes
portions
of
Doc.
650
and
Doc.
651]
July
16
(277)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that the United States should welcome any offer from the
British and Japanese to work as far as possible in harmony with
them, but should carefully avoid any commitments or obligations
which might hinder the maintenance of U. S. policies and views
regarding China.
785
[Pg.
785 includes
portions
of
Doc.
651
and
Doc.
652]
July
18
(157)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Secretary’s concurrence in the Minister’s opinion as to the
attitude that should be taken by the United States; view that there
should be no agreement with the powers whereby the U. S.
general policy would be varied. Request for views as to the
desirability of a separate note in reply to the Chinese note of June
24.
788
[Pg.
788 includes
portions
of
Doc.
653
and
Doc.
654]
July
20
(701)
From the British Chargé
British Government’s opinion that it would be inadvisable to
delay acquainting China with attitude of the powers. Outline of
the statements which the British Government feels should be
contained in the reply to the Chinese Government.
788
[Pg.
788 includes
portions
of
Doc.
653
and
Doc.
654]
July
20
(702)
From the British Chargé
Amendments suggested by the Japanese Government to the joint
790
[Pg.
790 includes
portions
of

declaration proposed by the British Government; British approval
of the amendments.
Doc.
654
and
Doc.
655]
July
20
(703)
From the British Chargé
Italian proposal that the identic reply by the powers to the
Chinese note of June 24 should embody and itself constitute the
public
declaration
previously
suggested
by
the
British
Government.
791
[Pg.
791 includes
portions
of
Doc.
655
and
Doc.
656]
Undated
[Rec’d
July 21]
From the Japanese Embassy
Japanese draft of the proposed joint declaration in reply to the
Chinese note of June 24.
792
[Pg.
792 is part
of Doc. 657]
July 23
To the British Chargé
Assertion that the only point of difference among the powers
appears to be in regard to the precise phraseology of the reply to
the Chinese representations. Opinion that, as a matter of practical
policy, it would be preferable to convey fair warning to the
Chinese Government of its responsibility for the preservation of
order and other matters rather than to make complete restoration
of order a condition precedent to a discussion of reforms and
treaty relations. U. S. draft reply (text printed).
(Footnote: Countries to which text of the draft reply was
telegraphed.)
793
[Pg.
793 is part
of Doc. 658]
July
23
(165)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Communication of text of the U. S. draft reply, with instructions
to use it as a basis for discussion with the representatives of the
other interested powers.
(Instructions to repeat to Tokyo.)
797
[Pg.
797 includes
portions
of
Doc.
658
and
Doc.
659]
July
27
(292)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Suggestion of certain changes in wording of the U. S. draft,
particularly in the paragraph dealing with tariff revisions.
Recommendation that if it should prove impossible to obtain
almost immediate concurrence in an identic note based upon U. S.
draft, the United States should send its own note and let the others
reply as they see fit to the Chinese note of June 24.
798
[Pg.
798 is part
of Doc. 660]
July
28
(293)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Analysis of tentative impressions regarding the situation in China,
with particular reference to the growing nationalism and the
consequent difficulty of maintaining special treaty rights in
China.
799
[Pg.
799 includes
portions
of
Doc.
660
and
Doc.
661]

July
28
(170)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Comment on the Minister’s suggested changes in wording of the
U. S. draft reply to the Chinese note of June 24, and approval of
his recommendation as set forth in telegram No. 292, July 27.
802
[Pg.
802 includes
portions
of
Doc.
661
and
Doc.
662]
July
29
(300)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Further expression of opinion, in connection with the wording of
the U. S. draft, that the phrase “tariff autonomy” ought not to be
used, and that the wording of the sentence in question is not clear
as it stands; suggestion of substitute wording.
803
[Pg.
803 includes
portions
of
Doc.
663
and
Doc.
664]
July
30
(301)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Conversation with the Japanese Minister, in which he suggested
the establishment of a close working relationship between the U.
S., British, and Japanese Legations, looking toward a more
definite leadership by those powers having the greatest
responsibilities and interests in China.
803
[Pg.
803 includes
portions
of
Doc.
663
and
Doc.
664]
July
30
(173)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Instructions for wording of the passage in the U. S. draft
regarding the tariff, so that the U. S. position will be clear.
804
[Pg.
804 includes
portions
of
Doc.
664
and
Doc.
665]
July
30
(723)
From the British Chargé
Information that, as the U. S. draft differs so radically from the
Anglo-Japanese text, the British representative in China has been
authorized to discuss the two texts with the U. S. Minister and his
other colleagues in the hope of combining both in a new agreed
text. British disapproval of the statement in the U. S. draft with
regard to the Extraterritorial Commission, and objection to the
term “tariff autonomy.”
805
[Pg.
805 includes
portions
of
Doc.
665
and
Doc.
666]
Aug.
1
(180)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Secretary’s conversation with the Japanese Ambassador, who
indicated Japanese disagreement with U. S. proposal to make
reference in the powers’ note to China to the questions of
extending the scope of the tariff conference and also of tariff
autonomy. Secretary’s reiteration of U. S. position and
explanation of the phraseology which will be acceptable to the
United States and which it is hoped will meet the objections of
the Japanese Government.
806
[Pg.
806 includes
portions
of
Doc.
666
and
Doc.
667]

Aug.
1
(306)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Conversation with the Japanese Minister, who expressed his
Government’s difficulty in assenting to the U. S. draft insofar as it
conveys a formal promise to consider tariff autonomy at the
special conference. U. S. Minister’s personal view that it would
be tactically unsound to announce publicly at this time a readiness
to go beyond the terms of the Washington Conference provisions
for the special conference. Request for instructions.
807
[Pg.
807 includes
portions
of
Doc.
667
and
Doc.
668]
Aug.
3
(181)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Readiness of the British Government, as well as the U. S.
Government, to extend the scope of the tariff conference.
Summary of British note No. 723, of July 30.
810
[Pg.
810 is part
of Doc. 669]
Aug.
4
(142)
From the Chargé in Japan (tel.)
Statement of the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs that for the
present the Japanese Government are not prepared to go beyond
the terms of the Washington Conference in any discussion with
the Chinese Government; his reiteration of Japanese desire to
work with U. S. and British Governments in meeting the present
situation, and assertion that the Washington Conference provided
a basis upon which all agreed.
812
[Pg.
812 is part
of Doc. 670]
Aug.
5
(311)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Suggested modifications in the U. S. draft to meet what the
Minister understands to be the British views.
813
[Pg.
813 is part
of Doc. 671]
Aug. 5
To the British Chargé
Reply to the British note No. 723, of July 30, pointing out an
apparent misinterpretation by the British Government of the
statement in the U. S. draft with respect to the Extraterritorial
Commission.
814
[Pg.
814 is part
of Doc. 672]
Aug. 6
To the British Chargé
Information that the Department, desiring to meet the British
point of view, has authorized the U. S. Minister in China to make
certain changes in the text of the U. S. draft. Hope that with these
amendments the British Government will find itself able to accept
the American draft.
815
[Pg.
815 includes
portions
of
Doc.
672
and
Doc.
673]
Aug.
7
(193)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Information as to the comments of various Governments in regard
to the U. S. draft note to the Chinese Government: Concurrence
of Belgium and the Netherlands in U. S. views; Italian agreement
in principle with the essential points of the U. S. draft; French
preference for the Japanese draft, considering the U. S. draft too
mild in tone and the British perhaps too sharp.
816
[Pg.
816 includes
portions
of
Doc.
673
and
Doc.
674]

Aug. 11
(151)
From the Chargé in Japan (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s assertion that, so far as the Extraterritorial
Commission is concerned, he is in substantial agreement with the
American point of view; that concerning tariff, Japan could not go
beyond the terms of existing treaties or the Washington
Conference engagements.
818
[Pg.
818 is part
of Doc. 675]
Aug. 11
(738)
From the British Chargé
British concurrence in U. S. view regarding the Extraterritorial
Commission as explained in the Secretary’s note of August 5, and
willingness to adopt the new U. S. draft as a basis for an identic
reply to the Chinese Government.
819
[Pg.
819 is part
of Doc. 676]
Aug. 19
(753)
From the British Chargé
Indications that the Japanese Government may be inclined to
question the inclusion of Chinese tariff autonomy in the agenda of
the forthcoming conference, thus causing divergence of view
among the powers and consequent delay in replying to the
Chinese note. British willingness to concur if the United States
and Japan agree to omit mention of the tariff or agree on a
compromise formula.
820
[Pg.
820 is part
of Doc. 677]
Aug. 22
To the British Chargé
Information that the Japanese Government is willing to accept the
U. S. modified draft with an amendment; U. S. willingness to
accept the Japanese change provided it is acceptable to the other
powers. Transmittal of the U. S. proposed draft embodying the
modifications offered by the British and Japanese Governments.
821
[Pg.
821 includes
portions
of
Doc.
677
and
Doc.
678]
Aug. 26
(766)
From the British Chargé
Information that, while in the opinion of the British Government
the American draft embodying the British and Japanese
modifications is not wholly suitable for an identic note, the
British representative at Peking has been instructed to confer with
his U. S. colleague with a view to reaching a definite agreement.
822
[Pg.
822 includes
portions
of
Doc.
678,
Doc.
679,
and
Doc.
680]
Aug. 26
(353)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Agreement reached with interested colleagues on a number of
amendments to the draft note, all of which are matters of mere
form. Information that certain of the representatives must await
instructions from their Governments before sending the amended
note.
822
[Pg.
822 includes
portions
of
Doc.
678,
Doc.
679,
and
Doc.
680]
Aug. 31
Statement Issued to the Press by the Department of State
Text of speech by the Secretary before the annual meeting of the
American Bar Association, Detroit, Mich., September 2, dealing
823
[Pg.
823 includes
portions
of

with the present situation in China and U. S. policy in relation to
Chinese affairs.
(Footnote: For release by the press after delivery.)
Doc.
680
and
Doc.
681]
Sept.
1
(371)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that all interested representatives have been
instructed to send identic replies to the Chinese note of June 24 in
the form agreed upon as reported in telegram No. 353, August 26.
830
[Pg.
830 includes
portions
of
Doc.
681
and
Doc.
682]
Sept.
4
(41)
From the American Minister to the Chinese Minister for Foreign
Affairs
Reply to the Chinese Government’s note of June 24, expressing
willingness to consider the modification of existing treaties in
measure as the Chinese authorities demonstrate their willingness
and ability to fulfill their obligations and to protect foreign rights;
and readiness to appoint delegates to the Special Conference on
the Chinese Tariff, as provided for in the Washington Conference
Treaty, February 6, 1922, and a commissioner to sit on the
Commission on Extraterritoriality, as provided for in Resolution
V of the Washington Conference.
(Footnote: Presentation of identic notes by representatives of the
other Washington Conference powers.)
831
[Pg.
831 is part
of Doc. 683]
THE SPECIAL CONFERENCE ON THE CHINESE CUSTOMS TARIFF
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925 Apr.
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s desire to call the Special Conference on the
Chinese Customs Tariff for September 1 at Peking, dependent
upon French ratification of the nine-power customs treaty.
(Footnote: Instruments of ratification of the customs treaty
deposited at Washington August 5.)
includes
portions
of
Doc. 684 and
Doc. 685]
Apr.
27
(85)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Belief that after the customs treaty comes into foree following
its ratification by France, it would be appropriate for the
Chinese Government to call the Special Conference;
willingness to accept September 1 as the tentative date.9
includes
portions
of
Doc. 684 and
Doc. 685]
July
1
(195)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
From Perkins: Foreign Office concurrence in the view that the
Special Conference should convene at an early date. British
emphasis on the importance of concerted action by the United
includes
portions
of

States, Japan, and Great Britain.
(Footnote: Mahlon F. Perkins, sent to London to confer with the
Foreign Office regarding the Special Conference.)
Doc. 685 and
Doc. 686]
July
1
(118)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Report of general views on certain points regarding the customs
conference as expressed by the U. S. Minister to China (en
route to his post) in an informal conversation with the Japanese
Foreign Minister; Foreign Minister’s agreement with the views
as stated.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 686 and
Doc. 687]
Aug.
8
(320)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that the Senior Minister has raised the question of
preparing definite agenda in advance of the conference. U. S.
Minister’s expression of preference for going into the
conference with a program based strictly on the treaty; inquiry
if Department approves this view.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 687 and
Doc. 688]
Aug.
10
(198)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of the Minister’s views as to the agenda of the
conference.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
688,
Doc. 689, and
Doc. 690]
Aug. 19
From the Chinese Minister
Invitation to the United States to participate in the Special
Conference, to meet on October 26 at Peking.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
688,
Doc. 689, and
Doc. 690]
Aug. 21
To the Chinese Minister
U. S. acceptance of the invitation to participate in the
conference.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 690 and
Doc. 691]
Aug.
22
(342)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Identic telegram from the representatives of the powers
signatory to the customs treaty to their respective Governments
(text printed), indicating desirability that the powers should
confer at Washington in regard to the furnishing of full powers
to the delegates at Peking.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
691,
Doc. 692, and
Doc. 693]
Aug.
27
(222)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
U. S. decision to issue to its delegates at the Special Conference
includes
portions
of

full powers to confer with the other delegates, and to negotiate,
conclude, and sign treaties for ratification by the United States.
Doc.
691,
Doc. 692, and
Doc. 693]
Sept. 9
To the American Delegation
Instructions of a general character, including the opinion that
the conference should discuss the entire subject of the
conventional tariff, even proposals looking toward ultimate
tariff autonomy; that the Chinese Government must be given an
opportunity to present its plans regarding diminution and
ultimate removal of likin; and that the conference should
consider the advisability of using the surtax revenues for the
refunding of China’s unsecured obligations.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 693 and
Doc. 694]
Sept.
10
(388)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Personnel of the Chinese delegation; outline of what appears to
be the tentative program of the Chinese Government for the
conference.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 694 and
Doc. 695]
Sept.
12
(248)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of the tentative Chinese program, or some similar
program. Substance of letter to Mr. Strawn, U. S. delegate,
expressing the Secretary’s desire that a plan be worked out, if
possible, whereby tariff autonomy will now or eventually be
given to China and extraterritoriality given up.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 695 and
Doc. 696]
Sept.
18
(822)
From the British Chargé
Information regarding instructions to the British delegation,
namely, that the British Government has no intention of
rejecting the Chinese request for eventual tariff autonomy, but
feels that such autonomy can only come in stages.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 696 and
Doc. 697]
Sept.
25
(418)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Mimeographed circular given to the Senior Minister by the
Foreign Office for distribution, entitled, “Provisional Agenda
for the Special Conference on Chinese Customs” (text printed).
includes
portions
of
Doc. 698 and
Doc. 699]
Sept.
30
(423)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Foreign Office refusal to invite the Soviet Government and
Germany to participate in the conference, as they do not have
the eligibility requirement under the customs treaty. German
Minister’s desire that Germany should be enabled to adhere to
the Washington Conference treaties and resolutions concerning
China so as to cooperate in the policies set forth therein, even if
not participating in the conference.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 698 and
Doc. 699]

Oct.
1
(425)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Identic telegram from the interested representatives to their
respective Governments (text printed), suggesting modifications
in the provisional agenda drawn up by the Chinese
Government, as transmitted in telegram No. 418, September 25.
Minister’s concurrence in advisability of the modifications;
probable acceptability of the agenda as thus modified.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 699 and
Doc. 700]
Oct.
3
(278)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
U. S. inability to invite Germany and Soviet Russia to adhere to
the Chinese customs treaty, as they do not qualify under the
provisions of article 8; opinion also that neither country is
qualified under Resolution V of the Washington Conference to
participate in the coming meeting of the Commission on
Extraterritoriality.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 701 and
Doc. 702]
Oct.
5
(282)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Feeling that the Chinese Government’s provisional agenda,
offered in response to the suggestion of the Senior Minister,
should be accepted.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 701 and
Doc. 702]
Oct.
14
(290)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Statement to the Belgian Chargé, who had expressed Belgium’s
desire for inclusion of the Banque Beige pour l’Éitranger
among the foreign banks to receive deposits of surplus Chinese
customs funds, that if the question of deposit of these funds is
brought up at the conference the U. S. delegation will hold that
banks of all nationalities be treated on a basis of equality.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
702,
Doc. 703, and
Doc. 704]
Oct.
15
(443)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Receipt of authorization by all but two of the interested
ministers to approve the suggested modifications to the Chinese
provisional agenda referred to in telegram No. 425, October 1;
decision of the ministers to authorize Senior Minister to discuss
the proposed modifications with the Foreign Minister.
(Footnote: Senior Minister’s statement, October 27, that agenda
had been allowed to stand, because of insufficient time for
making the alterations.)
includes
portions
of
Doc.
702,
Doc. 703, and
Doc. 704]
Oct.
15
(292)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of decision in regard to the Chinese tentative agenda
reported in telegram No. 443, October 15.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
704,
Doc. 705, and
Doc. 706]

Oct.
17
(449)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that the practical purposes of the Chinese financial
authorities are sharply contested by the diplomatic and political
elements, with the resulting probability that Chinese will enter
the conference without any definite program of action.
Request for instructions for guidance of the delegation in
meeting any forms of discrimination that cannot be met by the
most-favored-nation clause.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
704,
Doc. 705, and
Doc. 706]
Oct.
23
(303)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Instructions to attain express assurance that there will be no
discrimination and that when any benefit is granted to any
country the other countries shall receive it unconditionally
without
request.
Comments
upon
the
possibility
of
disadvantageous
treatment
of
American
trade,
despite
acceptance of most-favored-nation treatment, resulting from
either restrictions upon imports and exports, rate schedules, or
classification of goods.
is part of Doc.
707]
Oct.
24
(464)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Mandate of October 22 naming the Chinese delegates with full
powers to the customs conference.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 707 and
Doc. 708]
Oct. 26
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of opening of the conference; résumé of addresses by
Chinese officials and various diplomatic representatives of the
powers (extracts printed); list of delegates who made brief
addresses.
is part of Doc.
709]
Oct.
27
(5)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Acceptance, after considerable discussion, of the agenda as set
forth in the Minister’s telegram No. 418, September 25, with U.
S. and British reservation to the effect that any matter contained
in the nine-power customs treaty or the resolution concerning
board of reference should be open to discussion by the
conference.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 709 and
Doc. 710]
Oct. 28
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Customs tariff laws promulgated October 24 (text printed) and
referred to by Dr. Wang, Chinese delegate, in his address at the
opening of the conference on October 26. Press communiqué
issued by the secretary general of the conference (text printed)
reporting first meeting of the committee on program and
procedure.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 710 and
Doc. 711]

Undated
[Rec’d
Oct.
30]
(6)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Report of meeting of committee on tariff autonomy at which
China reiterated request for tariff autonomy to be effective with
the abolition of likin, January 1, 1929. Submittal of a tentative
working basis (text printed) and suggestion that reasonable
concessions be made to meet the Chinese demands.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 711 and
Doc. 712]
Oct. 31
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Substance of press communiqué issued by the committee on
tariff autonomy (text printed), covering Japanese delegate’s
statement of alternative plans (text printed), Chinese
memorandum on the abolition of likin (text printed), and
résumé of the statements and proposals of various delegates.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 712 and
Doc. 713]
Oct.
31
(2)
To the American Delegation (tel.)
Approval of the tentative working basis submitted by the
delegation and of the suggestion for making reasonable
concessions to meet the Chinese demands.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 714 and
Doc. 715]
Nov. 4
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of second session of the committee on tariff autonomy,
including texts of statement of the British delegation, proposals
by the Japanese and American delegations, and declarations of
the Chinese Government regarding abolition of likin.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 714 and
Doc. 715]
Nov.
14
(10)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Information that the drafting of a formula embodying the sense
of the conference regarding tariff autonomy and the abolition of
likin was referred to a subcommittee, following presentation of
Chinese resolution (text printed) and British proposal (text
printed).
includes
portions
of
Doc. 715 and
Doc. 716]
Nov.
17
(11)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Chinese delegate’s statement in press interview (substance
printed), declaring that China, although determined to abolish
likin, is unwilling that the restoration of tariff autonomy be
made conditional on her ability to do so, as the abolition of likin
is an internal problem.
is part of Doc.
717]
Nov. 19
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Press communiqué issued by the conference (text printed)
quoting
resolution
on
tariff
autonomy
unanimously
recommended by the subcommittee and adopted by the
committees on tariff autonomy and provisional measures.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 717 and
Doc. 718]
Nov.
24
(13)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Meeting of technical committee on likin, technical committee
includes

on other subjects, and subcommittee on rates.
portions
of
Doc. 718 and
Doc. 719]
Nov.
30
(5)
To the American Delegation (tel.)
French Ambassador’s statement, in conversation with the
Secretary, that apparently his Government thought the granting
of tariff autonomy without making abolition of likin a correlate
should be safeguarded by an agreement that no other kind of tax
would be imposed in lieu of likin.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 720 and
Doc. 721]
Dec.
2
(14)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Probability that the situation is not fully understood by the
French Ambassador; information that the delegates are waiting
for China’s statement on her unsecured debts and her definition
of likin; that they will insist on abolition of likin as a condition
to conceding tariff autonomy, but that such condition might be
waived under certain circumstances.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 720 and
Doc. 721]
Dec. 4 (6) To the American Delegation (tel.)
Letter from the Committee of the American Material Creditors
of the Chinese Government alleging intention of the Chinese
delegates to repudiate claims of material creditors and to
exclude them from any plan for consolidation or refunding of
unsecured debts. Request for information.
includes
portions
of
Doc. 721 and
Doc. 722]
Dec.
7
(15)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
No information that the Chinese delegates intend to repudiate
claims of material creditors.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
722,
Doc. 723, and
Doc. 724]
Dec. 30
From Mr. Silas H. Strawn, of the American Delegation
Absence of train service between Tientsin and Peking
December 8 to 24 because of the civil war; no meetings of the
conference except two called by the Chinese to demonstrate to
the people that the conference was still functioning.
includes
portions
of
Doc.
722,
Doc. 723, and
Doc. 724]
CONVENING OF THE COMMISSION ON EXTRATERRITORIALITY IN CHINA, PROVIDED FOR BY RESOLUTION V OF THE WASHINGTON CONFERENCE
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
July
2
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Department’s opinion that the meeting of the Extraterritoriality
includes portions

(130)
Commission should not be put off until after the Special
Customs Conference but should proceed at the earliest date
possible.
of Doc. 725 and
Doc. 726]
Sept. 10 To Mr. Silas H. Strawn
Transmittal of Mr. Strawn’s commission as the American
member of the Commission on Extraterritoriality.
includes portions
of Doc. 725 and
Doc. 726]
Sept. 15 To the Chargé in Japan (circular tel.)
Note for the Foreign Office (text printed) stating that the
United States has named Mr. Silas H. Strawn as its
Commissioner, and suggesting December 18 as the date for the
beginning of the Commission’s work.
(Footnote: Sent, mutatis mutandis, to certain European
countries and to Peru.)
887 [Pg. 887 is
part of Doc. 727]
Oct. 20
(299)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
List of countries having accepted December 18 as the day, and
Peking as the place, for the beginning of sessions of the
Extraterritoriality Commission.
includes portions
of
Doc.
727,
Doc. 728, and
Doc. 729]
Nov. 18
(103)
To the Minister in China
Substance of a conversation between the Secretary and the
Chinese Minister: Secretary’s opinion that it would not be wise
to give the Commissioners plenipotentiary powers to negotiate
a treaty for the abolition of extraterritoriality; Chinese
Minister’s cable to his Government (text printed) as to the
functions of the Commission.
includes portions
of
Doc.
727,
Doc. 728, and
Doc. 729]
Nov. 20 From the Norwegian Minister
Information that the Norwegian Government has acceded to the
Washington Conference Resolution on Extraterritoriality.
includes portions
of
Doc.
729,
Doc. 730, and
Doc. 731]
Dec. 17
(532)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Delay in meeting of the Extraterritoriality Commission until
the arrival of certain of the Commissioners detained at Tientsin
because of the factional fighting in progress.
includes portions
of
Doc.
729,
Doc. 730, and
Doc. 731]
1926
Jan.
4
(3)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that all Commissioners have arrived, and the
Commission will convene on January 8.
(Footnote: No meeting of the Commission until January 12.)
includes portions
of
Doc.
731,
Doc. 732, and
Doc. 733]

CONTINUED SUPPORT BY THE UNITED STATES TO THE FEDERAL TELEGRAPH COMPANY IN EFFORTS TO OBTAIN EXECUTION OF ITS CONTRACT WITH
THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1924
Dec. 24
From the Japanese Embassy
Summary of the points at issue between Japan and the United
States in connection with the wireless contracts of the Mitsui Co.
and the Federal Telegraph Co. with the Chinese Government.
Proposal to adjust the controversy on a basis analogous to the
four-power consortium arrangement, namely, that the contracts be
pooled and superseded by a loan agreement for wireless
enterprise in China, the Chinese Government to have control of
the operation of the wireless telegraphy in question and a
financial group representing U. S., British, French, and Japanese
interests to supply the services of engineers and accountants.
890
[Pg.
890 includes
portions
of
Doc.
731,
Doc.
732,
and
Doc.
733]
Dec. 27
(317)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that Col. Manton Davis, attorney for the Radio
Corporation of America, will sail for China to assist Barnes Moss,
Federal Co.’s representative, in negotiations.
893
[Pg.
893 includes
portions
of
Doc.
733
and
Doc.
734]
1925 Jan.
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Chinese desire that the Federal Telegraph Co. send a
representative with extensive powers and accompanied by a fully
qualified expert to take up technical questions. Continuation of
strong Japanese opposition to the Federal contract.
894
[Pg.
894 includes
portions
of
Doc.
735
and
Doc.
736]
Jan. 7 (4) To the Minister in China (tel.)
Information from the Radio Corporation that Colonel Davis will
be accompanied by an electrical expert. Request for comment on
the Japanese proposal of December 24, 1924.
894
[Pg.
894 includes
portions
of
Doc.
735
and
Doc.
736]
Jan.
23
(39)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Certain obstacles with which the execution of the Japanese
proposal would be confronted; assertion that any proposal to pool
the Federal contract in a consortium would require the consent of
the Chinese Government, which might be impossible to obtain.
895
[Pg.
895 includes
portions
of
Doc.
736
and
Doc.
737]

Jan.
28
(16)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Possibility that the Radio Corporation may be unable to continue
with the Federal Telegraph Co. project on the original plan;
consequent reason to fear that the Japanese proposal may be the
only available alternative. Department’s desire for further
comment in view of these possibilities.
897
[Pg.
897 includes
portions
of
Doc.
737,
Doc.
738,
and
Doc.
739]
Feb.
5
(61)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Suggestion that a conference be held in Peking between
representatives of the Chinese Government and of all the
companies with which China has radio agreements, to consult as
to how best to coordinate the contracts for the most desirable
results.
897
[Pg.
897 includes
portions
of
Doc.
737,
Doc.
738,
and
Doc.
739]
Feb.
21
(72)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Arrival of Davis and Moss. Assertion that, according to Moss, it
would seem that China, faced with the possibility of having to
accept a radio consortium of four powers, may be willing to
accept the Federal contract with a few minor changes.
Request for explicit instructions as to the support to be given to
Davis and Moss.
899
[Pg.
899 includes
portions
of
Doc.
739
and
Doc.
740]
Feb.
24
(24)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Instructions to employ complete frankness in discussions with the
representatives of the U. S. interests.
Opinion that the radio conference proposal as set forth in telegram
No. 61, February 5, might cause the Federal Co.’s valid legal
position to be compromised without assuring effective results.
900
[Pg.
900 includes
portions
of
Doc.
741
and
Doc.
742]
Feb. 28
To the Japanese Embassy
U. S. desire to be reassured as to whether the Japanese proposal of
December 24, 1924, would be acceptable to the Chinese
Government before giving it further consideration.
900
[Pg.
900 includes
portions
of
Doc.
741
and
Doc.
742]
Mar. 12
(3)
From Mr. Manton Davis to the Radio Corporation of America
Delay in official negotiations because of illness of Minister of
Communications; satisfactory progress in unofficial negotiations.
Strong Japanese effort to have Federal contract canceled. Outline
of proposed traffic arrangement to serve as a basis for settlement
of the controversy.
(Footnote: Information that Mr. Davis’ suggested traffic
arrangement was approved by the Radio Corporation, the Federal
901
[Pg.
901 includes
portions
of
Doc.
743
and
Doc.
744]

Co. of Delaware, and the president of the Federal Co. of
California.)
Mar. 23
(123)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Deadlock in negotiations, which the Federal Co.’s representatives
attribute to Japanese influence in the Foreign Office and with the
Chief Executive. Suggestion that strong U. S. representations
telegraphed by the Chinese Minister in Washington might have an
important effect at the Foreign Office at this juncture.
901
[Pg.
901 includes
portions
of
Doc.
743
and
Doc.
744]
Apr. 8
To the Japanese Embassy
U. S. suggestion of the traffic arrangement as set forth in Mr.
Davis’ telegram of March 12, as an alternative to the Japanese
proposal of December 24, 1924.
902
[Pg.
902 includes
portions
of
Doc.
744
and
Doc.
745]
Apr. 8
To the Chinese Legation
Transmittal of copy of the memorandum to the Japanese
Embassy, April 8, and expression of desire for Chinese approval
of the suggested arrangement.
903
[Pg.
903 includes
portions
of
Doc.
745
and
Doc.
746]
Apr.
23
(168)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Efforts to hasten conclusion of negotiations with the Federal Co.;
Foreign Minister’s assertion that the Chinese Minister in
Washington had had negotiations with the State Department and
that it was now necessary to await the Japanese reply to the U. S.
proposal of April 8 before executing contract.
904
[Pg.
904 includes
portions
of
Doc.
746
and
Doc.
747]
Apr.
28
(87)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Instructions to inform Foreign Office that there are no
negotiations pending with the Chinese Minister in Washington.
905
[Pg.
905 includes
portions
of
Doc.
748
and
Doc.
749]
May 28
(566)
From the British Ambassador
Information that, subject to the safeguarding of the prior rights of
the Marconi Co., the British Government would welcome in
principle the formation of a consortium such as proposed in the
Japanese memorandum of December 24, 1924, to the United
States.
905
[Pg.
905 includes
portions
of
Doc.
748
and
Doc.
749]
June 1
From the Japanese Embassy
Assertion that the plan suggested in the U. S. memorandum of
April 8 is simply an operating arrangement and assumes
906
[Pg.
906 includes
portions
of

abandonment by the Mitsui Co. of its legal position, without any
corresponding concession by the Federal Co.; also that such an
arrangement would not make for fair and impartial treatment of
the other powers interested. Suggestion of possible desirability of
a meeting of representatives of the U. S., British, French, and
Japanese radio interests to examine the feasibility of the Japanese
proposal of December 24, 1924, and to work out detailed terms of
adjustment.
Doc.
749
and
Doc.
750]
July
1
(117)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Report of a conversation between the Foreign Minister, the U. S.
appointed Minister to China (MacMurray), and a representative of
the Mitsui Co., in which U. S. objections to the Japanese proposal
and Japanese objections to the U. S. counterproposal were
discussed, and in which all parties expressed desire and necessity
for cooperation in reaching a settlement.
909
[Pg.
909 includes
portions
of
Doc.
750
and
Doc.
751]
July
22
(704)
From the British Chargé
Inquiry as to U. S. attitude toward the question of the future
development of wireless telegraphy in China; British readiness to
support the Japanese proposal to the United States of December
910
[Pg.
910 includes
portions
of
Doc.
751
and
Doc.
752]
July
29
(299)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Interview with the Foreign Minister, at which U. S. Minister
emphasized the impossibility of satisfactory adjustment between
the U. S. and Japanese interests until the Chinese Government has
enabled the Federal Co. contract to proceed. Report that China
may take up the question with Japan if the U. S. and Japanese
interests cannot come to an agreement; suggestion that the
Chinese Minister at Washington might be persuaded to telegraph
his Government as to the seriousness of subordinating valid
American rights to the veto of Japan.
911
[Pg.
911 includes
portions
of
Doc.
752
and
Doc.
753]
Aug.
6
(190)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Promise of the Chinese Minister to see what he can do by way of
taking up the matter with his Government.
913
[Pg.
913 includes
portions
of
Doc.
753
and
Doc.
754]
Aug. 14
(330)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Consent of the Foreign Minister, upon insistent request of the U.
S. Minister, to arrange for an interview between the U. S. Minister
and the Chief Executive for the purpose of discussing the Chinese
Government’s position regarding the Federal wireless contract.
914
[Pg.
914 is part
of Doc. 755]

Aug. 22
(345)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that as a result of Japanese pressure, the Chief Executive
has directed that the interministerial committee must report in
favor of the cancelation of the Federal contract. Reported
intention of the Minister of Communications to recommend
simultaneous cancelation of the Mitsui contract.
915
[Pg.
915 includes
portions
of
Doc.
755
and
Doc.
756]
Aug. 25
(349)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Chief Executive’s assurance that the Federal contract is
recognized as valid and will be given effect; Minister’s inability,
however, to obtain assurance as to the time and manner of giving
effect to the contract. Proposed note to the Foreign Office (extract
printed) requesting an early and definite statement on the subject.
Request for authorization to present such a note.
916
[Pg.
916 includes
portions
of
Doc.
756
and
Doc.
757]
Aug. 26
(218)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Authorization to present the note to the Foreign Office as
suggested.
918
[Pg.
918 includes
portions
of
Doc.
757,
Doc.
758,
and
Doc.
759]
Aug. 26
(352)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of the Chief Executive’s decision, at a secret Cabinet
meeting, to cancel both the Federal and the Mitsui contracts.
Minister’s intention to send his proposed note to the Foreign
Office immediately, with a view to forestalling action on this
decision.
918
[Pg.
918 includes
portions
of
Doc.
757,
Doc.
758,
and
Doc.
759]
Aug. 29
(360)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Aide-mémoire from the Foreign Office transmitting a proposal of
the Ministry of Communications for replacement of both
contracts by an arrangement whereby both parties would jointly
make a loan to China for the development by it of a wireless
system; Davis’ consideration of the plan as wholly unacceptable;
note to the Foreign Office (substance printed) reiterating request
for an early and definite statement whether China will give effect
to the Federal contract, and if so, what date such action may be
expected.
919
[Pg.
919 is part
of Doc. 760]
Aug. 29
(361)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Message from Davis for the Radio Corporation (text printed),
transmitting the Chinese proposal summarized in telegram No.
360, August 29.
920
[Pg.
920 is part
of Doc. 761]

Sept.
2
(374)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Recommendation that the Chinese Minister be informed that the
U. S. Minister’s notes of August 26 and 29 call for a definite reply
and corresponding action by the Chinese Government.
921
[Pg.
921 includes
portions
of
Doc.
761
and
Doc.
762]
Sept.
3
(231)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Chinese Minister’s statement that he had informed his
Government that the U. S. Minister’s note of August 29 was
supported by the Secretary.
922
[Pg.
922 is part
of Doc. 763]
Sept. 12
(249)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Letter from the Radio Corporation requesting Department to
consider the desirability of giving the corporation liberty to make
such arrangements with foreign associates as it can to assure
American participation in the wireless communications of China.
Information that the Department is awaiting report of results of
the Minister’s representations to China before answering the
letter.
923
[Pg.
923 is part
of Doc. 764]
Sept. 15
(399)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
No reply as yet to the representations of August 26 and 29, and no
indication as to what attitude the administration may take.
924
[Pg.
924 includes
portions
of
Doc.
764
and
Doc.
765]
Sept. 15
(255)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Acknowledgment of Radio Corporation’s letter with statement
that the request is being carefully considered. Desire that Minister
continue to impress upon the Chinese Government the importance
which the United States attaches to this opportunity for China to
demonstrate good faith.
925
[Pg.
925 includes
portions
of
Doc.
765,
Doc.
766,
and
Doc.
767]
Sept. 18
(404)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Arrangement for a further interview with the Chief Executive to
urge a prompt answer to the representations. Suggestion that a
message from President Coolidge be cabled for delivery to the
Chief Executive.
925
[Pg.
925 includes
portions
of
Doc.
765,
Doc.
766,
and
Doc.
767]
Sept. 19
(258)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Secretary’s desire that the Minister have an interview with the
Chief Executive and urge him to recognize the Federal contract.
926
[Pg.
926 includes
portions
of
Doc.
767

and
Doc.
768]
Sept. 19
(260)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that it would not be wise to have the President send a
personal message to the Chinese Chief Executive.
927
[Pg.
927 includes
portions
of
Doc.
769
and
Doc.
770]
Sept. 21
(405)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Chief Executive’s assurance that the Federal contract will be
carried out and that China will give whole-hearted support to the
open-door policy. Minister’s renewed assurances, upon inquiry by
Tuan, of U. S. readiness to discuss a mutual accommodation of
interests between the Federal and Mitsui Companies as soon as
the Federal contract has been put into effect.
927
[Pg.
927 includes
portions
of
Doc.
769
and
Doc.
770]
Sept. 22
(263)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that if the Japanese Ambassador makes inquiries
regarding the Chinese wireless situation, as indicated by a press
report from Tokyo, the Secretary will tell him that he is waiting to
learn the results of the negotiations at Peking.
929
[Pg.
929 includes
portions
of
Doc.
771
and
Doc.
772]
Sept. 29
(422)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Message from Davis for the Radio Corporation (text printed),
stating that an agreement will possibly be signed soon.
929
[Pg.
929 includes
portions
of
Doc.
771
and
Doc.
772]
Oct.
5
(426)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Agreement reached for an interchange of notes, in which the
Chinese Foreign Minister will state his Government’s intention to
give effect to the Federal contract, and the U. S. Minister will
confirm assurances that following the first steps in the carrying
out of the contract, the U. S. interests will discuss an arrangement
for cooperation with the Chinese and Japanese; the interchange of
notes to be accompanied by a procès-verbal in respect to certain
details.
930
[Pg.
930 includes
portions
of
Doc.
772
and
Doc.
773]
Oct.
8
(430)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that the notes have been exchanged and the procès-
verbal initialed.
932
[Pg.
932 includes
portions
of
Doc.
773,
Doc.
774,

and
Doc.
775]
Undated
[Rec’d
Oct. 9]
From the Japanese Embassy
Assertion that the Chinese proposal of August 28 (summarized in
the U. S. Minister’s telegram No. 360, August 29), is in
substantial agreement with the Japanese proposal of December
24, 1924; hope that the basic principle for adjustment now found
acceptable to both Chinese and Japanese Governments will be
favorably received by the United States.
932
[Pg.
932 includes
portions
of
Doc.
773,
Doc.
774,
and
Doc.
775]
Undated
[Rec’d
Oct. 9]
From the Japanese Embassy
Renewal of the suggestion of June 1 that the Japanese proposal of
December 24, 1924, be submitted to a meeting of representatives
of the radio interests of the various countries concerned to be
examined as to its feasibility.
934
[Pg.
934 includes
portions
of
Doc.
775
and
Doc.
776]
Dec. 29
(550)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that no progress has been made since the exchange of
notes reported in telegram No. 430, October 8, because of
absence of certain Cabinet Ministers from Peking and political
instability.
935
[Pg.
935 includes
portions
of
Doc.
777
and
Doc.
778]
EXECUTIVE ORDER BY PRESIDENT COOLIDGE REMITTING FURTHER PAYMENTS BY CHINA ON THE BOXER INDEMNITY
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
July
16
Executive Order No. 4268
Providing for the remission of further payments of
the annual installments of the Chinese indemnity.
935
[Pg.
935
includes
portions of Doc. 777 and Doc.
778]

General:
Contents
Belgium (Documents 58-66)
Czechoslovakia (Documents 67-77)
France (Documents 78-98)
Greece (Documents 99-102)
Italy (Documents 103-105)
Latvia (Documents 106-106)
Rumania (Documents 107-121)
Yugoslavia (Documents 122-131)
Colombia and Nicaragua (Documents 266-269)
Colombia and Peru (Documents 270-309)
Costa Rica and Panama (Documents 310-322)

Scrapping of ships by the United States,
Great Britain, and Japan in accordance with
the treaty for the limitation of naval
armament, signed February 6, 19221
[1] The Secretary of the Navy (Wilbur) to the Secretary of State
Washington, February 17, 1925.
[2] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy (Wilbur)
Washington, February 20, 1925.
[3] The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
[4] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
Washington, March 24, 1925.

[Document 1]
The Secretary of the Navy (Wilbur) to the Secretary of State2
WASHINGTON, February 17, 1925.
SIR: I take pleasure in advising you that this Department has completed the work of the
scrapping of vessels required to be demolished under the Treaty Limiting Naval
Armament.
Under the provisions of the Treaty the Battle Cruisers Lexington and Saratoga are
being converted into airplane carriers and the Battleship North Dakota is being retained
as a target.
Respectfully,
CURTIS D. WILBUR
communicated to the Embassies in France, Great Britain, Italy, and Japan, with
instructions to convey it to the respective Governments.

[Document 2]
The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy (Wilbur)
WASHINGTON, February 20, 1925.
MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: In addition to the formal routine letter of February seventeenth3 in
which I acknowledged the receipt of your letter of the same date advising me of the
completion of the work of the scrapping of vessels required to be demolished under the
treaty limiting naval armament, I desire to write you more personally an expression of
my appreciation of the skill, the loyalty, and the carefulness of the public interest, with
which your Department has carried to a conclusion the difficult task imposed upon it
by the treaty. This work has, I realize, called for the most careful and judicious
planning; and I feel that the way in which it has been carried out is worthy of the fine
traditions of our naval service.
With high regard [etc.]
CHARLES E. HUGHES
3 Not printed.

[Document 3]
The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
TOKYO, March 6, 1925.
[Received March 24.]

Foreign Service Report
No. 15
On February 24th, 1925, the Minister for Foreign Affairs informed the Ambassador, in
Note No. 22, a copy of a translation of which is enclosed herewith,4 that on February
9th, 1925, the Japanese Government completed the work of scrapping their vessels of
war as provided for in the Treaty for the limitation of Naval Armament signed at
Washington in February. 1922. A list, similar to that issued by the Japanese Navy
Department, giving the names of the vessels which were scrapped and the manner in
which they were disposed of was enclosed in the Foreign Minister’s Note. A copy of
this list is also enclosed herewith.4
4 Not printed.
4 Not printed.

[Document 4]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 24, 1925.
No. 298
SIR: Under instructions from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs, I have the honour to inform you that the work of scrapping the capital ships of
the British Empire, which were required to be demolished in accordance with the treaty
on the limitation of armaments signed at Washington in 1922, has been completed.
Mr. Chamberlain desires me to add that the battleships Colossus and Agamemnon have
been retained under the provisions of the treaty, the former for non-combatant purposes
and the latter as a target ship.
I have [etc.]
(For the Ambassador)
H. G. CHILTON

Proposals for the calling by the President of
the
United
States
of
a
disarmament
conference
[5] Excerpt From a Memorandum of a Conversation Between the British
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain) and the American
[6] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of State
[7] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg)
[8] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of State
[9] The Chargé in Great Britain (Sterling) to the Secretary of State

[10] The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
[11] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[12] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft)
[13] The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
[14] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft)
[15] Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the
French Ambassador (Daeschner), March 26, 1925
March 26, 1925
[16] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

[17] The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
[18] The Chargé in Italy (Robbins) to the Secretary of State
[19] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
[20] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
[21] The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
[22] The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[23] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State

[24] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)

[Document 5]
Excerpt From a Memorandum of a Conversation Between the British
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain) and the American
As to naval disarmament, he6 thought much more could be accomplished and rather
intimated that he would welcome an invitation from the United States to hold such a
conference. He did say that, as to land armament, Herriot7 had told him that if France
were invited by the United States she would have to decline. As to naval armament he
said he thought much more could be accomplished and he was hopeful that France
could be induced not only to attend but to join in further agreement. He suggested
much could be accomplished as in the size and time of renewal of battle ships; that this
constantly increasing size of battle ships was an enormous expense. Why 35,000 tons,
why not 25,000? Why a certain number of years? Four or five years added to the length
of time for renewals would save an enormous expense. He suggested also that [sic] the
limitation in the size of cruisers. Instead of having cruisers which would carry 1,200
men, cruisers that would carry half that number would answer every purpose. He
realized that countries like Great Britain whose Dominions reach all over the world, in
all the seas, had to have a larger number of cruisers than Germany which had no
Dominions or other countries which had few. So far as he was concerned, Great Britain
was prepared to agree to absolute elimination of submarines. It was a barbarous mode
of warfare and could only be carried on by sinking merchant ships, women, children
and noncombatants; that they ought to do away absolutely with poisonous gases and
limit the number of air-planes, etc. The last Washington Conference8 had been a great
success. Mr. Hughes had made a spectacular and a wonderful proposition which had
been immediately accepted by the British Government. He thought that if another one
were to be called it would be wise to quietly sound out the different governments in
advance so that there would be no failure. Of course, I told him I had no knowledge
whatever as to the President’s or the Secretary’s views on the subject of calling a
conference; that the resolution of Congress was simply advisory but indicated a public
opinion. I think he rather expects such a conference and I am inclined to think he would
welcome it and that he thinks it could succeed best in Washington.
of receipt by the Department of this memorandum is not indicated.

6 Sir Austen Chamberlain.
7 French Premier and Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Relations, 1922, vol. I, pp. 1 ff.

[Document 6]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
stay, and in the two-hour conversation which followed he expressed his views on
various European subjects, among them the Geneva Protocol,10 security for France,
evacuation of the Ruhr and the Rhineland, Russian situation, the Ambassadorship to
Turkey, and land and naval armament. It is unnecessary to cable the details of this
extended conversation.
You will understand that I did not express the views of my Government on these
subjects. The one thing I have to mention is that Chamberlain thinks that any move at
present by any government for land disarmament is premature and would be failure,
but he does think further limitation of naval armament desirable; he believes that
France and Japan would participate. Yesterday he informed me that the Cabinet
approves the calling of a conference of this sort in the United States and that he
intended to inform you of his views through Ambassador Howard in Washington.11
KELLOGG
9 See vol. II, p. 199.
10 Protocol for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes; text printed as Senate
11 No communication on this subject from the British Ambassador found in Department
files.

[Document 7]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg)
has for believing that France would join in conference for further limitation of naval
armament with intention to effect limitation of auxiliary craft. Is there ground for
believing that France has changed her position since Washington Conference and if not
how is that position to be met in order to avoid recurrence of deadlock between France
and Great Britain? It may be possible for you to obtain confidential information on this
point before leaving.12
HUGHES
12 Ambassador Kellogg returned to the United States and was appointed Secretary of
State on Mar. 4, 1925.

[Document 8]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
basis for his belief that France would participate in a conference for the further
limitation of naval armament affecting auxiliary craft, but found that he has no definite
statement from present French Government; he infers from general political situation in
France and from a general conversation he had last December with Premier Herriot that
while France would not take part in conference on land disarmament, the Government
might participate in a naval conference. I shall explain Chamberlain’s views in detail
on my arrival.
KELLOGG

[Document 9]
The Chargé in Great Britain (Sterling) to the Secretary of State
74. In answer to a question in the House of Commons yesterday as to whether any
information could be given with regard to a new disarmament conference to be
summoned by the President of the United States, Mr. Chamberlain replied, “The matter
has been informally mentioned in conversations with the Ambassador of the United
States and is under consideration.” No editorial comments in the press as yet.
STERLING

[Document 10]
The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10 p.m.]
Coolidge has received consent of England, Japan and Italy and is waiting for consent of
France before calling disarmament conference.
BANCROFT
13 Not printed.

[Document 11]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
94. On February 19 I requested the French Ambassador to see me at the Department. I
said that he had doubtless noticed in the public press considerable discussion growing
out of Chamberlain’s statement in the House of Commons, in answer to a question, that
there had been conversations with the American Ambassador on the calling of a new
arms conference by the United States. Chamberlain had declined to enter upon
discussion of the subject, stating that the conversations were wholly informal.
I said that the press was making a great deal out of incidents that had very slight
significance. I wished the French Government to know what had taken place as I would
not care to have it supposed that negotiations were going on without suitable
information to French Foreign Office. What had happened was that in a recent
interview between Ambassador Kellogg and Chamberlain, preparatory to the former’s
departure from London, Chamberlain himself had brought up the subject of another
conference at Washington, suggesting that an invitation extended by President
Coolidge might have favorable reception on the part of the powers, and had indicated a
favorable attitude on the part of the British Government. Chamberlain had recognized
unlikelihood that anything could be done at such a conference in relation to land
armaments but had thought that progress might be made with respect to further naval
limitation. I said that on receiving advice of this intimation I had instructed our
Ambassador to inquire of Chamberlain whether he had any definite basis for supposing
that other Governments might favorably receive such an invitation. It then appeared
that upon this point there was nothing definite.
I called attention to the fact that from time to time there had been recurrent
conversations of an informal character between our representatives abroad and foreign
offices as well as between ambassadors here and myself on possibility of another
conference. The position of this Government remained what it had been, that is, it
desired to go forward from the point which had been reached at the Washington
Conference and to obtain a further agreement on limitation of auxiliary naval craft. I
would not refer to the difficulties encountered at the Washington Conference. I should
be greatly pleased to learn that there was a prospect for removal of these difficulties.
This Government did not desire to call a conference, of course, unless there was a

reasonable prospect of agreement. The French Government could be assured that if the
Government of the United States took up the matter on its own initiative, it would bring
it to the attention of all the other Governments, including France. Present discussion in
the press had grown simply out of this informal statement made by Chamberlain; and
the United States was not advised as yet of any change in situation which would
warrant calling of another conference. I added that by this I did not mean to say that I
would not welcome a suggestion from the French Government that it would look
favorably upon an invitation and was ready to proceed with an agreement for limitation
of auxiliary craft. The Ambassador said that he was glad to have my statement, but
made no further comment.
Foregoing is for your information and informal use, should you have occasion to
discuss the subject with French officials.
HUGHES

[Document 12]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft)
[Paraphrase]
19. Reference your telegrams February 20. Day before yesterday the Japanese Chargé
d’Affaires remarked that there had been a good deal appearing in the press in regard to
the calling of another arms conference, and that naturally his Government was much
interested in these reports.
I said that I was glad the opportunity had arisen to tell him just what had taken place, as
the situation has been considerably magnified in the newspaper reports. A few days ago
Mr. Austen Chamberlain, in the course of a conversation with Ambassador Kellogg,
had mentioned the possibility of another arms conference and had indicated the
willingness of the British Government to take part; that was all there was to it. It was
recognized that a conference would probably have to be confined to proceeding with
limitation of naval craft in view of the unlikelihood of doing anything in regard to land
armament. Mr. Chamberlain suggested further that an invitation extended by the
President would be received favorably by the other powers. The conversation between
Mr. Chamberlain and the Ambassador was most informal. Mr. Kellogg telegraphed me
the substance of it, and I then instructed him to inquire if Mr. Chamberlain had a
definite basis for belief that invitation would be welcomed by the naval powers, and
particularly whether any different attitude could now be expected on question of
auxiliary craft which had arisen between France and Great Britain. From the
conversation that followed it appeared that Mr. Chamberlain’s suggestion had been
general and that there was nothing very definite to go upon. A question on this matter
had been asked in the House of Commons, to which Mr. Chamberlain had replied that
there had simply been conversations.
I told the Chargé that the attitude of this Government remains unchanged, that it had
always wished to go forward when an opportune time should have arisen with the
proposals it had made at the Washington Conference in 1922, but that it had feared that
difficulty which had then prevented an agreement in regard to auxiliary craft still
remained. I said that I understood that the viewpoint of the Japanese Government is
very much the same as our own and that it is ready to proceed in event that there is any
appearance of reasonable expectation of an agreement. I added that I regretted only that
these reports had made it appear that some special negotiation was going on with Great

Britain when none was. There was nothing more than these conversations in which Mr.
Chamberlain had brought up the matter, in addition to fact that for a year or so there
had been such general and informal talks with other interested Governments as had
taken place with Government of Japan on this matter.
Although the Chargé has doubtless reported this conversation, you may take occasion
to assure yourself that situation is fully understood by Japanese Foreign Office. It is not
necessary for me to assure you that I am aware of danger of appearing to work with
other powers in disregard of Japan. This has neither been done nor intended. Press
publicity has tended to give great definiteness to what is entirely nebulous at this time
and has been the more embarrassing to me because of difficulty of making any
effectual denial without running the danger of chilling public interest and sympathy for
the further plans of naval limitation which it is still our wish to bring about.
HUGHES

[Document 13]
The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
51. Two Tokyo newspapers today carry London despatch which says:
“Following the failure of the Geneva Protocol,14 the President’s
announcement of his intention to call another conference evidently follows
course of action agreed upon by Chamberlain and Kellogg when they came
to an understanding just before the latter left London”.
Despatch refers to President’s alleged decision to proceed with conference even if some
powers refuse to take part, as being aimed at France in London’s opinion.
The chief aide to the Minister of the Navy said today that Japan was persuaded that
conversations had taken place between the United States and Great Britain before the
first Washington Conference (1922) and in guarded reference to above report gave
impression that those conversations were regarded by Japanese as very significant.
BANCROFT
14 On March 12 the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs stated to the Council
of the League of Nations that his Government could not accept the protocol or
recommend its acceptance to the other Governments of the Empire. See Great Britain,

[Document 14]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft)
my request and I read to him all but the last paragraph of the Department’s telegram to
conversation with Chamberlain, mentioning particularly that the subject of a
disarmament conference was introduced by Chamberlain. I informed the Ambassador
that I had not mentioned the subject to Chamberlain or the British Government; that we
did not sound out the British Government or come to any understanding about it; that
the conversation was informal; that if the President concluded to call a naval
conference in Washington, we should of course communicate with and inquire of the
Japanese Government exactly in the same way we should with the other Governments;
and that we had no intention of calling such a conference without doing so. I further
assured him of our desire, as far as possible, to act in harmony and cooperation with the
Japanese Government both in this matter and in the Chinese situation.
The Ambassador thanked me very much and said that our telegram to you was
probably sent after he left Tokyo. He also said that his Government, in a general way,
thought as we did on the subject, that, of course, he believed that if such a conference
were to be called, the Japanese Government and all the Governments should be
communicated with and sounded out on the subject in advance. He expressed his great
appreciation that it was our intention to work in harmony with him in Chinese matters
as far as possible and said he wished to come in some other day and discuss with me
some other matters, particularly some radio matters in China. He said he had seen the
newspaper reports as to the President’s determination to call a conference but he did
not think there was anything particularly new about it. I told him I had not yet
discussed the question with the President for want of time.
KELLOGG

[Document 15]
Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the
French Ambassador (Daeschner), March 26, 1925
March 26, 1925
The French Ambassador called and said he was not requested to come by his
Government but he came privately on his own account. He, however, read to me a
message, apparently from his Government, which stated in substance that France
considered security, disarmament and arbitration as inseparable, that in spite of
England’s attitude on the Geneva Protocol, they did not in France consider it dead but
that it would come up for discussion at the next meeting of the Council of the League
of Nations in September; that in view of the situation, France did not consider
disarmament now practical and even if the Washington Government considered calling
a naval disarmament [conference], France felt as though, in view of her colonies, in the
event of a war with Germany, further agreement for naval disarmament was not
possible. I asked him if this was intended as a statement that France would not attend
such a conference. He said no, he was not authorized to make any such statement and
the statement he had read me did not go that far. He was reading it to me for my private
information, not of course private from the President.
I informed him that there was nothing new on the subject, that of course if the President
concluded to call a conference, he would first communicate with the Governments
interested but he evidently came to see me with a view of discouraging any such move.
I asked him if he thought they were going to make a settlement of the security question.
He said he did not know. He thought there would be no difficulty about getting proper
guarantees as to the Western Boundary but the difficulty was the Eastern Boundary—
the Danzig Corridor and Silesia, especially the Danzig Corridor, which separated East
Prussia from West Prussia and which also gave Poland a port.

[Document 16]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)15
[Paraphrase]
385. Please summarize briefly by cable press comment in the country to which you are
accredited on President’s remarks to press16 regarding possibility of disarmament
conference and on possibility of holding it in Washington; also any personal
information you may have without making inquiry of officials of the Government.
Repeat as circular instruction to Embassies in Great Britain, Germany, and Italy.
KELLOGG
15 See last sentence for instructions to repeat to Great Britain, Germany, and Italy.
Similar instruction, except for last sentence, sent to Embassy in Japan, Oct. 22, 4 p.m.
16 Appearing in the newspapers of October 21.

[Document 17]
The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
[Received 11:55 p.m.]
conference on disarmament under the President’s auspices, whether held at Washington
or at The Hague.
WHITEHOUSE

[Document 18]
The Chargé in Italy (Robbins) to the Secretary of State
[Received 1:35 p.m.]
ROBBINS

[Document 19]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
discuss disarmament with other diplomatic representatives, and what information I
have comes to me either indirectly or in conversations with members of the press. I feel
sure, nevertheless, that a distinct atmosphere of hostility exists toward any attempt to
bring a conference on land armament to Washington. The feeling is that at Locarno19
the European powers reached a friendly understanding without our help and that now
they are in a position to regulate armaments among themselves without American
initiative, especially as, not being a member of the League of Nations, we have no
direct interest or concern in European affairs. I fear, therefore, that any suggestion to
bring a conference of nature intimated to Washington would meet with refusal. On
other hand, a proposition to reduce naval armaments, in which it is conceded that we
have a direct interest, would not improbably receive affirmative answer. I must
emphasize, however, fact that Locarno settlement has changed radically the mental
attitude of the powers concerned; they now feel to large extent independent of America;
and in addition, by conferring great powers on the League of Nations, they are
conscious that they have brought into existence new and very important political
machine which belongs to them.
Two days ago the Swedish Minister here came to see me, and after discussing matters
about which Mr. Sterling will report to you, he asked if America realized how strong
the League of Nations had become and if there were any likelihood that in view of the
changed situation we would now become a member. I told him that I knew of no reason
to suppose that our position would change. He then asked if President Coolidge was
thinking of calling a conference in Washington on land disarmament. I said that I was
without information. He said that he hoped the President would not, as such a request
would certainly be refused, and added that he knew whereof he spoke as he had
discussed matter with other diplomatic representatives and had just come from a talk
with Chamberlain. A naval conference would, he said, receive a favorable answer.
Doubtless you remember the Minister; he is usually well informed. Certainly he left me
with the impression that the whole matter of land disarmament had already been
discussed by Briand and Chamberlain, and that any attempt at this time on our part

would be resented by them. All Chamberlain has ever said to me is that he told
Luther20 that Germany must not expect a disarmament of the other powers so complete
as had been forced on her.
As you are aware, we are not popular in Europe just now. Our refusal to join the
League of Nations and our insistence upon debt repayments have left us without
friends. The conclusion is inescapable for me that an open refusal to allow us to take
lead in European disarmament would be popular over here; but I also think that an
entirely new method of approach in which we could have something to offer would
change present situation.
Daily press of this week beginning the 19th has carried various articles quoting the
White House spokesman as having pointed out desirability of holding a disarmament
conference upon signing of the Locarno Agreement and indicating that President upon
any favorable intimation from Europe might consider issuing invitations to one. There
have been no direct editorial articles but the general press comment has been that with
the Locarno Agreement initiative has passed from Washington to Geneva, and points
out that the Locarno Agreement was reached without any American participation. An
alleged statement by Chamberlain to the French press is generally referred to, that
Locarno had brought the question of universal disarmament nearer realization than it
had ever been before; that Mr. Coolidge was interesting himself in this problem but that
it ought to be widely known that at present time the League of Nations was busy
preparing for summoning of an international disarmament conference.
[The remainder of the telegram quotes excerpts from British newspaper statements.]
HOUGHTON
17 Telegram in two sections.
20 Dr. Hans Luther, Chancelor of the German Reich.

[Document 20]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
[Paraphrase]
322. Probably you have seen press statements on what President said on subject of a
disarmament conference. I should be glad if on your own responsibility you could
ascertain from the proper British authorities in such a way that it will not be considered
an inquiry from this Government what the attitude of that Government is toward the
President’s calling of such a conference and what the opinion of British officials is in
regard to its reception by other European countries on subjects of both land and naval
armament. I am not yet prepared to make inquiry of European countries and for that
reason wish this to be simply an informal talk by you on your own responsibility.21
KELLOGG
21 On Oct. 26, noon, the Ambassador telegraphed that the Department’s inquiry had
[Document 21]
The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
176. Reference to Department’s telegram inquiring newspaper comment on President’s
press statement.22 His remarks were not widely carried, none of the vernacular papers
featured the news item prominently; only a few of the metropolitan papers printed
condensations in their news columns; an account in English appeared in Japan
Advertiser. There has been no editorial comment. There has been some discussion of
effect that could be expected from the Locarno Agreements.

I am informed that Japan would prefer to see settlement as far as possible of all the
outstanding obligations arising out of Washington 1922 Conference before considering
new commitments; that for the present moment the country is content with its
armament situation and would not welcome further conference on armament until
Chinese situation shows some sign of clarifying and until relations with Russia are
placed upon more secure foundation than at present exists.
NEVILLE

[Document 22]
The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 5:34 p.m.]
received exceedingly little press comment here; only article of any interest is in
Vossische Zeitung of October 23.

I believe, however, that German opinion in general for obvious reasons would welcome
call from President Coolidge for disarmament conference at Washington.
SCHURMAN

[Document 23]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
LONDON, October 29, 1925—(?) p.m.
[Received 3:53 p.m.]
conference for limitation of armaments is occasioning me real concern. Should a
conference of this sort eventuate, nothing can prevent at least a part of European press
from voicing distinct satisfaction and from seeing in our exclusion a definite and
intended rebuff to would-be American leadership. This view would be copied into the
American press and, coupled with the fact that the League of Nations is now a
formidable political machine, would be used to demonstrate that our policy, despite all
our sacrifices, has resulted merely in eliminating us from the general comity of nations
and has left us isolated against a united Europe and without friends in Asia.
In these circumstances may I suggest for consideration that it might clear the situation
if President Coolidge were to point out at early opportunity that any so-called American
interference in European affairs has come only when the European powers themselves
were unable to agree and had asked our help, as in the Dawes Plan. When these powers
can agree, especially in efforts to effect limitation of armaments, neither reason nor
excuse for our participation exists. Our approval of a conference of that sort may be
taken as matter of course. The administration, rather than its enemies, it seems to me,
should define its position, but unless such a definition as suggested be made early any
later statement would avail little. Attitude on our part such as I suggest would
unquestionably have salutary effect on this side the water and would serve to bring to
minds of the powers concerned that they would be affected adversely and possibly
disastrously by any real withdrawal on our part.
HOUGHTON

[Document 24]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
[Paraphrase]
have given him a memorandum.23 He will take up the subject in his message to
would from a newspaper interview. If you think that there is any possibility that
European countries will take steps to call a conference before his message, I should be
glad to be advised.
KELLOGG
23 Not printed.
24 See the President’s message to Congress, December 8, p. VII [Pg. VII is part of Message of the
President of the United States to Congress, December 8, 1925].

Disinclination of the United States to be
associated in European security pacts: (1)
Geneva protocol; (2) Locarno agreement
[25] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With the British
Ambassador (Howard), January 5, 1925
January 5, 1925
[26] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With the British
Ambassador (Howard), January 8, 1925
January 8, 1925
[27] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With the German
Ambassador (Maltzan), March 16, 1925
March 16, 1925
[28] The Chargé in Great Britain (Sterling) to the Secretary of State
[29] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Poland (Pearson)
Washington, June 5, 1925.

[Document 25]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With the British
Ambassador (Howard), January 5, 1925
January 5, 1925
Geneva Protocol.25 The Ambassador said that he had received a private letter from Mr.
Austen Chamberlain26 requesting him to take up with the Secretary the question of the
Geneva Protocol. Mr. Chamberlain desired to know the views of this Government. It
would seem that the putting into effect of the Protocol without modifications might
leave the way open for the development of situations which would be embarrassing
with respect to the relations between Great Britain and the United States. It was a
cardinal point in British policy to maintain friendly relations with the United States and
to cooperate with this Government wherever possible, and there might be interference
with this policy if contingencies should arise in which through the operation of the
Protocol the British Government was brought into opposition to the interests of the
United States. On the other hand, it seemed to the British Government that it would not
be well to throw out the Protocol entirely, for if this were done there would most
probably be a continuance of competitive armament in Europe which the countries
concerned could not afford. The only alternative to such a competition in armament
with all its possible consequences would seem to be the adoption in some form of such
an arrangement as the Geneva Protocol proposed. The British Government were
seeking for modifications which might suit the purpose and would be very glad to
know the position of the United States.
The Secretary said he should hardly care to make any answer for this Government to
such a broad inquiry, involving important questions of future policies, without bringing
the matter to the attention of the President, and this he would do at the first opportunity.
He did not mind saying, however, as an informal expression of his personal views, that
there were two aspects at least of the Geneva Protocol which might give concern to this
Government. The Secretary said that if the Protocol were taken as having practical
value and of actually portending what it set forth, there would appear to be a proposal
of a concert against the United States, when the Powers joining in the Protocol
considered that the United States had committed some act of aggression, although the
United States might believe itself to be entirely justified in its action, and in fact be
acting in accordance with its traditional policies. The Secretary said that he did not
believe that such a concert would actually become effective but he supposed that the
Protocol must be taken as it is written and in this view the United States would be
compelled to view it with disfavor. The Secretary said there was another class of cases

where the action of the United States itself might not be involved but that of some other
country with which the United States had trade relations, and the action of the Powers
who had joined in the Protocol might turn out to be inimical to the interests of the
United States in such relations with the country in question.
The Ambassador said that he had not supposed that the first situation would actually
arise and he really had in mind the second case that the Secretary had put. In other
words, they might be called upon to blockade some country and come into antagonism
to the interests of the United States in consequence. The Secretary said that there was
one thing he believed could be depended upon, and that was that this Government from
its very beginning had been insistent upon the rights of neutrals and would continue to
maintain them. The Secretary did not believe any Administration, short of a treaty
concluded and ratified, could commit the country against assertion of its neutral rights
in case there should be occasion to demand their recognition. The Ambassador said that
he believed that that was the situation and that that was the point which his
Government had in view. The Secretary said that while the effect of the Protocol upon
the interests of the United States in the contingencies suggested seemed to be quite
obvious, the Government of the United States did not desire to be put in the position of
taking action against the adoption of the Protocol. He had rather expected that
situations similar to those which might arise in the view of the United States, would be
in contemplation of other Governments and especially of the British Government, and
he had not believed that the Protocol would become effective according to its present
terms; that it was desired by this Government that if other Governments did not
approve the Protocol, they should deal with the matter from the standpoint of their own
interests and not put the responsibility upon the United States.
The Ambassador said that there had been nothing on the particular point in Mr.
Chamberlain’s letter, but it had occurred to him (the Ambassador) that possibly the
result might be reached by a reservation on the part of the British Government; that
they could reserve the right in any contingency to which the sanctions might apply to
consult with any Power that was not a member of the League of Nations and make such
arrangements as might be desirable in the light of such consultation. The Ambassador
said that he had not worked out the phraseology but the idea occurred to him and it
seemed to him that it might be a satisfactory solution.
The Secretary said that he could well understand the reasons which might lead the
British Government to make such a reservation but that he thought it would be
inadvisable to have anything said on the other side to the effect that an arrangement had
been made in relation to the ratification of the Protocol which was satisfactory to the
United States. The Secretary said that if any such statement or suggestion was made
there would at once be inquiry here as to what understanding we had and why we had it
and what right we had to have it, et cetera; that it would be a most unpleasant situation.
The Secretary must emphasize the point, therefore, that whatever action the British

Government took it must take on its own responsibility and while, as it seemed to the
Secretary, they could appropriately envisage the possible contingencies of conflict with
the interests of the United States and develop their course accordingly, they should not
make any suggestion that the course they did take was taken pursuant to some
understanding with the United States.
The Secretary said this was all he cared to say at present and he would talk over the
matter with the President.
The Ambassador said that he was leaving the city and would not write to Mr.
Chamberlain at once and might see the Secretary again on his return on Thursday.27
25 Protocol for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes; text printed as S. Doc.
26 British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.
27 i. e., January 8.

[Document 26]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With the British
Ambassador (Howard), January 8, 1925
January 8, 1925
[Extract]
Geneva Protocol. The Ambassador asked whether the Secretary had had an opportunity
to take up with the President the subject discussed at the last interview (January 5/25).
The Secretary said that he had done so and that the President agreed with the views the
Secretary had expressed.
The Secretary said that he felt it necessary to emphasize the point that this Government
desired that the British Government should act entirely on its own responsibility, so far
as this Government is concerned, in dealing with the Geneva Protocol. It was
particularly necessary that nothing should be said in the House of Commons or
elsewhere that there was any agreement or understanding with the United States. The
Secretary said that if, for example, it should be said in answer to a question in the
House of Commons that any action or reservation of the British Government was
satisfactory to the United States Government, it would cause great difficulty here. It
would at once be asked what arrangement had been made and why the President,
through the Secretary, should have entered into any understanding upon such a subject.
The Ambassador entirely agreed and said that of course there was no agreement or
understanding with the United States Government in the matter. He appreciated the
importance of avoiding any misapprehension on this score. The Ambassador again
referred to the difficulties that might arise in applying the sanctions, especially the
economic sanctions, with respect to the relations between Great Britain and the United
States, and the desire of Great Britain to avoid any such embarrassment. He repeated
that it was the cardinal policy of Great Britain to act in cooperation with the United
States. The Secretary said that it was of course easy to foresee possible contingencies in
which the attempt to enforce such economic sanctions would run counter to the
interests of the United States, either when the United States was taking action which it
thought justified in the circumstances, or was dealing with a third Power that was the
subject of such sanctions and the rights of the United States as a neutral would be
interfered with. The Ambassador referred to the Monroe Doctrine and action that might
be taken under the Monroe Doctrine if there were difficulties between two of the Latin
American Republics and one appealed to the Council of the League and sanctions were

applied. The Secretary said that this Government, not being a signatory of the Protocol
or represented at Geneva, felt that it should not be called up to take the responsibility of
opposing the Protocol. But the particular difficulties to which the Ambassador referred
had their analogy in other difficulties that might arise elsewhere and the Secretary
supposed that the British Government would be alive to all the possibilities and that the
action which the Ambassador had suggested as possible, in making reservations, would
be taken in view of the British Government’s own interests.
The Ambassador said that he felt that the frankest way in such emergencies was the
best way, and therefore he was disposed to think that instead of making a reservation
that the British Government in any contingency would be at liberty to consult with a
Government not a member of the League, they might better say that they desired to
retain the privilege of consulting with the United States and making its [their]
arrangements in view of the interests of the United States. The Ambassador felt that it
would be well for the British Government to say frankly to its associates in the League
that there could be no hope of applying the sanctions successfully in opposition to the
views of the United States as they might be entertained by its people when a
contingency arose.
The Secretary reiterated the importance of the United States Government remaining
entirely separate from the discussion.29
29 The remainder of the memorandum deals with other matters.

[Document 27]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With the German
Ambassador (Maltzan), March 16, 1925
March 16, 1925
The German Ambassador called to inform me of the substance of a proposition which
had been made by Germany to France and England for a joint security pact to secure
France.30 He did not have the complete copy but had some memoranda showing the
general nature of the pact and said he wished that the American Government should be
informed. It appears that in one of these propositions made in 1922, it was proposed
that France, England, Italy, and Germany should guarantee France’s security to the
Government of the United States.31 I told him I could not see why this should be made
to the United States as we were not authorized to join in any such guarantee. He said he
understood that perfectly. He also said that the guarantee which they now propose had
been delivered to England by the German Ambassador in London who had given a
copy of it to the American Chargé d’Affaires at the London Embassy last Friday and it
would undoubtedly be sent to us. I made no comment on the nature of the guarantees
other than expressed above. He then said that I probably remembered that a good deal
had been said in the newspapers about Germany joining the League of Nations,
especially the invitation received by Germany last September, that this invitation had
been renewed or at least conversations had taken place about Germany’s joining. He
said that Germany insisted on assurance that she would have a member on the Council,
that she objected to Article XVI and some other objections. He said he wished to
inform me that the matter was under consideration. He was not, of course, asking the
approval of the American Government but was informing me so that if we had any
objections or suggestions, we could state them to him. I told him, speaking for myself
and not for the President, that it was a matter entirely for Germany to decide, that we
are not members of the League and, therefore, not interested, and that the German
Government should exercise its own judgment in the matter and that we had no
suggestion to make one way or the other about it. He talked as though this joining
might be a part of the plan for the general guarantee of security to France and I told
him, of course, that as we could not join in any such guarantee we ought not to express
any opinion about it.
30 The German proposal was transmitted to the French Government on February 9; see

Proposals for a Pact of Security Made by the German Government on February 9,
1925.

[Document 28]
The Chargé in Great Britain (Sterling) to the Secretary of State
LONDON, March 16, 1925.
[Received March 25 (?).]
enclose a copy, in translation, of the memorandum of January 20, 1925, which the
German Government handed to the governments of Great Britain, France, Italy and
Belgium on the subject of a security pact.33 I also enclose a copy of a letter which Mr.
Dufour, Counselor of the German Embassy, handed to me today32 commenting upon
the memorandum in question.
The manner in which I obtained the memorandum was as follows. Recently, having
occasion to speak upon other subjects with Dufour, I asked him if, as a matter of
information, he could properly give me the text of the proposals put forward by the
German Government for a security pact, concerning which there had been so much
publicity. I told him that I would like the text to forward to you and that it would be
given the most confidential treatment, making it clear to him that I was under no
instructions from my Government and that my request should not be interpreted as a
possibility of American intervention in European political affairs in any way. In a day
or two he brought me the memorandum; he thoroughly understands our position.
I gather from him that the British Government have replied informally to the German
Government to the effect that they believed the memorandum contained a basis
deserving of careful consideration, and that the French have replied in a more guarded
manner but have not rejected the idea. Apparently there has been great divergence of
opinion in the British Cabinet as to what form the question of security should take and
even as yet there is no crystallized policy determined upon. It would appear fairly
certain, however, that the British will attempt to induce France to include Germany in
any pact, on the understanding, of course, that Germany will first enter on an equal
footing into the League of Nations. Conversations are now taking place on this basis
between Herriot34 and Chamberlain, but the situation is in a very fluid state and it will
probably be several months before anything definite evolves. Italy can be counted upon
to follow the lead of Great Britain.
There has been much talk in the press here of a Disarmament Conference in
Washington. To me it seems clear that before France will attend such a conference the
question of her security, as she views it, must be definitely settled.

With best wishes [etc.]
F. A. STERLING
[Enclosure]
German Memorandum on the Subject of a Security Pact
BERLIN, 20 January, 1925.
The Disarmament and Evacuation questions which are now being discussed are often
regarded in France from the point of view of security against possible German
intentions of aggression. Therefore, they would possibly more easily find a solution, if
an agreement of a general kind could be brought about with the intention of
guaranteeing peace between Germany and France. Germany is entirely ready to accept
this point of view. She wishes to see all problems which may accrue between her and
France to be treated in no other way than by peaceful understanding and is therefore,
for her part, also interested in the formation of a special treaty-basis for such a peaceful
understanding.

When considering all the different methods which might at present be brought into
being for the formation of a pact of security, one might start from an idea similar to the
one which in December 1922 formed the basis of the suggestion made by the then
German Chancellor Cuno.35 Germany could, for instance, declare herself in agreement
with a pact, whereby the Powers interested on [in?] the Rhine, above all England,
France, Italy and Germany, could solemnly pledge themselves to the Government of
the United States of America as Trustees, to carry on no war with one another for a still
to be defined period of time. A far reaching treaty of arbitration could be connected
with such a pact between Germany and France in a similar way, as has already been
formed during the last few years between several European Powers. Germany is ready
to enter into such treaties of arbitration with all other States as well, in order to
guarantee a peaceful settlement of judicial and political conflicts.
Besides this a pact would also be acceptable to Germany which expressly guarantees
the territorial statics quo on the Rhine. The tenor of such a pact could eventually be that
the States which are interested in the Rhine should reciprocally agree fully to respect
the inviolability of the territorial status quo on the Rhine, that they furthermore, both
jointly and separately, guarantee the execution of this obligation and, finally, that they
will consider every action which tends to counteract the obligation as a matter of joint
or individual concern. In the same sense these Treaty States could guarantee in this pact
the execution of the obligation regarding the demilitarisation of the Rhineland which
Germany has undertaken in Articles 42 and 43 of the Treaty of Versailles. Included in

this pact could also be arbitral conventions of the kind mentioned above between
Germany and all other States who would be ready to take part in such conventions.
It will be possible to add several other possibilities of solution to the above-named
examples. And the ideas which form the basis of these examples could in one way or
another be also combined. But the examples might possibly suffice to show that, if all
States concerned have the wish for guarantees to bring about a peaceful development, it
would not be difficult to find a definite basis by treaty means.
32 Not printed.
33 The text is similar to, not identical with, the text of the German note presented to the
French Government on February 9.
32 Not printed.
34 French Premier and Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[Document 29]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Poland (Pearson)
WASHINGTON, June 5, 1925.
No. 123
SIR: There is enclosed herewith for your confidential information a copy of a
Memorandum left by the Polish Minister on May 28, 1925. Upon being apprised of the
contents of the Memorandum I drew the Minister’s attention to the fact that the United
States could not in any way associate itself with a Security Pact36 and must maintain an
entirely neutral position with regard to any boundary disputes arising in connection
therewith. The Polish Minister stated that he understood the situation perfectly.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
[Enclosure]
The Polish Legation to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
For some time past there has been a great deal of discussion in connection with the so-
called security pacts of the alleged injustice of those clauses of the Treaty of Versailles
which gave to Poland the Province of Pomerania, commonly known as the “Polish
Corridor”, and of the allotment of a part of Upper Silesia to Poland on the basis of the
Treaty of Versailles and the subsequent plebiscite.
Pomerania is the district extending from Poznania to the Baltic Sea. It constitutes
Poland’s only free access to the sea. The population is and always has been
predominantly Polish. Before the war, according to the official German census, Poles
population and the German lists 15%. Since 1922 a considerable number of Germans
have left Pomerania and an additional number will have to leave before 1926, in
accordance with the terms of the Convention of Vienna signed August 30, 1924,
regulating the question of option of nationality. A fair estimate of the present numerical
relation of Poles and Germans in Pomerania would be, Poles, 90%, Germans 10%.

On fifteen occasions between 1875 and 1918 the people of Pomerania cast their ballots
for the election of a member to represent that district in the German Reichstag. These
elections invariably resulted in the choice of a Pole to represent Pomerania.
The Transit Convention of Paris, signed by Poland and Germany April 25, 1921,
provides for free and unrestricted traffic between the German Province of East Prussia
lying to the east of Pomerania and the main body of Germany lying to the west. For the
settlement of complaints and grievances arising in connection with this transit traffic
the contracting parties established a Mixed Transit Tribunal under neutral presidency
with final jurisdiction. The first case which this Transit Tribunal was called upon to
hear in the course of its three years of existence was a German protest in connection
with the railway disaster occurring at Starogard on April 30, 1925. In this case the
Tribunal exonerated the Polish Government of any responsibility for the disaster, the
evidence pointing to a criminal attempt by parties unknown. Pomerania constitutes no
barrier to communication between one part of Germany and another. Persons and goods
are moved through the territory in question without being subject to any formality
whatever. Neither passports nor visas are required, and freight and baggage are liable to
no tariff nor inspection. This is true not only on the railroads but on the waterways.
The first draft of the Treaty of Versailles provided that the Polish-inhabited districts of
Upper Silesia should be given to Poland. Because of Germany’s protest and in
deference to the opinion of the British representative who reversed his position the final
Treaty provided for the taking of a plebiscite as a guide in the delimitation of the
boundary line. Article 88 of the Treaty of Versailles provided as follows:
“In …,37 Upper Silesia …,37 the inhabitants will be called upon to indicate by
a vote whether they wish to be attached to Germany or to Poland: …37
Germany hereby renounces in favor of Poland all rights and title over the
portion of Upper Silesia lying beyond the frontier line fixed by the Principal
Allied and Associated Powers as a result of the plebiscite.
“Annex Paragraph 4. …37 The result of the vote will be determined by
communes according to the majority of votes in each commune.
“Paragraph 5. On the conclusion of the voting, the number of votes cast in
each commune will be communicated by the Commission to the Principal
Allied and Associated Powers, with a full report as to the taking of the vote
and a recommendation as to the line which ought to be adopted as the frontier
of Germany in Upper Silesia. In this recommendation regard will be paid to
the wishes of the inhabitants as shown by the vote and to the geographical
and economic conditions of the locality.”

The plebiscite was held under Interallied supervision on March 20, 1921. As was
expected, in some districts heavy majorities were cast for Poland, in other districts
heavy majorities for Germany. Faced with the problem of delimiting the frontier so as
to conform as nearly as possible with the spirit and letter of the Treaty, the Supreme
Council invoked the good offices of the Council of the League of Nations. The Council
appointed a Polish-German Commission under the presidency of Felix Calonder,
former President of the Swiss Republic, which actually delimited the boundary line in
conformity with the wishes of the inhabitants as expressed in the vote by communes
and with due regard for geographical and economic considerations. The work of this
Commission was approved by the Council of the League and accepted by the Supreme
Council. On May 15, 1922, Poland and Germany signed a Treaty at Geneva embodying
the terms of the settlement including the boundary line as approved by the Council of
the League and the Supreme Council. No boundary line could have been drawn which
would have placed all of the Poles within Poland and all of the Germans within
Germany. Sizeable minorities of Poles and Germans respectively were by the force of
necessity excluded from the country of their choice.
Immediately after the incorporation within Poland of the part of Upper Silesia allotted
by the Treaty, a very large measure of autonomy was granted it by the Polish Diet. A
special Upper Silesian Diet was elected by universal suffrage. In the Diet so elected
These facts which set forth the legal and moral rights of Poland in respect to Pomerania
and Upper Silesia will serve to explain why it is unthinkable that any Polish
Government could permit itself to enter into a discussion which would in whatever
form tend to question Poland’s rights to these parts of her territory. In so refusing to
enter into any international discussion of its rights to these territories the Polish
Government has ample proof of the unanimous support of its people.
WASHINGTON, May 28, 1925.
36 For statement on the work of the Locarno Conference, see the President’s message to
Congress, December 8, p. VII [Pg. VII is part of Message of the President of the United States to Congress,
December 8, 1925].
37 Omission indicated in the original memorandum.
37 Omission indicated in the original memorandum.
37 Omission indicated in the original memorandum.
37 Omission indicated in the original memorandum.

Participation by the United States in the
Conference for the Supervision of the
International Traffic in Arms, at Geneva,
38 For previous correspondence concerning control of traffic in arms, see Foreign
Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 17 ff. For proceedings of the Conference, see League of
Nations, Proceedings of the Conference for the Supervision of the International Trade
in Arms and Ammunition and in Implements of War (A. 13. 1925. IX).
[30] The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to the
Secretary of State
[31] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
Washington, April 16, 1925.
[32] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
Washington, April 16, 1925.
[33] The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of State

[34] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation
(Burton)
[35] The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of State
[36] The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of State
[37] The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton)
[38] The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton)
[39] The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of State
[40] The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton)

[41] The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of State
[42] The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton)
[43] The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton)
Washington, June 4, 1925—[(?) p.m.]
[44] The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of State
[45] The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of State
[46] The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton)
[47] The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of State

[48] The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of State
[49] The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[Document 30]
The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to the
Secretary of State
GENEVA, January 8, 1925.
[Received January 27.]
SIR: In pursuance of my letter of December 9th, 1924,39 I have the honour to inform you
that, at its meeting held in Rome on December 9th, 1924, the Council of the League of
Nations decided that the International Conference to examine the draft Convention for
the control of the international traffic in arms, munitions and implements of war,
prepared by the Temporary Mixed Commission for the reduction of armaments,40 and
to conclude a Convention on this matter, will meet at the Secretariat of the League of
The Governments of the following countries have already signified their willingness to
be present at this Conference:
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria
China
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Esthonia
Finland
France

Germany
Great Britain
Greece
Hungary
India
Italy
Japan*
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats & Slovenes
Latvia
Netherlands
Persia
Poland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United States of America
Uruguay.
I have [etc.]
[Signature illegible]
[For the] Secretary-General
39 Not printed.
Nations, Report of the Temporary Mixed Commission for the Reduction of Armaments
(A. 16. 1924. IX, annex IV).

* The participation of Japan is conditional upon the representation at the Conference of
the States mentioned in Article 32 of the draft Convention. These States are Belgium,
United States of America, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan and Russia. [Footnote in
the original.]

[Document 31]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation41
WASHINGTON, April 16, 1925.
No. 1
SIRS: The President has instructed me to inform you of his desire that you should
represent this Government at the forthcoming international conference to be held at
Geneva on May 4, 1925, to consider the conclusion of a convention with regard to the
international trade in arms, munitions and implements of war. You will be assisted by
Mr. Charles E. Herring,
Mr. Alan F. Winslow,
Major George V. Strong,
Commander Herbert F. Leary,
as technical advisers and secretarial staff.42
You are already familiar with the subject matter to be dealt with at the Conference and
with the views of this Government as set forth in the instruction of the Acting Secretary
has prepared and encloses herewith a confidential print which includes correspondence
and documentary material for general reference purposes with respect to the question
of arms traffic.44 You will note in this correspondence the text of the communications
of the Legation at Berne under instructions from the Department of August 29 [28?],
represented at the proposed conference. The confidential print also indicates the
position this Government has taken with respect to the unratified Convention of St.
Germain45 and also the views expressed at the meetings which were held in 1924 at
Geneva and Paris to consider in a preliminary way the international trade in arms,
munitions and implements of war.
To supplement the information contained in this confidential print and for your further
guidance, the Department, in the following pages, indicates its attitude toward the draft
convention which is to be considered at the Conference, pointing out changes which

are considered necessary or desirable before any convention is submitted to the Senate
for approval or to Congress for legislation.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
This Government is prepared to give careful consideration to any constructive
proposals for the proper regulation of the international trade in arms with a view not
only to securing adequate publicity with respect to such trade but also for the purpose
of reducing to a, minimum the traffic in arms which is calculated to foment disorder,
encourage militarism or render more difficult the realization of this Government’s
desire that further progress should be made toward an era of continuing peace.
In this connection it may appropriately be pointed out that the United States, while
declining to ratify the Convention of Saint Germain has already complied with the
spirit of that convention in the reductions which have been effected in its war times
munitions industry and the consequent reduction to relatively small proportions of the
American trade in arms and ammunition.
Further, it should be noted that of the High Contracting Powers specifically mentioned
in Article 32 of the draft convention, the United States, in contrast with other Powers, is
the only nation that does not maintain large Government arsenals for the supply of its
own war time need. Consequently, in the event of any national emergency this
Government will be dependent for its arms and ammunition almost exclusively upon
the relatively meager private industry and manufacture of war material. It is therefore
clear that this Government could not properly acquiesce in any measure which would
be directed against private munitions factories while leaving government-owned or
controlled factories in other countries free to continue their trade or production.
Further, it is clearly to be borne in mind that, with respect to the United States, the
further control of the traffic in arms could only be made effective by Congressional
action. It would, therefore, be useless for this Government to conclude a convention
unless there were reasonable grounds to believe that it was of a character to commend
itself to Congress and that the necessary legislation to make it effective could be
obtained.
AGENDA OF THE CONFERENCE
The Department understands that the Conference is to consider solely the question of
the international trade in arms, munitions and implements of war, taking as a basis for
discussion the draft convention prepared by the Temporary Mixed Commission of the
League of Nations which was communicated to this Government under date of October
international conference and that all States, whether members or non-members of the

League, will participate on the same basis in all the deliberations and functions of the
Conference- It further understands that the draft convention, while serving as a basis
for discussion, is susceptible of any and all modifications which may be considered
desirable by the participating States.

Before proceeding to a consideration of the draft convention article by article, the
Department desires to take up the three important principles underlying the convention
in its present form, as follows:
(1) The licensing system;
(2) The restriction of sales to recognized governments and belligerents, and
(3) The prohibited zones.
THE LICENSING SYSTEM
Under existing legislation the President is authorized whenever in his opinion
conditions of domestic violence exist which are or may be promoted by the importation
of arms from the United States, to prohibit such exportation except under licenses in
the case of countries in this hemisphere and countries in which the United States
exercises extraterritorial jurisdiction. The draft convention contemplates the extension
of this system of licensing to cover all countries of the world in time of peace
irrespective of the conditions prevailing in such countries. The purpose of the licensing
system, as indicated in the Convention, in the securing of adequate information with
regard to the movements of arms and ammunition and, taken in conjunction with other
provisions of the Convention, to prevent such arms from reaching the hands of
unauthorized parties.
As far as the United States is concerned, the statistical data could be obtained without
requiring the somewhat elaborate system of licensing. In fact at the present time the
United States published [publishes] statistics, both of production and of export and
import trade, which are believed to be more complete than the corresponding statistics
of any other country. While the Department is prepared to take up with Congress the
question of securing the necessary legislation for the licensing of the export of arms
and ammunition in international trade, in the event that an agreement at Geneva should
be reached on this basis, nevertheless it seems preferable, and you are authorized to
suggest, if occasion offers, that the ends of publicity would be equally well served by
the requirement that in the case of each exportation of arms and ammunition, whether
by a government or by a private company or individual, there should be filed with the
appropriate local authorities an export declaration or statistical statement giving full
data with regard to the nature, size, and destination of the shipment. A copy of such

declaration could also accompany the shipment. (As indicated below, there would,
however, be no objection to providing for a system of licensing with respect to the
“prohibited zone.”) The suggestion has been made that special export declarations for
arms shipment be required rather than licenses granted by the Government. In this
connection certain objections have been raised to the license system and the views of
the War Department on this subject might briefly be summarized as follows:
(a) Licensing might involve the Government in a responsibility as to the
ultimate destination of the shipment, a responsibility which it is in no
position to carry out since it has no control of the arms once the shipment
leaves its territory.
(b) Licensing might result in undue interference with private trade.
(c) Non-producing States object to a requirement that they turn to other
governments to secure licenses for the export from a foreign country of the
arms necessary for their national defense.
(d) A licensing system if it placed impediment in the way of acquirement
abroad by non-producing States of the arms necessary to their defense would
tend to force such States to become producers of arms. This result would not
help toward world peace.
The Department therefore desires you to ascertain whether effectual agreement could
be reached on the basis that the term “export declarations” or its equivalent should be
inserted for “licenses” in various articles of the convention as hereafter indicated. This
is not, however, a point of such vital importance as to justify a course of action which
would seriously imperil the success of the Conference.
In the event, therefore, that the Powers represented at the international conference are
generally agreed that the license system is the only satisfactory method of securing the
control and the statistical data desired, the Department would not wish to jeopardize the
success of the Conference by advocating the abandonment of the license system.
SALES RESTRICTED TO RECOGNIZED GOVERNMENTS AND BELLIGERENTS
This provision of the Convention should be amplified so as clearly to reserve the right
of this Government or of its nationals to make direct sale of arms and war material to
the authorities of any self-governing dominion, colony, dependency, mandated territory,
and to the federal or administrative subdivision thereof with the consent of the central
authority. It is obvious that this Government could not acquiesce in the view that sales
to self-governing dominions should be made exclusively by one State or that the
Mandatory or Sovereign Powers should be permitted to monopolize the trade in arms

with countries under mandate, or with their colonies and thereby defeat the principle of
equality of opportunity.
There is a further question of no little difficulty, which arises under the provisions of
the Convention restricting sales to recognized governments or belligerents. If this
Government does not extend recognition to a particular régime while other countries
extend such recognition, the result would be that other countries would be free to
export arms to that country and American manufacturers would be prevented from so
doing. This situation is taken into account in the modification of Article 3, Paragraph 1.
THE QUESTION OF THE PROHIBITED AREA
The Department desires you to support the position that the Convention as at present
drafted should be divided into two separate conventions—one dealing with publicity
and the control of the general export trade in arms, the other dealing with the special
supervision of the trade in the so-called prohibited zones which it is apparently the
desire of certain Powers to place under a further system of control. In this connection
you will note that the Department’s instruction of June 17th favored the division of the
Convention as above indicated and that on page 147 of the League publication47 there
is given a detailed statement as to the desirability of this procedure.
The Department believes that it would facilitate the consideration of the Arms Traffic
question in this country if the two questions, that of the general publicity and control on
the one hand and that of the prohibited areas on the other, were dealt with separately.
They are distinct problems. The latter only concerns this Government to a very limited
degree. The United States has no territorial possessions in the general region (i. e.
Africa, South Western Asia, etc.) which have in the past been considered as possible
prohibited areas. Further, neither this Government nor its nationals have ever engaged
in any considerable traffic in arms with this area of the world. The question of the
measure of control to be exercised in any such “prohibited zones” is largely a matter
for determination by the Powers which have colonies or mandates in this region,
provided, however, that no restrictions are imposed which would impair the principle
of most-favored-nation treatment.
Whether this Government could properly be a party to a convention setting up a control
of the arms trade in the prohibited areas can only be determined when the scope and
purpose of the convention is more clearly defined. In any event the Department would
not desire you to support any effort directed toward the placing in the “prohibited
zone” of sovereign States, such for example as Persia, which the Department notes has
already made vigorous protest against such action.
In taking up the discussion of the Convention, article by article, the Department will
deal further with this question of the “prohibited zone” in considering Articles 9 to 25

inclusive.

SHIPMENTS BY GOVERNMENTS TO BE MADE PUBLIC AS WELL AS SHIPMENTS BY PRIVATE PARTIES
It should be made entirely clear that the Convention covers the full publicity for all
export of arms by or on behalf of the governments themselves, (exclusive, of course, of
shipments for their own military forces abroad) as well as shipments by private
individuals or companies within the territories of the High Contracting Parties. The
reasons for this are obvious. One of the chief purposes of the Convention is to obtain
statistical information with respect to the volume, character, destination, etc., etc., of
the international trade in arms and ammunition. In the case of certain countries such
export is to a large degree carried on by or on behalf of the governments which
manufacture the arms in Government factories or, as the case may be, directly control
the bulk of the manufacture and trade. If the export of arms and ammunition by
Governments is not given publicity, the result would be that the figures on exports from
countries such as the United States, where the trade in arms is almost entirely carried
on by private companies, would be out of its proper ratio if contrasted with the export
of the countries of which the governments themselves engage in a considerable traffic
in arms. This point will be dealt with in further detail in considering the specific
articles of the Convention.
CONSIDERATION OF THE CONVENTION ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
PREAMBLE*
“Whereas the Convention of Saint Germain signed by the High Contracting
Parties therein mentioned has not entered into full force and effect;
“Whereas it is necessary to exercise a general supervision over the
international trade in arms, munitions and implements of war, with the object
of securing the fullest possible publicity in regard to such trade;
“Whereas the existing treaties and conventions, and particularly the Brussels
Act of July 2nd, 1890,48 regulating the traffic in arms and munitions in
certain regions, no longer meet present conditions;
“Whereas a special supervision of the maritime zone adjacent to certain
countries is necessary to ensure the efficacy of the measures adopted by the
various Governments both as regards the import of arms, ammunition and
implements of war into these countries and their export from their own
territory;

“Have appointed . . . . . . . . . . . .”

In view of the fact that the Convention of Saint Germain never became generally
effective, it is considered preferable that it should not be mentioned in the preamble.
Further, the statement that this Convention “has not entered into full force and effect”
might lead to the erroneous conclusion that it was partially effective. The Department
does not understand that this is the case with respect to any of the important producing
countries. Further, there is already included in Article 27 a provision to the effect that
the Convention of Saint Germain is to be superseded by the present Convention in so
far as the Powers which ratified the former are concerned.
The second paragraph of the Preamble should be modified to avoid giving any ground
for the erroneous conclusion that the purpose of the Convention is to provide for the
international “general supervision” over the arms trade. It is suggested, therefore, that
the second paragraph of the Preamble be modified to read:
“Whereas the High Contracting Parties are agreed as to the desirability of
exercising, each in so far as it is concerned, a supervision over the foreign
trade in arms, munitions and implements of war,” etc., etc.
In the event that the present draft convention is divided into two separate conventions,
as heretofore suggested, the Preamble would of course be modified to meet this change.
ARTICLE I
“This Convention applies to the following arms, munitions and implements
of war:
Category I
“1. Arms and Munitions, Assembled or Component Parts, Exclusively
Designed for Land, Sea or Aerial Warfare, Whatever Their Mode of
Employment.
(List follows)
“2. Implements of War Hereafter Enumerated and Component Parts Which
are Capable of Being Utilized Only In the Manufacture of the Said Material.
(List follows)
Category II

“Arms and Munitions, Assembled or Component Parts, Capable of Use Both
For Military and Other Purposes.
(List follows)
Category III
“Arms and Munitions Having No Military Value.”
(List follows)

It has been pointed out by representatives of American manufacturers particularly
interested in the export of sporting arms and arms for personal self-defense that the
division of arms into categories according to caliber is misleading and unless modified
would result in placing in Category I, that is arms which can only be exported under
license, certain sporting arms which could properly be exported without license.
Further, it is to be noted that pistols and revolvers are in Category I.
It has therefore been suggested, and it seems reasonable to the Department, that the
Categories as at present drafted should be modified so as to exclude from Category I
pistols, revolvers and sporting arms.
In this connection the following recommendations of the War Department with regard
to Categories as contained in a suggested redraft of Article 1 are deserving of careful
consideration.
ARTICLE 1
“This convention applies to the following arms, munitions and implements of
war;
Category I
“(a) Arms, ammunition, and implements of war, exclusively
designed for land, sea, or aerial warfare, which are, or shall be,
comprised in the equipment of the armed forces of the different
states, whether military, naval or aerial, with the exception of
pistols and revolvers, and with the exception of sporting arms.
(b) All arms except pistols, revolvers and sporting arms and
ammunition for the same, which, after having been employed in the
services of the different states, are no longer part of their

equipment but remain capable of being utilized for military
purposes to the exclusion of any other utilization.
(c) Component parts of the items listed in (a) and (b) above, if
capable of being utilized only in the manufacture or repair of the
items listed in (a) and (b) above, for land, sea or aerial warfare.”
The War Department suggests the omission of Category II.
In view of the fact that the control of the export of such weapons as pistols, revolvers
and sporting arms may be desirable within the “prohibited zone”, there would be no
objection, in principle, to retaining a second category to include such arms. The export
to the prohibited zone, except under license, of arms in both Categories I and II might
be prohibited.
In connection with the definition of categories, or wherever in the convention it might
be considered most appropriate, the Department would desire to see an article inserted
absolutely prohibiting international trade in asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases for
use in war. In this connection you will recall that the Treaty between the United States,
Great Britain, France, Italy, and Japan, signed on February 6, 1922,49 contained, in
Article 5, a prohibition against the use of such gases. This Treaty, it may be noted, is
not yet effective as it has not been ratified by France. However, as this Government and
various other governments are clearly committed to the principle that poisonous gases
should not be used in warfare, there is every reason for you to press for the inclusion of
an article prohibiting the shipment of such gases in foreign trade for possible use in
time of war. The form which such an article might take, following in part the
phraseology of the Treaty of February 6, 1922, might be somewhat as follows:
The use in war of asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases, and all analogous
liquids, materials or devices, has been justly condemned by the general
opinion of the civilized world and a prohibition of such has been declared in
treaties to which a majority of the civilized Powers are parties. The High
Contracting Parties therefore agree absolutely to prohibit the export from
their territory of any such asphyxiating poisonous or other gases and all
analogous liquids, intended or designed for use in connection with operations
of war.
ARTICLE 2
“The High Contracting Parties undertake not to export themselves, and to
prohibit the export of arms, munitions and other implements of war
enumerated in Category I, except on the conditions hereinafter mentioned.”

Instead of a general prohibition against the export of arms and ammunition followed by
exceptions—a misleading form of drafting, since it is not the purpose of the
Convention to prohibit the export of arms or ammunition—the Department considers
that it would be preferable to combine Article Two with the first paragraph of Article
Three, as indicated below: ARTICLE 3
“Notwithstanding this prohibition, the High Contracting Parties may grant in
respect of arms, munitions and implements of war whose use is not
prohibited by international law, licenses for the export of arms, munitions and
implements of war enumerated in Category I, in the following conditions.”
If Article Two is suppressed as above indicated, the first paragraph of Article Three
might well be modified to read:
“Each of the High Contracting Parties agree that the following conditions
shall be applicable to the exportation or shipment from their territory,
including self-governing dominions, colonies, protectorates, mandated
territories, of all arms, munitions and implements of war enumerated in
Article I, Category 1, exclusive of arms shipped for the use of their own
military forces, whether such export is by or on behalf of the Government
itself or by private companies or individuals.”
ARTICLE 3, PARAGRAPH ONE
“Licenses are not to be granted except for a direct supply to a Government
recognized as such by the Government of the exporting country.”
This paragraph should be modified somewhat as follows:
“Exports* are not to be permitted except for a direct supply to a government
recognized by at least one of the High Contracting or adhering Powers or to
the authorities in any self governing dominion, colony, protectorate,
mandatory territory, or to the authorities in any federal or administrative
subdivision thereof, with the consent of the central authorities of the
importing country.”
ARTICLE THREE, PARAGRAPHS TWO AND THREE
(2) “The Government acquiring the consignment must act through
a duly accredited representative.”
(3) “Such representative must produce a written authority from the
Government he represents for the acquisition of each consignment,

which authority must state that the consignment is required for
delivery to that Government for its own use.”
To replace or to supplement the provisions of paragraphs two and three it is suggested
that the visa of the consul of the importing country upon the export declaration (or
license as the case may be) should be sufficient indication that the shipment referred to
in paragraph 1 is authorized by the Government of that State.
ARTICLE THREE, PARAGRAPHS FOUR, FIVE AND SIX
(4) “The form in which this license shall be given shall, so far as
practicable, be that given as an appendix to the present Convention.
“Each licence must contain a description sufficient for the
identification of the arms, munitions and implements of war to
which it relates and the names of the exporter and the acquiring
Government, ports of embarkation, and disembarkation, means of
transport, intended route and destination.
(5) “A separate licence shall be required for each separate
consignment which crosses the frontier of the exporting country,
whether by land, water or air, and shall accompany each separate
consignment.
(6) “A return of the licences granted shall be sent quarterly to the
Central International Office referred to in Article 8 of the present
Convention by the issuing Governments; importing Government,
when High Contracting Parties, shall also forward quarterly to the
Central International Office a return of the same licences enclosing
particulars of the heading under which the imported goods will
appear in their imports statistics.”
In the event that export declarations replace licenses, it would be necessary to make
corresponding changes in the above paragraphs.
If licenses are retained it would be important to clarify exactly what is meant by the
reference to the “return of the licenses” to the Central International Office. Does this
mean a report of the total export of various categories of arms based on information
obtained from the licenses or is it the intention that copies of the licenses themselves
should be forwarded to the Central Office? In this connection your attention is called to
the provision in Article 8 which would appear to indicate that the return of the licenses
covers an indication of the quantities and the destination of the arms exported under
licenses.

ARTICLE 4
“Further, licences for the export to private individuals of component parts
covered by Category 1 may be granted on the following conditions:
“The said component parts must be exported direct to a recognized
manufacturer of war material, duly authorized by his own Government, on a
declaration from him to the effect that the said component parts are required
by him.
“The Government which grants the licence and the Government of the
importer’s country shall take all adequate precautions to ensure that the said
component parts are sent direct to their destination.
“The licences granted in the terms of the present Article shall, so far as
practicable, be drafted according to the form annexed to the present
Convention, and shall conform to the provisions of the present Convention,
and particularly to those of Article 8.”
The provision that the exporting government shall “take all adequate precautions to
insure that the said component parts are sent direct to their destination” is one which it
would be difficult to carry out since the exporting country cannot control the shipment
after it has left its territory. This provision should be modified or eliminated.
With respect to the shipment of component parts, the following suggested redraft of
Article 4, prepared by the War Department, is submitted to you for your consideration.
“The export of items or component parts of items specified in Article 1,
including samples for demonstration, may be permitted to recognized
manufacturers, or to trade representatives of the exporter, on the following
conditions:
1. The said items or component parts of items must be exported direct
(a) to a recognized manufacturer of war material dulyauthorized by
his own government; or
(b) to a trade representative of the exporting manufacturer.
The export declaration (or license) must show that said item or component
part is required by the importer.
2. The government which permits the export and the government of the
importer’s country, shall take all reasonable precautions to insure that the said

items or component parts are sent direct to their destination.”
ARTICLE 5
“Without prejudice to any obligations to which they may have subscribed
under international conventions dealing with transit, the High Contracting
Parties, when they have reason to believe that any consignment of arms,
munitions or implements of war in transit through their territory’ does not
conform to the provisions of the present Convention, undertake to investigate
the circumstances and if necessary to prohibit the transit.”
It is suggested that before the word “transit” the word “land” be inserted. The
Department feels that it would be undesirable to conclude a convention which might
conceivably be construed as authorizing the detention, for examination, of ships
temporarily in transit through the territorial waters of one of the High Contracting
Parties merely because of the suspicion that such ship might possibly contain a
consignment of arms not properly authorized. Such a provision might easily lead to
abuse. Further, this Government would not wish to be obligated by an international
convention to exercise such a supervision with respect, for example, to ships passing
through the Panama Canal. Nor would it desire that such a supervision be exercised
under the present Convention upon American vessels passing through, or temporarily
remaining in, the territorial waters of other countries.
The Department feels that the phrase “does not conform to the provisions of the present
Convention” is too broad and general. It is suggested that it be replaced by the phrase
“is not properly authorized.”
Furthermore, it might be pointed out that a third State would presumably have no
opportunity to examine goods shipped in bond over its territory and shall not therefore
be under any obligation to control arms so shipped. A provision to the effect that
“articles shipped in bond” should not be disturbed might be considered in this
connection.

ARTICLE 6
“Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 7, arms and munitions in
Categories II and III may, if the exporter’s country so desires, be exported
without licence. Provided, nevertheless, that in the case of arms and
munitions of Category II the High Contracting Parties hereby undertake to
determine from the size, destination and other circumstances of each
consignment whether these arms and munitions are intended for war

purposes. If such is the case, the High Contracting Parties undertake that the
shipments shall become subject to Articles 2 to 5.”
While the Department concurs in the view that arms not in Category I should be
shipped without license (except in the case of the prohibited zone) there is no reason
why there should not be full publicity as to such shipments. In this way it would be
much easier to detect and thus to prevent the shipment in large quantities of arms which
are alleged to be for sporting purposes though in reality they may be for military
purposes. Each of the High Contracting Parties would be free to provide the necessary
machinery to secure the desired publicity but the items of information desired might
well be indicated in the convention and it might further be provided that all such
information should be sent to the International Central Office. The War Department
prefers that Article 6 be omitted.
ARTICLE 7
“The High Contracting Parties further undertake to prohibit the export of
arms, munitions and implements of war enumerated in Article I, to the
maritime or territorial zones specified in Article 9.
“Nevertheless, the High Contracting Parties may grant export licences,
notwithstanding this prohibition, provided that they conform to the
provisions of Articles 3 to 5. The competent authorities must satisfy
themselves, before issuing the licences, that the arms, munitions or
implements of war are not intended for export to any destination or for
disposal in any way contrary to the provisions of this Convention.”
If the Conference adopts the suggestion with respect to the separation of the
Convention into two parts, i. e. one covering publicity and the general control and the
other the prohibited areas, it would be necessary to indicate definitely in Article Seven
the extent of the prohibited zone. It is also desirable to include in this article a provision
for most-favored-nation treatment.
ARTICLE EIGHT
“A Central International Office shall be established by the Council of the
League of Nations for the purpose of collecting, preserving and publishing
documents of all kinds exchanged by the High Contracting Parties with
regard to the trade in and the distribution of arms, munitions and implements
of war, as well as the text of all laws, orders and regulations made for the
carrying out of the present Convention.
“Each of the High Contracting Parties shall publish an annual return of the
export licences which each may have granted in respect of arms, munitions

and implements of war in pursuance of the present Convention, mentioning
the quantities and destination of the arms, munitions and implements of war
to which the export licences refer. A copy of this return shall be sent to the
Central International Office.
“The High Contracting Parties further undertake to forward to the Central
International Office all information which they will be in a position to
provide relating to consignments under contracts entered into before the
coming into force of the present Convention.”
It is clear to the Department that any provision that the Central International Office
should be established by the Council of the League of Nations would be objectionable
and would seriously prejudice the prospect of the ratification of the Convention. It is
noted that provision is made in a subsequent Article for a “conditional or partial
adherence.” The Department feels, however, that it would be unfortunate for the
Convention to be drafted in a form to make amendments or reservations essential. You
should therefore endeavor to secure an alteration in Article Eight so that that Article
shall not provide for the designation of the International Office by the Council of the
League. In this connection the Department has noted, on pages 88 and 191 of the
League publication,50 that various proposals for the separation of the International
Office from the League have been made but not adopted by the League committees on
the ground, chiefly, that committees of the League could hardly themselves suggest that
the Central Committee be entirely divorced from the League. The International
Conference, however, being entirely independent of the League, would be in a different
position, and it would be appropriate for you to indicate this Government’s view that
the Central International Body should be established by agreement among the High
Contracting Parties or that it should be set up pursuant to the agreement of certain
specified Powers.
Upon the opening of the Conference the Department would be glad to receive from you
any further suggested formulae to cover this point which you feel might profitably be
suggested to the Conference.
It is further suggested that the last paragraph of Article Eight be omitted. There will be
considerable time between the signature of any convention and its going into effect.
Arms manufacturers will be clearly on notice as to the conditions which they may be
called upon to meet, in the event the Convention is made effective, and it would
therefore seem proper that all shipments after Convention goes into effect should be
subject to its terms, whether contracted for prior to or after such date. It would seem
unnecessary, and perhaps prove to be impracticable, to endeavor to secure specific
information relating to shipments made before the coming into force of the convention
since the legal provisions for securing such information might not then be in effect in
certain countries. However, in view of the fact that the United States already secures

and publishes such data there would be no serious objection to this provision unless it
meant, in effect, that the United States would be the only country to supply this
information to the Central Bureau.
It is felt that this Article should further be amended to provide for a more frequent
publication of statistics by the Central Bureau, which might well be done quarterly
rather than annually.
Further it should be provided that the High Contracting Parties may submit to the
Central Bureau information which they receive as to infractions of the Convention for
circulation by the Central Bureau to the High Contracting Parties. It is doubtful,
however, whether the Central International Office should undertake to pass upon the
information so furnished. It should rather act merely as a channel of transmission and
of publicity.
Finally it would be desirable to provide in Article 8 that the cost of the maintenance of
the Central Bureau should be apportioned equitably among the High Contracting
Parties. Possibly the best basis for computing the cost would be according to the Trade
of each country as reported to the Central International Office.
III. THE QUESTION OF THE PROHIBITED AREAS AND THE CONTROL TO BE EXERCISED THEREIN
ARTICLES NINE TO TWENTY-FOUR, INCLUSIVE
As already indicated, it is not felt that this section of the proposed Convention vitally
concerns the United States Government, which has no territorial possessions, colonies,
dependencies or mandates within the zones contemplated as prohibited areas.
The only question which would appear to arise, so far as this Government is concerned,
with respect to the Articles in question is whether it could consent that its nationals and
their trade should be subject to the supervision proposed. As far as the provision for
land surveillance is concerned, it seems clear that this Government could not object to
any reasonable measure of control exercised in territory under the sovereign or
mandatory control of other Powers. It would, of course, insist that such control should
not result in discrimination, denial of the principle of equality of opportunity, or undue
interference with legitimate trade. Subject, however, to these reservations, the
Department would not be disposed to object to any agreement which might be reached
among the interested Powers for a uniformity of control in the matter of importation of
arms into the so-called “prohibited zone” if the zone is under the authority of the
several Contracting Powers.
This Government would not, however, consent to third Powers exercising any form of
control over its trade with other sovereign countries, subject of course to the rules
applicable in time of war to contraband or blockade.

It should further be pointed out that this Government could not consider itself bound by
any such provision as that included in the penultimate paragraph of Article Thirteen,
which states: “In cases where a violation has been duly proved, no further transit
license shall be granted to the offending State without the previous consent of the
Council of the League of Nations.”
With respect to the question of maritime supervision, the question would naturally arise
whether this Government could recognize the right of the High Contracting Parties to
visit and search on the sea outside of territorial waters.
The Department understands from Article Eighteen that the supervision contemplated
applies to “native vessels of less than five hundred tons.” From the foregoing it appears
unlikely that vessels flying the American flag would be affected. As far as the
Department can judge from the facts before it, it would not be disposed to object to the
exercise of supervision of this character by other Powers within certain specified zones
adjacent to their own territories with respect to native vessels of the tonnage suggested,
but it would not undertake to participate in any such supervision.
As already suggested the Department is inclined to believe that it would not serve any
useful purpose for this government to become a party to a convention comprising
provisions similar to those in Articles 9–24. However, as this government is a party to
the Brussels Act of 1890 which contains somewhat similar provisions the Department
would be prepared to give careful consideration to the question in the event that you
should affirmatively recommend the signature of such a convention.
ARTICLE 25
from operation until the restoration of peace so far as concerns any export
and transit of arms, munitions or implements of war to or on behalf of any of
the belligerents recognized as such by the exporting country and the countries
of transit, provided such recognition has previously been communicated to
the other High Contracting Parties.”
You may wish to consider a modification of this Article similar to that suggested in the
case of Article 3, paragraph 1, namely the substitution for “the exporting country” of
the phrase “one of the High Contracting or Adhering Powers”.
It is further suggested that “and the countries of transit” be eliminated from Article 25.
It is felt that this question of the right of the third State to stop munitions in transit
destined for a recognized belligerent should be dealt with according to the applicable
principles of international law. A third State, because it does not recognize the
belligerent in question, should not be placed under any special obligation by this
Convention to stop arms in transit.

It is further recommended that the provision that recognition of belligerency must be
communicated to the other High Contracting Power be omitted.
In the event that the license system is abandoned this article would be unnecessary but
in that event Article 3, paragraph 1 should be amended to include “belligerents.”
ARTICLE 26
“Any Government may, on signing or adhering to the present Convention,
declare that it accepts its provisions partially or conditionally, provided that
the High Contracting Parties consent and that it does not thereby affect the
effectiveness of the supervision of the trade in arms, munitions and
implements of war.
“Nevertheless, the Convention shall only apply to Powers availing
themselves of the option provided in the previous paragraph if, within the
period of one year from the notification by the French Government of the
deposit of their ratification (or adherence), partial or conditional, no
opposition to such ratification (or adherence) has been raised by any of the
Contracting Parties.”
No comment.
ARTICLE 27
“All the provisions of former general international Conventions relating to
the matters dealt with in the present Convention, including the Convention
for the Control of the Trade in Arms and Ammunition and the protocol signed
at Saint Germain-en-Laye September 10th, 1919, shall be considered as
abrogated in so far as they are binding between the Powers which are Parties
to the present Convention.
“The present Convention shall in no way affect the rights and obligations
which may arise out of the provisions either of the Covenant of the League of
Nations or of the Treaties of Peace signed in 1919 and 1920 at Versailles,
Neuilly, Saint German and Trianon or of the Treaty limiting Naval
Armaments signed at Washington on February 6th, 1922,51 and the
provisions of Agreements registered with the League of Nations and
published by the League up to the date of coming into force of the present
Convention, so far as the Powers which are signatories of or benefit by the
said Treaties or Agreements are concerned.”
Your attention is particularly directed to the provisions in Article 27 that the
“Convention shall in no way affect the rights and obligations which may arise out of

the provisions …52 of Agreements registered with the League of Nations and published
by the League up to the date of coming into force of the present Convention. In view of
the large number of agreements which have been so registered, the Department desires
you, before acquiescing in any such provision, to ascertain whether any of the Powers
parties to the proposed Convention have concluded and registered arrangements the
terms of which conflict with those of the proposed convention. In the event that such is
the case, the Department would wish you to consider the bearing of such arrangements
upon the effectiveness of the control proposed before consenting to the insertion of any
such provision as that quoted above.
ARTICLE 28
“The Council of the League of Nations shall cause to be published an annual
report on the operation on [of] the present Convention.
“This report shall be presented to the Assembly of the League of Nations.”
The Central International Office should publish the report quarterly rather than
annually. If the Council of the League also desires to make a report, it would of course
be entirely free to do so without any provision in the Convention to that effect.
ARTICLE 29
“The present Convention, of which the French and English texts shall both be
authentic, is subject to ratification. It shall bear today’s date and shall be open
for signature by the Powers until . . . . . . . . . . (date).
“Each Power shall address its ratification to the French Government, which
shall at once notify the deposit of ratification to each of the other signatory
Powers.
“The instruments of ratification shall then remain deposited in the archives of
the French Government.”
No comment.

ARTICLE 30
“The High Contracting Parties will use their best endeavors to secure the
accession to the present Convention of the other States, whether members of
the League or not. On and after . . . . . . . . . . (date) the present Convention
may be acceded to by any Power. Accession shall be effected by an

instrument communicated to the French Government, which shall at once
notify such deposit to all Powers which are signatories of or accede to the
Convention.
“The instruments of accession shall remain deposited in the archives of the
French Government.”
Omit “whether members of the League or not.”
ARTICLE 31
“Disputes between the Parties relating to the interpretation or application of
this Convention shall, if they cannot be settled by direct negotiation, be
referred for decision to the Permanent Court of International Justice. In case
either or both of the Parties to such a dispute should not be parties to the
Protocol of Signature of the Permanent Court of International Justice, the
dispute shall be referred, at the choice of the Parties, either to the Permanent
Court of International Justice or to a court of arbitration.”
It might be well to insert after “Justice” the following: “to the Hague Tribunal.”
ARTICLE 32
“The present Convention will not come into force until it has been ratified by
twelve Powers, among whom shall be the following: Belgium, the United
States of America, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan and Russia.
“The date of its coming into force shall be the … day after the receipt by the
French Government of the twelfth ratification. Thereafter, the present
Convention will take effect in the case of each Party … days after the receipt
of its ratification or accession.”
The important point to be considered in connection with Article 32 is that a sufficient
number of arms producing States should be included among the Powers whose
ratification is necessary before the Convention enters into full force and effect. Further,
it should be noted that if any of the participating or adhering powers have not been
recognized by the United States the Department might desire to consider whether a
reservation at the time of signature would be necessary to safeguard its position.
ARTICLE 33
“The present Convention may be denounced by any Party thereto after the
expiration of ten years from the date when it came into force in respect of
that Party. Denunciation shall be effected by notification in writing addressed

to the French Government, which shall forthwith transmit copies of such
notification to the other Parties, informing them of the date on which it was
received.
“A denunciation shall take effect two years after the date on which the
notification thereof was received by the French Government, and shall
operate only in respect of the notifying State.”
The Department considers that the period of ten years for the effectiveness of the
Convention is far too long. The question of the control of the traffic in arms is yet in its
experimental stage, and this Government would not desire to be bound for any such
protracted period without an opportunity to examine the effectiveness and practicability
of the contemplated procedure. It is therefore suggested that “ten years” be replaced by
“three years” and that denunciation should take effect “one year” after notification.
It might be well to add that after the expiration of three years the Convention, unless
denounced, would continue to remain in force until one year after denunciation.
ARTICLE 34
“The High Contracting Parties agree that, at the conclusion of a period of five
years, the present Convention shall, in the light of the experience then gained,
be subject to revision upon the request of a third of the said High Contracting
Parties.”
“Five years” should be replaced by “three years” to bring this Article in line with the
preceding one.
In conclusion, the Department desires again to emphasize the position indicated in the
early pages of this instruction; namely, that it would welcome any agreement which,
while protecting the legitimate interests of this Government, might be calculated to
lessen the evils of the illicit trade in arms and war material and thereby aid in the
preservation of peace.
In working toward this end, this Government does not desire that its representatives at
the Conference should be bound by instructions on points of drafting or phraseology. It
is believed, however, that the foregoing instructions will serve to indicate the points of
particular interest to this Government.
You should consider the proposed rephrasing of the various Articles of the Convention
as suggestive rather than as mandatory. In the event that the discussions at the
Conference should raise questions involving substantial modifications on matters of
principle, you should communicate with the Department for further instructions.

Before any agreement is signed, the Department desires you to indicate the final form
of the Convention in order that specific instructions with respect to the signature of the
Convention may be given.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
41 Theodore E. Burton, chairman of the delegation, member of the Committee on
Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives; Hugh S. Gibson, vice chairman of the
delegation, Minister to Switzerland; Rear Admiral Andrew T. Long, Navy Department;
Allen W. Dulles, Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs, Department of State;
Brig. Gen. C. L’H. Buggies, Assistant Chief of Ordnance, War Department.
42 Charles E. Herring, commercial attaché at Berlin; Alan F. Winslow, secretary of
legation at Berne; Maj. George V. Strong, General Staff, War Department; Comdr.
Herbert F. Leary, assistant naval attaché at London. Maj. Earl J. Atkinson, War
Department, was also later attached to the delegation as technical adviser.
44 Not printed; for correspondence on the subject referred to in this paragraph, see
Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 17 ff.
47 League of Nations, Conference for the Control of the International Trade in Arms,
* In each case the text of the provision as contained in the Draft Convention is quoted
and then followed by discussion and comment. [Footnote in the original.]
48 William M. Malloy (ed.), Treaties, Conventions, etc., Between the United States of
America and Other Powers, 1776–1909 (Washington, Government Printing Office,
* (FOOTNOTE: In the event that it is decided that licenses rather than export declarations are
to be provided this and subsequent articles should be modified accordingly.) 50 See
51 For text of the treaty limiting naval armament, see Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p.
247.
52 Omission indicated in the original instruction.

[Document 32]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
WASHINGTON, April 16, 1925.
No. 2
SIRS: With reference to the Department’s general instruction to you of even date with
respect to the forthcoming international conference to be held at Geneva on May 4th, to
consider the conclusion of a convention with respect to arms traffic, there is given
herewith for your information and guidance a statement of the views of the Department
with respect to the attitude of the American Delegation in the event of the participation
in the conference of representatives of the régime now functioning in Russia or the
signature of, or adherence to, the proposed convention by Russia through that régime.
It is assumed that no action by the American Delegation or by this Government should
be construed or open to a fair construction as constituting recognition of the regime
now functioning in Russia.
The bare participation of the United States through an American Delegation in a
conference to deal with traffic in arms called by the League of Nations in which
delegates representing the Soviet régime are also participants would signify nothing.
Again, the bare signature of a multi-lateral Convention by American delegates which
was signed also by Soviet delegates would not in itself constitute recognition of the
Soviet Government as the Government of Russia, although possibly the formal
ratification of the Convention without explanation might be subject to divergent
constructions. It may be observed in this connection that the Allied Powers in
permitting Russia to sign with them the so-called Straits Convention53 at Rome on
August 14, 1923, did not regard their action as constituting recognition of the Soviet
regime. No reservations were made by them. It has been pointed out, however, by a
recent commentator, Ernest LaGarde, that it is difficult to reconcile with non-
recognition what took place. Nevertheless, he points out that the Soviet Government
made no effort to claim that its participation and signature constituted recognition of
their régime as the Government of Russia.
In the present case, however, Article 32 of the proposed Convention declares that it
shall not come into force until it shall have been ratified by twelve Powers, among
whom are specified both the United States and Russia. While the Russian state as such
may be said in a strict sense to be the party contemplated, that state nevertheless is now

acting through a régime not recognized by the United States as the Government of
Russia. Article 32 would thus seem to indicate that the Convention might become
operative upon the action of Russia as the twelfth state, making known its consent to
the Convention through the medium of the Soviet regime, and that consequently all of
the signatory Powers were disposed to permit the arrangement to become operative and
binding upon each through the action of the Soviet régime. Such consent unless
explained might well be taken to amount to recognition of that régime as the
Government of Russia.
Again, it would be highly unwise for a country, such as our own, not recognizing the
Soviet régime, to undertake any contractual obligation with respect to Russia so long as
it was represented by a regime not recognized by us.
Accordingly, it is desired that, as a safeguard against any possible misconstruction of
the attitude of the United States in signing a Convention at Geneva, or in accepting a
Convention signed in its behalf, appropriate reservation be made covering the three
following points: first, the effect of signing; secondly, the effect of failure on the part of
the United States to object to the operation of Article 32 of the Convention; and,
thirdly, the suspension of the operation of the Convention as between the United States
and a signatory or adhering Power represented by a régime not recognized by the
United States until such Power or signatory is represented by a Government recognized
as such by the United States. The text of a reservation covering these points is set forth
herein below.
It may be observed that this Government has consented in correspondence with other
interested Powers to permit Russia to adhere to the treaty concerning Spitzbergen under
terms which could in no wise be regarded as implying recognition of its Soviet
Government.54 It is understood that there is no objection abroad to this action by the
United States, although there is not yet entire agreement as to the phraseology to be
used with reference to the Soviet Government.
In order to deprive the Soviet régime of cause to complain that the United States is
thwarting its effort to represent Russia in its foreign affairs, it is suggested that it might
be unwise for the American Delegation to endeavor to have stricken from Article 32 the
provision with respect to Russia. So long as this Government is abundantly able to
prevent misconstruction of its acts or those of the American Delegation by appropriate
reservations, it should safeguard its action by that method rather than by aggressive
steps serving to weaken the position of Russia or its delegates in the conference.
RESERVATION
The action of the American Delegation in signing this Convention is taken with the
clear understanding that it is not to be construed as constituting the recognition by the

United States of the regime or entity functioning in any signatory or adhering Power as
the Government thereof which is not recognized by the United States as the
Government of such signatory or adhering Power; secondly, that the failure of the
United States to object to the coming into force of this Convention through the
ratification thereof by any specified Power pursuant to Article 32 through the medium
of a regime or entity functioning therein which has not been recognized by the United
States’ as the Government of such Power, shall not be regarded as constituting the
recognition by the United States of such régime or entity as the Government of the
Power in whose behalf it acts; and, thirdly, that the acceptance of this Convention by
the United States shall not put into force any contractual obligation between itself and
any signatory or adhering Power represented by a régime or entity not recognized by
the United States as the Government thereof until such Power is represented by a
Government recognized by the United States.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
Treaty Series, vol. XXVIII, p. 115.

[Document 33]
The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of
State
GENEVA, May 13, 1925—midnight.
28. The French delegation apparently desire to secure an insertion in the, draft
convention of a provision to the effect that the high contracting parties undertake not to
authorize the exportation of war material to countries where domestic legislation
prohibits the importation of such material. Their objective is to secure the cooperation
of exporting states in making effective the provisions of the treaties of Versailles, St.
Germain, Trianon and Neuilly which prohibit the importation of war material by
Germany, Austria, Hungary and Bulgaria.
A draft provision to the above effect has already been circulated by the Uruguayan
representative and may shortly be discussed by the conference. While delegation
doubts whether it would be practicable to attempt to secure legislation to make
effective any such provision it would appreciate Department’s instructions.
BURTON

[Document 34]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation
(Burton)
in your last sentence and believes the insertion of such a provision superfluous to the
purposes of the convention. As it is understood that the suggestion of the French
Delegation is directed at the four countries you mention, it is not considered that this
provision, applicable only to a particular set of countries, is germane to the scope of a
general convention.
GREW

[Document 35]
The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of
State
31. Egyptian delegate has called to attention of Conference that in view of regime of
capitulations, Egyptian Government would not be in a position to enforce against
foreigners of capitulatory countries penalties for infractions of a convention to control
of arms treaty [sic], Egyptian delegate proposed: (a) that Egyptian internal regulations
be made applicable to all foreigners; (b) that consular authorities be instructed to
enforce or assist the Egyptian Government in enforcing the observance of such
regulations by their nationals; (c) that the capitulatory powers be moved to instruct
their consuls and consular judges in Egypt to apply to infractions of the Egyptian laws
committed by their nationals the laws and penalties applicable in their respective
countries to similar infractions.
To carry out the above Egyptian delegate suggests “that the text of article two or three
should contain an explicit statement that the high contracting parties should institute
legislation in their respective countries to render effective the prohibition of export by
unauthorized persons and that the introduction of such legislation should nowhere be
delayed beyond a date to be fixed by the conference.”
While delegation appreciates the problem facing the countries where extraterritorial
rights are enjoyed and situation would presumably be somewhat similar in China and
Persia to that in Egypt it is considered that it would create an unfortunate precedent and
be unwise even if it should be legally possible to provide that our consuls exercising
extraterritorial jurisdiction should enforce provisions of Egyptian law.
Delegation considers however that it might be desirable if Department sees no legal
difficulty to include in the convention a provision to the following effect: “The high
contracting parties each insofar as it is concerned agree that the penalties which may be
prescribed under legislation to carry out the terms of the present convention shall so far
as possible be made applicable to their nationals in the case of any infractions of the
convention by their nationals within the territory of states where extraterritorial rights
are exercised.”
BURTON

[Document 36]
The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of
State
consideration proposal made by Uruguayan representative on French initiative,
delegation considers that the principle involved if it could be properly phrased might
serve as a useful precedent for securing cooperation of foreign powers in making
effective provisions of our prohibition law.
As presented at this afternoon’s meeting of Legal Committee, Uruguayan proposal was
vigorously attacked by German and Hungarian service who received considerable
support especially from the South American delegates. Proposal would have been
defeated if put to vote but postponement was decided to enable consultation to
ascertain whether formula could not be found which Germans and others could accept.
In the event as seems likely that the redrafted text provides that the country whose laws
prohibit importation of arms should itself communicate these laws to the other high
contracting powers with view to securing cooperation of such powers in preventing
exportation of arms in violation of the laws of the importing country the delegation
would be inclined not to oppose this provision. It is of course understood that no
absolute obligation should be placed upon exporting country to pass upon laws of any
other country but exporting state would have the opportunity of cooperation insofar as
possible or desirable preventing acts on its own territory which would lead to violation
of the laws of the importing state.

This matter will be further discussed Monday afternoon and further instructions would
be much appreciated.
BURTON

[Document 37]
The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation
(Burton)
nationals in extraterritorial countries under Section 4086 of the Revised Statutes would
without provision to that effect in the Convention include laws which may be passed to
carry out terms of Convention primarily in this country. However, Department would
not object to provision substantially as suggested by you. The meaning would be
clearer if words “under legislation” were changed to “under their respective laws.”
KELLOGG

[Document 38]
The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation
(Burton)
[Paraphrase]
suggested in third paragraph, its utility to the convention seems doubtful. If it does
obligate a signatory government to prevent action, which though legal within its own
territory might be contrary to the laws of another country, then it would prove
embarrassing.
Department desires you, therefore, to oppose the proposal of the Uruguayan delegate as
Under such provision of the treaty, if Latin American states were to pass laws
forbidding importation of arms and then communicated them to the United States, the
freedom of action of this Government with regard to supporting deserving
revolutionary governments would be seriously hampered.
KELLOGG
55 At the meeting on May 18 of the Legal Committee the amendment proposed by the
Uruguayan delegate was provisionally withdrawn, but was not later revived. See
League of Nations, Proceedings of the Conference for the Supervision of the
International Trade in Arms, p. 594.

[Document 39]
The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of
State
[Received 4:30 p.m.]
42. Article 31 appears to imply compulsory obligation to submit to arbitration all
disputes arising under the convention. Delegation desires early instructions whether it
will not be necessary to modify this article to provide that in each case calling for
arbitration a separate agreement should be reached by the high contracting parties
concerned according to their constitutional requirements. In this connection delegation
has considered article II of arbitration treaty between the United States and Sweden of
From preliminary discussion it seems likely that other powers would object to
modification of text of treaty which would tend to weaken obligation on other states to
submit to arbitration but would not object to separate reservation on our part. If the
Department desires a reservation to this article it may therefore be necessary that such
reservations be made at time of signing or of ratification. If Department wishes
delegation to endeavor to secure modified existing text please telegraph exact
phraseology desired.
BURTON

[Document 40]
The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation
(Burton)
(1) Department does not consider it necessary to procure modification of
Article 31 in sense suggested. Questions to be arbitrated under the
Convention are of a character which can so clearly be foreseen, the
Department is of the opinion that to require a provision like that in the
Convention with Sweden concerning arbitration of broad classes of disputes
might detract from the effectiveness of this agreement and quite likely would
be seriously objected to by other countries. You are authorized, therefore,
subject to final instructions, to sign the agreement without reservations but,
of course, it must be distinctly understood that when it is submitted to the
Senate for approval, the Senate may make some reservation on this point.
Article 31, Department prefers to leave the last clause of Article 31 as it is,
reading “either to the Permanent Court of International Justice or to a court of
arbitration.” This would include the Hague Court of Arbitration or any other
arbitral tribunal we should agree to.
KELLOGG

[Document 41]
The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of
State
54. Military and Naval Committee have adopted a report to General Committee, going
on record as to the need for dealing adequately with the subject of gas warfare. Report
states that present Conference is not competent to deal with the subject and
recommends that an international conference be called for the purpose as soon as
possible.
It seems evident that this is part of a plan to keep this question in the hands of the
League Secretariat. Delegation aware of possible difficulties in our accepting invitation
to such a conference. On the other hand if we decline to participate we shall appear in
the unenviable light of having started the whole movement without a sincere desire for
results.
One possible solution lies in the fact that a convention on this subject could be drafted
very briefly and simply and that it does not really require the calling of a large
international conference.
We could probably keep direction of the whole matter in our own hands if, on the
presentation of the Military and Naval Committee report, delegation could state that it
welcomed this evidence of a desire to deal effectively with the problem of gas warfare
and that it was authorized to state that as soon as the powers represented at this
Conference as well as other interested powers felt that it is opportune to take further
steps in this matter the President of the United States will be glad to extend an
invitation to such countries to designate their diplomatic representatives in Washington
or such other representatives as they may desire with a view [to] agreeing upon the text
of a convention with regard to the prohibition [of] the use of poison gas.
Such a suggestion made at the right moment could hardly be refused and if Department
feels that it is desirable for the United States to keep the initiative which it took both at
the Washington Conference and here with regard to poison gas the above action may be
necessary. Further, we would thereby avoid the embarrassment of making reservations
as to attendance at a possible future conference which would probably be held under
the auspices of the League.

Delegation appreciates that we are already a party to a treaty on this subject and that at
the present time we might not desire to go further than we have already gone in that
treaty. It further realizes that there may be other plans for a conference of a very much
broader scope and that the above suggestion may not harmonize with such plans.
However, it is felt that this suggestion should be clearly placed before the Department
and as the report of the Military and Naval Committee may be considered at early
meeting it is very important the instructions be received at the earliest possible
moment. Consider it imperative that this or some equivalent action be taken so that our
country may retain initiative and that course of our delegation be consistent with its
original action in pressing this matter.
BURTON

[Document 42]
The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation
(Burton)
[Paraphrase]
original action of delegation. As means of retaining initiative in matter which you have
proposed and of offering substitute which would indicate no wavering from principle
involved, I offer the suggestion that you propose resolution for adoption by Conference
which could be inserted in any final act (should there be one) somewhat as follows:
“The Conference expresses hope that each of signatory and adhering powers
will make appropriate endeavor to prohibit in their respective territories the
export of any asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases intended or designed for
use in connection with the operations of war.”
On receipt by Conference of report of Military and Naval Committee, it would appear
entirely appropriate, furthermore, for you to refer to article 5 of Washington treaty
relating to use of noxious gases in warfare, and to point out that article 5 affords
machinery necessary to give effect to proposed resolution in that any nonsignatory
power may adhere to the treaty by communicating to this Government an instrument of
adherence; this adherence by nonsignatory powers could be made to apply solely to
provision regarding noxious gases.

In the belief, however, that it is very important to keep initiative of this matter in our
hands, and that these proposals may not be sufficient, I shall consult the President
tomorrow in regard to whether he will be willing to call a conference in event the other
powers indicated willingness to attend. He might desire appropriation for expenses
unless he should under present authorization of Congress call a further naval
disarmament conference, when the other could be made a part of it as it was during the
last one. I shall cable you after consultation with the President.
KELLOGG

[Document 43]
The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation
(Burton)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 4, 1925—[(?) p.m.]
with the President you are authorized, if in your opinion it is wise, to indicate that if
powers represented at present Conference, as well as other interested powers, feel that
moment is opportune to take further steps in this matter, the President will be glad to
extend invitation as you suggest. As I indicated in telegram referred to above, if the
President should call a further naval disarmament conference, he would probably make
the other a part of it as was done last time.
KELLOGG

[Document 44]
The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of
State
GENEVA, June 4, 1925—noon.
[Received 2:40 p.m.]
proposed resolution prohibiting exportation of gas almost unanimously rejected in
committee on the ground that Pacific Ocean [sic] placed nonproducing countries at a
disadvantage and was technically impracticable. Suggestion of separate adherence to
article 5 of Washington treaty also was criticized on the ground that treaty had not been
ratified. Delegation does not regard the convening of a formal conference to deal with
this subject as necessary but refers to suggestion in [my] number 54,57 that diplomatic
representatives at Washington or such other representatives as countries might desire to
send could meet with the Secretary of State on the call of the President. Form of
convention might be taken almost bodily from Washington treaty. Should be glad to
receive further instructions as soon as possible.58
BURTON
58 No further action appears to have been taken.

[Document 45]
The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of
State
and Tuesday and effort will be made to sign on Wednesday. As time of signature will
follow immediately after the end of the discussion I trust that Department will promptly
authorize signature provided of course no new or objectionable features are introduced
into the treaty and provided further that a reasonable number of powers are also
prepared to sign.
As there has been a general disposition to meet our views on all the points of
importance the delegation has raised I do not anticipate any unfavorable developments
prior to signature.
I sincerely trust that your authorization may reach me by Tuesday June 16th.
I must say that our readiness to sign may have a decided influence upon the attitude of
other delegations and that our failure to sign here and now, unless we had some good
and sufficient reason for withholding signature, and I know of no such reason, would
tend to place largely upon our delegation a rather heavy responsibility for what might
perhaps be interpreted as an inconclusive termination of this conference. It is further to
be recalled that on our insistence and with a view to securing our signature and
facilitating eventual ratification the whole machinery of the convention itself has been
separated from the control of the League of Nations.
Latest modifications in text and indication of new material are being telegraphed
separately.59
BURTON
59 Not printed.
59 Not printed.

[Document 46]
The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation
(Burton)
if in your judgment no new or objectionable features are introduced into the treaty prior
to the time of signature, and provided that a reasonable number of powers including
several of the principal arms producing nations are also prepared to sign, you are
authorized to sign the convention. Report at earliest possible moment for press release
both the hour of signature and who will sign for this Government, and send flash after
signature.
KELLOGG

[Document 47]
The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of
State
GENEVA, [June 17, 1925—(?) p.m.]
90. Gibson and I signed convention, final act, protocol of signature and gas protocol at
12 noon. Did not sign final declaration.60
BURTON
portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49].

[Document 48]
The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of
State
GENEVA, June 17, 1925.
[Received June 30.]
DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I am enclosing a writing signed by the three Delegates who did not join
in the signature of the Treaties. This might assume considerable importance and I send
it to you.
The Conference came to a close at three o’clock today and in reviewing what has been
done, I think we have great reason for satisfaction in the results.
Very cordially yours,
THEODORE E. BURTON

[Enclosure]
Statement Approving the Provisions of the Convention and Consenting to Its Signature
The undersigned Delegates, having examined the text of the Convention for the Control
of the Trade in Arms, Ammunition and Implements of War, approve of its provisions
and consent to the signing thereof by the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the
American Delegation.
A. T. LONG
A. W. DULLES
C. L’H. RUGGLES
GENEVA, June 17, 1925.

[Document 49]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, July 24, 1925.
[Received August 11.]
No. 471
SIR: In compliance with the instructions contained in the Department’s telegram No. 61,
various Acts signed at Geneva on June 17, 1925, at the conclusion of the Conference
for the Control of the Traffic in Arms.63 These additional documents, which have just
been made available, are being transmitted by open mail.
I have [etc.]
HUGH GIBSON

[Enclosure 164 ]
Convention for the Supervision of the International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in Implements of War,
Signed at Geneva, June 17, 192565
GERMANY, THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, AUSTRIA, BELGIUM, BRAZIL, THE BRITISH EMPIRE, CANADA, THE IRISH FREE STATE AND INDIA,
BULGARIA, CHILE, CHINA, COLOMBIA, DENMARK, EGYPT, SPAIN, ESTHONIA, ABYSSINIA, FINLAND, FRANCE, GREECE, HUNGARY, ITALY, JAPAN,
LATVIA, LITHUANIA, LUXEMBURG, NICARAGUA, NORWAY, PANAMA, THE NETHERLANDS, PERSIA, POLAND, PORTUGAL, ROUMANIA, SALVADOR, SIAM,
SWEDEN, SWITZERLAND, THE KINGDOM OF THE SERBS, CROATS AND SLOVENES, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, TURKEY, URUGUAY AND VENEZUELA,
Whereas the international trade in arms and ammunition and in implements of war
should be subjected to a general and effective system of supervision and publicity;
Whereas such a system is not provided by existing Treaties and Conventions; Whereas
in relation to certain areas of the world a special supervision of this trade is necessary
in order to render more effective the measures adopted by the various Governments as
regards both the import of such arms and ammunition and implements of war into these
areas and their export therefrom; and Whereas the export or import of arms,
ammunition or implements, the use of which in war is prohibited by International Law,
must not be permitted for such purpose; Have decided to conclude a Convention and

have accordingly appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: [Here follow the names of the
Plenipotentiaries.]66

Who, having communicated their full powers, found in good and due form, HAVE AGREED AS
FOLLOWS: CHAPTER I.—Categories ARTICLE 1
For the purposes of the present Convention, five Categories of arms, ammunition and
implements are established: CATEGORY I. ARMS, AMMUNITION AND IMPLEMENTS OF WAR EXCLUSIVELY DESIGNED AND INTENDED FOR LAND, SEA
OR AERIAL WARFARE
A.—Arms, ammunition and implements exclusively designed and intended for land,
sea or aerial warfare, which are or shall be comprised in the armament of the armed
forces of any State, or which, if they have been but are no longer comprised in such
armament, are capable of military to the exclusion of any other use, except such arms,
ammunition and implements which, though included in the above definition, are
covered by other Categories.
Such arms, ammunition and implements are comprised in the following twelve
headings:
1. Rifles, muskets, carbines.
2. (a) Machine-guns, automatic rifles and machine-pistols of all calibres;
(b) Mountings for machine-guns;
(c) Interrupter gears.
above.
4. Gun-sighting apparatus including aerial gun-sights and bombsights, and
fire-control apparatus.
or above;
(c) Mortars of all kinds;

(d) Gun carriages, mountings, recuperators, accessories for mountings.
6. Projectiles and ammunition for the arms enumerated in No. 5 above.
7. Apparatus for the discharge of bombs, torpedoes, depth charges and other
kinds of projectiles.
8. (a) Grenades;
(c) Land mines, submarine mines, fixed or floating, depth charges;
(d) Torpedoes.
9. Appliances for use with the above arms and apparatus.
10. Bayonets.
11. Tanks and armoured cars.
12. Arms and ammunition not specified in the above enumeration.

B.—Component parts, completely finished, of the articles covered by A above, if
capable of being utilised only in the assembly or repair of the said articles, or as spare
parts.
CATEGORY II. ARMS AND AMMUNITION CAPABLE OF USE BOTH FOR MILITARY AND OTHER PURPOSES
A.—1. Pistols and revolvers, automatic or self-loading, and developments of the same,
designed for single-handed use or fired from the shoulder, of a calibre greater than 6.5
mm. and length of barrel greater than 10 cm.
2. Fire-arms designed, intended or adapted for non-military purposes, such as sport or
personal defence, that will fire cartridges that can be fired from fire-arms in Category I;
other rifled fire-arms firing from the shoulder, of a calibre of 6 mm. or above, not
included in Category I, with the exception of rifled fire-arms with a “breakdown”
action.
3. Ammunition for the arms enumerated in the above two headings, with the exception
of ammunition covered by Category I.
4. Swords and lances.

B.—Component parts, completely finished, of the articles covered by A above, if
capable of being utilised only in the assembly or repair of the said articles, or as spare
parts.
CATEGORY III. VESSELS OF WAR AND THEIR ARMAMENT
1. Vessels of war of all kinds.
2. Arms, ammunition and implements of war mounted on board vessels of
war and forming part of their normal armament.
CATEGORY IV
1. Aircraft, assembled or dismantled.
2. Aircraft engines.
CATEGORY V
1. Gunpowder and explosives, except common black gunpowder.
2. Arms and ammunition other than those covered by Categories I and II,
such as pistols and revolvers of all models, rifled weapons with a “break-
down” action, other rifled fire-arms of a calibre of less than 6 mm. designed
for firing from the shoulder, smooth-bore shot-guns, guns with more than one
barrel of which at least one barrel is smooth-bore, fire-arms firing rimfire
ammunition, muzzle-loading fire-arms.

CHAPTER II.—Supervision and Publicity ARTICLE 2
The High Contracting Parties undertake not to export or permit the export of articles
covered by Category I, except in accordance with the following conditions:
1. The export shall be for a direct supply to the Government of the importing
State or, with the consent of such Government, to a public authority
subordinate to it;
2. An order in writing, which shall be signed or endorsed by a representative
of the importing Government duly authorised so to act, shall have been
presented to the competent authorities of the exporting country. This order
shall state that the articles to be exported are required for delivery to the
importing Government or public authority as provided in paragraph 1.

ARTICLE 3
Nevertheless, export for supply to private persons may be permitted in the following
cases:
1. Articles covered by Category I exported direct to a manufacturer of war
material for use by him for the requirements of his industry, provided their
import has been duly authorised by the Government of the importing country;
2. Rifles, muskets and carbines and their ammunition exported for supply to
rifle associations formed for the encouragement of individual sport and duly
authorised by their own Government to use them, the import of which is not
contrary to any other provisions of the present Convention. Such arms and
ammunition shall be sent direct to the Government of the importing country
for transmission by such Government to the associations for which they are
supplied.
3. Samples of articles covered by Category I exported for demonstration
purposes direct to a trade representative of the exporting manufacturer, such
representative being duly authorised by the Government of the importing
country to receive them.
In the above-mentioned cases, an order in, writing, endorsed by the Government of the
importing country or by its representative duly authorised so to act, must have been
presented to the authorities of the exporting country. It shall contain all the information
necessary to show that the order is properly made under this Article.
ARTICLE 4
Permission to export under Articles 2 and 3 shall be signified by a licence. An export
declaration, if filed with and approved by the competent authorities of the exporting
country, may take the place of a licence.

Such licence or declaration must contain:
(a) A description sufficient for the identification of the articles to which it
relates, and giving their designation according to the headings in Category I,
and their number or weight;
(b) The name and address of the exporter;
(e) The name and address of the importing consignee;

(d) The name of the Government which has authorised the import.
Each separate consignment which crosses the frontier of the exporting country, whether
by land, water or air, shall be accompanied by a document containing the particulars
indicated above. This document may be either the licence or export declaration or a
certified copy thereof or a certificate issued by the Customs authorities of the exporting
country, stating that the consignment is exported under licence or export declaration in
accordance with the provisions of the present Convention.
ARTICLE 5
The articles covered by Category II shall only be exported under cover of an export
document, which may be either a licence issued by the competent authorities of the
exporting country or an export declaration endorsed by or filed with them. If the
legislation of the importing country requires the endorsement of a duly authorised
representative of its Government, and if this fact has been notified by the said
Government to the Government of the exporting country, then such an endorsement
must have been obtained and submitted to the competent authorities of the exporting
country before the export may take place.
Neither the licence nor the export declaration shall entail any responsibility upon the
Government of the exporting country as to the destination or ultimate use of any
consignment.
Nevertheless, if the High Contracting Parties consider, on account of the size,
destination or other circumstances of a consignment, that the arms and ammunition
consigned are intended for war purposes, they undertake to apply to such consignment
ARTICLE 6
As a preliminary to a general system of publicity for armaments irrespective of their
origin, the High Contracting Parties undertake to publish, within two months of the
close of each quarter, a statistical return of their foreign trade during this quarter in the
articles covered by Categories I and II. This return shall be drawn up in accordance
with the specimen forms contained in Annex I to the present Convention and shall
show under each heading appearing in Categories I and II in Article 1 the value and the
weight or number of the articles exported or imported under a licence or export
declaration, allocated according to country of origin or destination.
In all cases where the consignment comes from, or is sent to, a territory possessing an
autonomous Customs system, such territory shall be shown as the country of origin or
destination.

The High Contracting Parties further undertake, so far as each may be concerned, to
publish within the same time-limits a return containing the same information in respect
of the consignments of articles covered by Categories I and II to other territories placed
under their sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage, or under the same
sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage.
The first statistical return to be published by each of the High Contracting Parties shall
be for the quarter beginning on the first day of January, April, July or October,
subsequent to the date on which the present Convention comes into force with regard to
the High Contracting Party concerned.
The High Contracting Parties undertake to publish as an annex to the above-mentioned
return the text of the provisions of all statutes, orders or regulations in force within
their territory dealing with the export and import of articles covered by Article 1, and to
include therein all provisions enacted for the purpose of carrying out the present
Convention. Amendments and additions to these provisions shall be likewise published
in annexes to subsequent quarterly returns.
ARTICLE 7
The High Contracting Parties, in all cases covered by Category III, undertake to publish
within two months of the close of each quarter a return for that quarter, giving the
information detailed below for each vessel of war constructed, in course of construction
or to be constructed within their territorial jurisdiction on behalf of the Government of
another State:
(a) The date of the signing of the contract for the construction of the vessel,
the name of the Government for which the vessel is ordered, together with
the following data:
Standard displacement in tons and metric tons;
The principal dimensions, namely: length at water-line, extreme
beam at or below water-line, mean draft at standard displacement;
(b) The date of laying the keel, the name of the Government for which the
vessel is being constructed, together with the following data:
Standard displacement in tons and metric tons;
The principal dimensions, namely: length at water-line, extreme
beam at or below water-line, mean draft at standard displacement;

(c) The date of delivery, the name of the Government to which the vessel is
delivered, together with the following data with respect to the vessel at that
date:
Standard displacement in tons and metric tons;
The principal dimensions, namely: length at water-line, extreme
beam at or below water-line, mean draft at standard displacement;
As well as the following information regarding the armament installed on
board the vessel at the date of delivery and forming part of the vessel’s
normal armament:
Number and calibre of guns;
Number and calibre of torpedo-tubes;
Number of bomb-throwers;
Number of machine-guns.
The above information concerning the armament of the vessel shall be furnished by
means of a statement signed by the shipbuilder and countersigned by the commanding
officer or such other representative fully authorised for the purpose by the Government
of the State to whom the vessel is delivered. Such statement shall be transmitted to the
competent authority of the Government of the constructing country.
Whenever a vessel of war belonging to one of the High Contracting Parties is
transferred, whether by gift, sale or other mode of transfer, to the Government of
another State, the transferor undertakes to publish within two months of the close of the
quarter within which the transfer is effected the following information: The date of
transfer, the name of the Government to whom the vessel has been transferred and the
data and information referred to in paragraph (c) above.
By the standard displacement in the present Article is to be understood the
displacement of the vessel complete, fully manned, engined and equipped ready for
sea, including all armament and ammunition, equipment, outfit, provisions and fresh
water for crew, miscellaneous stores and implements of every description that are
intended to be carried in war, but without fuel or reserve feed-water on board.
ARTICLE 8
Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 7, if the transport of any vessel of war is
carried out otherwise than by such vessel’s own motive power or towage, the vessel,

whether assembled or in component parts, and the armament thereof will become
subject also to the provisions of this Convention as if they were included in Category I.

ARTICLE 9
The High Contracting Parties undertake to publish, within six months of the close of
each quarter, a return for that quarter of the export of aircraft and aircraft engines,
giving quantities exported and their allocation according to country of destination.
ARTICLE 10
Subject to the provisions of Chapter III, the articles covered by Categories IV and V
may be exported without formalities or restrictions.
ARTICLE 11
The High Contracting Parties undertake not to apply a more favourable regime to
imports of articles referred to in Article 1 coming from territories of non-contracting
States than that which they will apply to such imports coming from territories of
contracting States, and to subject these imports, of whatever origin, to the same
conditions of authorisation and, so far as possible, of publicity.
CHAPTER III.—Special Zones ARTICLE 12
The High Contracting Parties agree that the provisions of this Chapter apply to the
territorial and maritime zones hereinafter defined and referred to in the present
Convention as the “special zones”.
1. Land zone.
(a) The whole of the continent of Africa, with the exception of Egypt, Lybia, Tunisia,
Algeria, the Spanish possessions in North Africa, Abyssinia, and of the Union of South
Africa together with the territory under its mandate, and of Southern Rhodesia.
This zone also includes the adjacent islands which are situated within 100 marine miles
from the coast thereof and also Prince’s Island (Principe) in the Bight of Biafra, St.
Thomas (Sâo Thomé), Annobon and Socotra, but does not include the Spanish islands
situated to the north of the parallel of 26° North latitude.
(b) The Arabian peninsula, Gwadar, Syria and Lebanon, Palestine and Transjordan, and
Iraq.

2. Maritime zone.
A maritime zone, which includes the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden, the Persian Gulf and
the Gulf of Oman and is bounded by a line drawn from and following the latitude of
Cape Guardafui to the point of intersection with longitude 57° East of Greenwich and
proceeding thence direct to the point at which the eastern frontier of Gwadar meets the
sea.

ARTICLE 13
The High Contracting Parties undertake not to export or to permit articles covered by
Categories I, II, IV and V to be exported to places within the special zones, unless a
licence has been issued in conformity with the conditions defined in Article 14.
An export declaration, if filed with and approved by the competent authorities of the
exporting country, may take the place of a licence.
The High Contracting Parties also undertake, each in respect of any territory under its
sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage situated within the special zones, not to
permit articles covered by the Categories above mentioned to be imported into such
territory unless their import has been authorised by the authorities of the territory
concerned. Such articles shall only be admitted into territory within the special zones at
such ports or other places as the authorities of the State, colony, protectorate or
mandated territory concerned shall designate for this purpose.
ARTICLE 14
The High Contracting Parties undertake not to issue the export licences nor to approve
the export declarations required under Article 13 unless they are satisfied that the
conditions stated in paragraph (a) or (b) hereof are fulfilled and also, as regards articles
(a) That, if an export is being made to territory under the sovereignty,
jurisdiction, protection or tutelage of a High Contracting Party, articles
covered by Categories I, II and IV to which the licence or export declaration
applies are required for lawful purposes and that the authorities of the
territory to which they are consigned are willing to admit them; and that, in
the case of articles covered by Category V, a copy of the licence or export
declaration has been sent to the authorities aforesaid before the export takes
place.

(b) That, if an export is being made to territory which is not under the
sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage of a High Contracting Party,
articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V are required for lawful
purposes.
ARTICLE 15
The High Contracting Parties undertake to publish, in addition to the returns provided
for in Article 6 and Article 9 in respect of articles covered by Categories I, II and IV, a
return of articles covered by Category V exported to territory situated within the special
zones. This return shall be published within the same time-limits and at the same
intervals as those provided in the first paragraph of Article 6, and shall contain, as far
as possible, the same particulars.
ARTICLE 16
The trade in articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V within the special zones shall
be placed under the supervision of officials of the authorities of the State, colony,
protectorate or mandated territory concerned.
The admission and transit of and trade in such articles within the said zones shall also
be subject to the provisions of Section I, §§ 1 and 2, of Annex II of the present
Convention, to which provisions the High Contracting Parties undertake to conform.
An authorisation must be given by a duly authorised representative of the authorities
aforesaid in each case before any such articles may be reconsigned to any place outside
the territory to which they have been admitted.
ARTICLE 17
The manufacture, assembly and repair within the special zones of articles covered by
Categories I, II, IV and V shall be subject to the provisions of Section I, § 3, of Annex
II of the present Convention, to which provisions the High Contracting Parties
undertake to conform.
ARTICLE 18
The High Contracting Parties undertake, each in respect of any territory under its
sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage situated within the special zones, not to
permit the transit by land across such territory of articles covered by Categories I, II, IV
and V when their destination is another territory also situated in the special zones,
unless their transport to their destination is assured and the authorities of the latter
territory have authorised their import.

The prohibition referred to in the above paragraph shall not apply to the transit of such
articles through a territory situated in the special zones when their destination is
territory of one of the High Contracting Parties not included in the said zones, provided
that their transport to their destination is assured.
If, for the purposes of transport to a territory situated within the special zones, it is
necessary to pass through a contiguous territory likewise situated within the said zones,
the transit shall be permitted, subject always to the conditions laid down in the first
paragraph hereof, at the request of the authorities of the importing territory, provided
that such authorities guarantee that the articles in respect of which the request is made
shall not at any time be sold, or otherwise transferred, contrary to the provisions of the
present Convention. Nevertheless, if the attitude or the disturbed condition of the
importing State constitutes a threat to peace or public order, permission for transit shall
be refused to such State by the authorities of all such contiguous territories until this
threat has ceased to exist.
ARTICLE 19
Subject to any contrary provisions in existing special agreements or in any future
agreements, provided that in all cases such agreements otherwise comply with the
provisions of the present Convention, the High Contracting Parties agree that in the
special zones the authorities of the State, colony, protectorate or mandated territory
concerned shall carry out within their territorial waters the supervision and police
measures necessary for the application of the present Convention.
ARTICLE 20
The High Contracting Parties agree that within the special zones no native vessel, as
hereinafter defined, of less than 500 tons (net tonnage) shall be allowed to ship,
discharge or tranship articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V.
A vessel shall be deemed to be a native vessel if she is either owned, fitted out or
commanded by a native of any country bordering on the Indian Ocean west of the
meridian of 95° East of Greenwich and north of the parallel of 11° South latitude, the
Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, or the Gulf of Oman, or if at least one-half of the crew are
natives of such countries.
The provisions of paragraph 1 hereof do not apply to lighters or barges or to vessels
engaged exclusively in the coasting trade between different ports of the same State,
colony, protectorate or mandated territory where warehouses are situated. The
conditions under which articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V may be carried by
such vessels are laid down in § 1 of Section II of Annex II of the present Convention, to
which the High Contracting Parties undertake to conform.

The provisions of this Article and of Section II, § 1, of Annex II do not apply:
(a) To arms, ammunition or implements carried on behalf of a Government
either under an authorisation or accompanied by a duly authorised official of
such Government; or
(b) To arms and ammunition in the possession of persons provided with a
licence to carry arms on the condition that such arms are for the personal use
of the bearer and are accurately described in such licence.

ARTICLE 21
The High Contracting Parties agree that, with the object of preventing all illicit
conveyance within the special zones of articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V,
all native vessels within the meaning of Article 20 must carry a manifest of their cargo
or a similar document specifying the quantities and nature of the goods on board, their
origin and destination. This manifest shall remain covered by the secrecy to which it is
entitled by the law of the State to which the vessel belongs, and must not be examined
during proceedings for the verification of the flag, unless the interested party consents
thereto.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to:
(a) Vessels exclusively engaged in the coasting trade between different ports
of the same State, colony, protectorate or mandated territory; or
(b) Vessels engaged in carrying arms, ammunition and implements on behalf
of a Government under the conditions defined in Article 20 (a) and
proceeding to or from any point within the said zones; or
(c) Vessels only partially decked, having a maximum crew of ten men, and
exclusively employed in fishing within territorial waters.
ARTICLE 22
The High Contracting Parties agree that no authorisation to fly the flag of any of such
High Contracting Parties shall be granted to native vessels of less than 500 tons (net
tonnage) as defined in Article 20, except in accordance with the conditions prescribed
in Section II, §§ 3 and 4, of Annex II of the present Convention. Such authorisation,
which shall be in writing, shall be renewed every year and shall contain the particulars
necessary to identify the vessel, the name, tonnage, type of rigging, principal

dimensions, registered number and signal letters if any. It shall bear the date on which
it was granted and the status of the official who granted it.
ARTICLE 23
The High Contracting Parties agree to communicate to any other High Contracting
Party who so requests the forms of the documents to be issued by them under Articles
The High Contracting Parties further agree to take all necessary measures to ensure that
the following documents shall be supplied as soon as possible to any other High
Contracting Party who has requested the same:
(a) Certified copies of all authorisations to fly the flag granted under the
provisions of Article 22;
(b) Notice of the withdrawal of such authorisations;
(c) Copies of authorisations issued under Section II, § 1, of Annex II.
ARTICLE 24
The High Contracting Parties agree to apply in the maritime zone the regulations laid
down in Annex II, Section II, § 5, of the present Convention.
ARTICLE 25
The High Contracting Parties agree that any illicit conveyance or attempted
conveyance legally established against the captain or owner of a vessel authorised to
fly the flag of one of the High Contracting Parties, or holding the licence provided for
in Section II, § 1, of Annex II, of the present Convention, shall entail the immediate
withdrawal of the said authorisation or licence.
ARTICLE 26
The High Contracting Parties who have under their sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection
or tutelage territory situated within the special zones, undertake, so far as each is
concerned, to take the necessary measures to ensure the application of the present
Convention and, in particular, the prosecution and punishment of offences against the
provisions thereof, and to appoint the territorial and consular officers or competent
special representatives for the purpose.
They will communicate these measures to such High Contracting Parties as shall have
expressed the desire to be informed thereof.

ARTICLE 27
The High Contracting Parties agree that the provisions of Articles 16 to 26 inclusive
and of Annex II of the present Convention establishing a certain regime of supervision
in the special zones shall not be interpreted, as regards such High Contracting Parties as
have no territory under their sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage within or
immediately adjacent to the said special zones, either as constituting an obligation to
apply the regime defined in the abovementioned provisions or as involving their
responsibility with respect to the application of this regime.
However, the said High Contracting Parties shall conform to the provisions of Articles
(net tonnage) may be authorised to fly the flag of such High Contracting Parties.

CHAPTER IV.—Special Provisions ARTICLE 28
Abyssinia, desirous of rendering as effective as possible the supervision of the trade in
arms and ammunition and in implements of war, which is the subject of the present
Convention, hereby undertakes, in the free exercise of her sovereign rights, to put into
force, so far as concerns her own territory, all regulations which may be necessary to
fulfil the provisions of Articles 12 to 18 inclusive of the said Convention relating to
exports, imports and the transport of arms, ammunition and implements of war.
The High Contracting Parties take note of the above undertaking, and, being in full
sympathy with the desire of Abyssinia to render as effective as possible the supervision
of the trade in arms and ammunition and in implements of war, hereby undertake to
conform to the provisions of the above-mentioned Articles so far as concerns
Abyssinian territory, and to respect the regulations put into force, in accordance with
the said undertaking, by Abyssinia as a sovereign State.
If a State, at present included in the special zones, should at the moment of its
accession to the present Convention assume with respect to its own territory the same
undertakings as those set forth in the first paragraph of this Article, and also, when such
State possesses a sea-coast, those contained in Articles 19 to 26 inclusive in so far as
the same are applicable, the High Contracting Parties hereby declare that they will
consider such State as excluded from the said zones from the date that its accession
becomes effective as specified in Article 41 and that they will accept as regards such
State the obligations set forth in the second paragraph of the present Article, and also,
when the State excluded possesses a sea-coast, the obligations of Articles 19 to 27
inclusive in so far as they are applicable.
ARTICLE 29

The High Contracting Parties agree to accept reservations which may be made by
Esthonia, Finland, Latvia, Poland and Roumania at the moment of their signature of the
present Convention and which shall suspend in respect of these States, until the
accession of Russia to the present Convention, the application of Articles 6 and 9, as
regards both export to and import into these countries by the High Contracting Parties.
These reservations shall not be interpreted as preventing the publication of statistics in
accordance with the laws and regulations in effect within the territory of any High
Contracting Party.

ARTICLE 30
The High Contracting Parties who possess extra-territorial jurisdiction in the territory
of another State party to the present Convention undertake in cases where the rules of
this Convention cannot be enforced by the local courts as regards their nationals in
such territory to prohibit all action by such nationals contrary to the provisions of the
present Convention.
CHAPTER V.—General Provisions ARTICLE 31
The provisions of the present Convention are completed by those of Annexes I and II
which have the same value and shall enter into force at the same time as the
Convention itself.
ARTICLE 32
The High Contracting Parties agree that the provisions of the present Convention do
not apply:
(a) To arms or ammunition or to implements of war forwarded from territory
under the sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage of a High
Contracting Party for the use of the armed forces of such High Contracting
Party, wherever situated, nor
(b) To arms or ammunition carried by individual members of such forces or
by other persons in the service of a High Contracting Party and required by
them by reason of their calling, nor
(c) To rifles, muskets, carbines and the necessary ammunition therefor,
carried by members of rifle clubs for the sole purpose of individual use in
international competitions in marksmanship.
ARTICLE 33

In time of war, and without prejudice to the rules of neutrality, the provisions of
Chapter II shall be suspended from operation until the restoration of peace so far as
concerns any consignment of arms or ammunition or of implements of war to or on
behalf of a belligerent.
ARTICLE 34
All the provisions of general international Conventions anterior to the date of the
present Convention, such as the Convention for the Control of the Trade in Arms and
Ammunition and the Protocol signed at St. Germain-en-Laye on September 10th, 1919,
shall be considered as abrogated in so far as they relate to the matters dealt with in the
present Convention and are binding between the Powers which are Parties to the
present Convention.

The present Convention shall not be deemed to affect any rights and obligations which
may arise out of the provisions) either of the Covenant of the League of Nations or of
the Treaties of Peace signed in 1919 and 1920 at Versailles, Neuilly, St. Germain and
Trianon, or of the Treaty Limiting Naval Armaments signed at Washington on February
6th, 1922, or of any other treaty, convention, agreement or engagement concerning
prohibition of import, export or transit of arms or ammunition or of implements of war;
nor, without prejudice to the provisions of the present Convention itself, shall it affect
any other treaty, convention, agreement or engagement other than those referred to in
paragraph 1 of the present Article having as its object the supervision of import, export
or transit of arms or ammunition or of implements of war.
ARTICLE 35
The High Contracting Parties agree that disputes arising between them relating to the
interpretation or application of this Convention shall, if they cannot be settled by direct
negotiation, be referred for decision to the Permanent Court of International Justice. In
case either or both of the States to such a dispute should not be parties to the Protocol
of December 16th, 1920, relating to the Permanent Court of International Justice, the
dispute shall be referred, at the choice of the Parties and in accordance with the
constitutional procedure of each State, either to the Permanent Court of International
Justice or to a court of arbitration constituted in accordance with the Hague Convention
of October 18th, 1907, or to some other court of arbitration.
ARTICLE 36
Any High Contracting Party may declare that its signature or ratification or accession
does not, as regards the application of the provisions of Chapter II and of Articles 13,
14 and 15 of the present Convention, bind either all or any one of the territories subject

to its sovereignty, jurisdiction or protection, provided that such territories are not
situated in the special zones as defined in Article 12.
Any High Contracting Party which has made such a declaration may, subsequently, and
in conformity with the provisions of Article 37, adhere entirely to the present
Convention for any territories so excluded. Such High Contracting Party will use its
best endeavours to ensure as soon as possible the accession of any territories so
excluded.
Any High Contracting Party may also, as regards the application of the provisions of
with the procedure laid down in Article 38, denounce the present Convention separately
in respect of any territory referred to above.
Any High Contracting Party which shall have availed itself of the option of exclusion
or of denunciation provided for in the preceding paragraphs undertakes to apply the
provisions of Chapter II to consignments destined for territories in respect of which the
option has been exercised.
ARTICLE 37
The High Contracting Parties will use their best endeavours to secure the accession to
the present Convention of other States.
Each accession will be notified to the Government of the French Republic and by the
latter to all the signatory or acceding States.
The instruments of accession shall remain deposited in the archives of the Government
of the French Republic.
ARTICLE 38
The present Convention may be denounced by any High Contracting Party thereto after
the expiration of four years from the date when it came into force in respect of that
Party. Denunciation shall be effected by notification in writing addressed to the
Government of the French Republic, which will forthwith transmit copies of such
notification to the other Contracting Parties, informing them of the date on which it was
received.
A denunciation shall take effect one year after the date of the receipt of the notification
thereof by the Government of the French Republic and shall operate only in respect of
the notifying State.

In case a denunciation has the effect of reducing the number of States parties to the
Convention below fourteen, any of the remaining High Contracting Parties may also,
within a period of one year from the date of such denunciation, denounce the
Convention without waiting for the expiration of the period of four years mentioned
above and may require that its denunciation shall take effect at the same date as the
first-mentioned denunciation.
ARTICLE 39
The High Contracting Parties agree that, at the conclusion of a period of three years
from the coming into force of the present Convention under the terms of Article 41, this
Convention shall be subject to revision upon the request of one-third of the said High
Contracting Parties addressed to the Government of the French Republic.

ARTICLE 40
The present Convention, of which the French and English texts are both authentic, is
subject to ratification. It shall bear to-day’s date.
Each Power shall address its ratification to the Government of the French Republic,
which will at once notify the deposit of ratification to each of the other signatory
Powers.
The instruments of ratification will remain deposited in the archives of the Government
of the French Republic.
ARTICLE 41
A first proces-verbal of the deposit of ratifications will be drawn up by the Government
of the French Republic as soon as the present Convention shall have been ratified by
fourteen Powers.
The Convention shall come into force four months after the date of the notification of
this proces-verbal by the Government of the French Republic to all signatory Powers.
Subsequently, the Convention will come into force in respect of each High Contracting
Party four months after the date on which its ratification or accession shall have been
notified by the Government of the French Republic to all signatory or acceding States.
IN
WITNESS
WHEREOF, the above-mentioned Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention.

DONE at Geneva, in a single copy, this seventeenth day of June, One Thousand Nine
Hundred and Twenty-Five.
For Germany
H. VON ECKARDT
For the United States of America
THEODORE E. BURTON
HUGH S. GIBSON
For Austria
E. PFLÜGL
For Belgium
For Brazil
CONTRE-AMIRAL A. C. DE SOUZA E SILVA
MAJOR ESTEVAO LEITÃO DE CARVALHO
Brazil reserves the right, during the whole period of application of the present
Convention, to execute it, in so far as she is concerned, in accordance with
the spirit of the clauses which aim at rendering the supervision general both
as regards the trade in and the manufacture of armaments.67
For the British Empire
I declare that my signature does not bind India or any British Dominion
which is a separate Member of the League of Nations and does not separately
sign or adhere to the Convention.
ONSLOW
For Canada
For the Irish Free State
For India
P. Z. Cox

For Bulgaria
For Chile
GÉNÉRAL DE DIVISION LUIS CABRERA
For China
For Colombia
For Denmark
For Egypt
For Spain
EMILIO DE PALACIOS
For Esthonia
Subject to the suspension of the application of Articles 6 and 9 in virtue of
the right accorded to Esthonia by Article 29.
LAIDONER
For Abyssinia
GUÉTATCHOU
BLATA HEROUY HEROUY
A. TASFAE
For Finland
Subject to the suspension of the application of Articles 6 and 9 in virtue of
the right accorded to Finland by Article 29.
O. ENCKELL
For France
B. CLAUZEL
For Greece

For Hungary
DR. BARANYAI ZOLTÁN
For Italy
PIETRO CHIMIENTI
ALBERTO DE MARINIS-STENDARDO
For Japan
M. MATSUDA
For Latvia
Subject to the suspension of the application of Articles 6 and 9 in virtue of
the right accorded to Latvia by Article 29.
COLONEL HARTMANIS
For Lithuania
For Luxemburg
CH. G. VERMAIRE
For Nicaragua
For Norway
For Panama
For the Netherlands
For Persia
For Poland
Subject to the suspension of the application of Articles 6 and 9 in virtue of
the right accorded to Poland by Article 29.
GÉNÉRAL CASIMIR SOSNKOWSKI
G. D. MORAWSKI

For Portugal
For Roumania
Ad referendum subject to the reservation provided for in Article 29 of the
Convention to the effect that the application of Articles 6 and 9 as regards
both export to and import into Roumania by the High Contracting Parties
shall be suspended until the adhesion of Russia to the present Convention and
to its Annexes.
N. P. COMNENE
GÉNÉRAL T. DUMITRESCU
For Salvador
J. GUSTAVO GUERRERO
For Siam
For Sweden
For Switzerland
For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
J. DOUTCHITCH
GÉNÉRAL KALAFATOVITCH
CAPT. D. FRÉG. MARIASEVITCH
For Czechoslovakia
DR. VEVERKA, FERDINAND
For Turkey
For Uruguay
For Venezuela
Annex I
STATISTICAL FORMS

FORM I
Imports1 into . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (name of importing country) during the . . . . . . .
. . . quarter of 19. .
Description2
of arms and
ammunition
and
implements
of
war
according to
the headings
in attached
schedule.
Countries of Origin
Total
A3
Z3
No. of
articles
Weight Declared
value4
No. of
articles
Weight Declared
value4
No. of
articles
Weight Declared
value4
Totals
EXPLANATORY NOTES

FORM II
Exports and Re-exports1 from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (name of exporting country)
during the . . . . . . . . . . quarter of 19. .
Description2
of arms and
ammunition
and
implements
of
war
according to
the headings
in attached
schedule.
Countries of Destination
Total
A3
Z3
No. of
articles
Weight Declared
value4
No. of
articles
Weight Declared
value4
No. of
articles
Weight Declared
value4
Total
EXPLANATORY NOTES
SCHEDULE

CATEGORY I. ARMS, AMMUNITION AND IMPLEMENTS OF WAR EXCLUSIVELY DESIGNED AND INTENDED FOR LAND, SEA OR AERIAL WARFARE
Arms and ammunition and implements exclusively designed and intended for land, sea
or aerial warfare, which are, or shall be, comprised in the armament of the armed forces
of any State, or which, if they have been, are no longer comprised in such armament
but are capable of military to the exclusion of any other use, except such arms,
ammunition and implements which, though included in the above definition, are
covered in other categories.
Such arms, ammunition and implements are comprised in the following twelve
headings:
1. Rifles, muskets, carbines (number).
2. (a) Machine-guns, automatic rifles and machine-pistols of all calibres
(b) Mountings for machine-guns (number);
(c) Interrupter gears (number).
4. Gun-sighting apparatus including aerial gun-sights and bombsights, and
fire-control apparatus (number).
(15 cm.) (number);
or above (number);
(c) Mortars of all kinds (number);
(d) Gun carriages (number), mountings (number), recuperators (number),
accessories for mountings (weight).
6. Projectiles and ammunition for the arms enumerated in No. 5 above
7. Apparatus for the discharge of bombs, torpedoes, depth charges and other
kinds of projectiles (number).
8. (a) Grenades (number);

(b) Bombs (number);
(c) Land mines, submarine mines, fixed or floating, depth charges (number);
(d) Torpedoes (number).
9. Appliances for use with the above arms and apparatus (number).
10. Bayonets (number).
11. Tanks and armoured cars (number).
12. Arms and ammunition not specified in the above enumeration (number or
weight).
Component parts, completely finished, of the articles covered by the above headings, if
capable of being utilised only in the assembly or repair of the said articles, or as spare
parts, should be entered separately, by weight, under each of the above headings or
subheadings to which they belong.
CATEGORY II. ARMS AND AMMUNITION CAPABLE OF USE BOTH FOR MILITARY AND OTHER PURPOSES
1. Pistols and revolvers, automatic or self-loading, and developments of the
same, designed for single-handed use or fired from the shoulder, of a calibre
2. Fire-arms designed, intended or adapted for non-military purposes, such as
sport or personal defence, that will fire cartridges that can be fired from fire-
arms in Category I. Other rifled fire-arms, firing from the shoulder of a
calibre of 6 mm. or above not included in Category I, with the exception of
rifled fire-arms with a “breakdown” action (number).
3. Ammunition for the arms enumerated in the above two headings, with the
exception of ammunition covered by Category I (number).
4. Swords and lances (number).
Component parts, completely finished, of the articles covered by the above headings, if
capable of being utilised only in the assembly or repair of the said articles, or as spare
parts, should be entered separately, by weight, under each of the above headings or sub-
headings to which they belong.
Annex II
SUPERVISION WITHIN THE SPECIAL ZONES

SECTION I. Supervision on Land § 1
All articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V admitted into the territory of a State,
colony, protectorate or mandated territory situated in the special zones, except such
articles imported by individuals for their personal use under an authorisation issued by
the authorities of the territory concerned, shall be deposited by the importer at his own
expense and risk in a public warehouse maintained under the exclusive custody and
permanent supervision of the authorities aforesaid or their officials, of whom at least
one must be a member of their armed forces, and who shall keep an official record of
such deposit.
Every withdrawal from a public warehouse must be authorised beforehand by such
authorities. No such authorisation shall be given except for the purposes of transfer to
another public warehouse or to a private warehouse duly approved by the said
authorities or for delivery to individuals who have proved to the satisfaction of the said
authorities that the articles are necessary to them for their personal use.
Articles required for the equipment of the national forces or for the defence of the
territory are exempted from all formalities in connection with deposit in or withdrawal
from a public warehouse.
§ 2
No private warehouse for articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V shall be
allowed within the special zones unless authorised by the authorities of the State,
colony, protectorate, or mandated territory. Such warehouse must consist of enclosed
premises, reserved for that purpose and having only one entry, which must be fitted
with two locks, one of which can be opened only by officials of the authorities.
The person in charge of the warehouse shall be responsible for all such articles
deposited therein and must account for them on demand by the authorities.
Such articles must not be withdrawn from the warehouse nor be transported or
transferred without a special authorisation. The particulars entered on such
authorisations shall be noted in a special register numbered and initialled.

Every arm imported under the provisions of § 1 by an individual for his personal use or
transferred under the provisions of the same § from a public warehouse to a private
warehouse or a private individual must be registered. A mark shall be stamped thereon
if it does not already bear another mark or a number sufficient for identification. The
mark or number shall be noted in the licence to carry arms issued by the authorities.

§ 3
The manufacture or assembly within the special zones of articles covered by Categories
I, II, IV and V is prohibited otherwise than in establishments instituted for the defence
of the territory or maintenance of public order by the authorities of the territory
concerned, or in the case of mandated territory by such authorities under the
supervision of the mandatory Power.
The repair of such articles shall only be carried out in establishments instituted by the
authorities or in private establishments which shall have been authorised for this
purpose by the said authorities. Such authorisation shall not be granted without
guarantees for the observance of the rules of the present Convention.
SECTION II. Maritime Supervision § 1
Cargoes of articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V shipped on board the lighters,
barges or coasting vessels referred to in Article 20, paragraph 3, must be covered by a
special licence issued by the authorities of the State, colony, protectorate or mandated
territory in which such cargoes are shipped, and containing the particulars specified in
§ 2 hereof. All articles so shipped shall in addition be subject to the provisions of the
present Convention.
§ 2
Special licences referred to in § 1 of Section II of the present Annex shall contain the
following particulars:
(a) A statement of the nature and quantity of the articles in respect of which
the licence is issued.
(b) The name of the vessel on which the cargoes are to be shipped.
(c) The name of the ultimate consignee.
(d) The ports of loading and discharge.
It shall be certified on such licences that they have been issued in conformity with the
provisions of the present Convention.

§ 3

An authorisation to fly the flag of a High Contracting Party may only be granted by the
authorities mentioned in paragraph (b) below, and subject to the three following
conditions:
(a) The owners must be nationals of the Power whose flag they claim to fly
or companies who are nationals under the laws of that Power.
(b) The owners must have furnished proof that they are bona fide owners of
real estate in the territory of the authorities to whom the application for a
licence is addressed, or have given to such authorities sufficient guarantees
for the payment of any fines to which they may become liable.
(c) The owners and the captain of the vessel must have furnished proof that
they enjoy a good reputation and, in particular, that they have never been
convicted of illicit conveyance of arms or ammunition or implements of war.
§ 4
All native vessels before they are authorised to fly the flag of a High Contracting Party
shall have complied with the following regulations for the purpose of their
identification at sea:
(a) The initial letters of the port of registration of the native vessel, followed
by the vessel’s registration number in the serial port numbers, must be incised
and painted in white on black ground on both quarters of each vessel in such
a position as to be easily distinguishable from a distance.
(b) The net tonnage of the native vessel shall also, if practicable, be incised
and painted inside the hull in a conspicuous position.
§ 5
The regulations referred to in Article 24 of the present Convention are as follows: 1.
When a warship belonging to one of the High Contracting Parties encounters within the
maritime zone but outside territorial waters a presumed native vessel of under 500 tons
burden (net tonnage),
(a) Flying the flag of one of the High Contracting Parties, or
(b) Flying no flag,
and the Commanding Officer of the warship has good reason to believe that the said
vessel is flying the flag of any High Contracting Party without being entitled to do so,
or is illicitly conveying articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V, he may proceed

to stop the vessel in order to verify the nationality of the vessel by examining the
document authorising the flying of the flag, but no other document.

2. Any vessel which presents the appearance of native build and rig may be presumed
to be a native vessel.
3. For the purpose of verifying the nationality of the suspected vessel, a boat
commanded by a commissioned officer in uniform may be sent to visit the vessel after
she has been hailed so as to give notice of such intention. The officer sent on board the
vessel shall act with all possible consideration and moderation. Before leaving the
vessel, the officer shall draw up a proces-verbal in the form and language in use in his
own country. This proces-verbal shall state the facts of the case and shall be dated and
signed by the officer.
Should there be on board the warship no commissioned officer other than the
Commanding Officer, the above prescribed operations may be carried out by a warrant,
petty or non-commissioned officer at the discretion of the Commanding Officer.
The captain or master of the vessel visited, as well as the witnesses, shall be invited to
sign the proces-verbal and shall have the right to add to it any explanations which they
may consider expedient.
4. In the cases referred to in paragraph 1 (a) hereof, unless the right to fly the flag can
be established, the vessel may be conducted to the nearest port in the maritime zone
where there is a competent authority of the Power whose flag has been flown and shall
be handed over to such authority, but if such a port should be at such a distance from
the point of detention that the warship would have to leave her station or patrol to
escort the detained vessel thereto, the vessel may be taken to the nearest port where
there is a competent authority of one of the High Contracting Parties of nationality
other than that of the warship and handed over to such authority, and steps shall at once
be taken to notify this fact to the competent authority representing the power
concerned.
No proceedings shall be taken against the vessel or her crew until the arrival of the
representative of the Power whose flag the vessel was flying or without authority from
such representative.
Instead of conducting the suspected vessel to a port as laid down above, the
Commanding Officer of the detaining warship may hand her over to a warship of the
nation whose flag she has flown if the latter consents to take charge of her.

5. The procedure laid down in paragraph 4 may also be followed if, after the
verification of the flag and in spite of the voluntary production of the manifest, the
Commanding Officer of the warship continues to suspect the vessel of engaging in the
illicit conveyance of articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V.
6. In the cases referred to in paragraph 1 (b) hereof, if it is ascertained, as a result of the
visit made on board the vessel that, whereas it flew no flag, it was also not entitled to
fly the flag of a recognised State, the vessel may, unless the innocent nature of her
cargo can be duly established to the satisfaction of the Commanding Officer of the
warship, be conducted to the nearest point in the maritime zone where there is a
competent authority of the Power to which the detaining warship belongs, and shall be
handed over to such authority.
7. The authority before whom the suspected vessel has been brought shall institute a
full enquiry in accordance with the laws and regulations of his country and in
conformity with the procedure laid down in paragraph 8 below.
This enquiry shall be carried out in the presence of an officer of the detaining warship.
If, however, the presence of such officer is impracticable owing to the duties upon
which the warship is engaged, an affidavit sworn by the Commanding Officer may in
special cases be accepted by the authority holding the enquiry in place of the oral
evidence of an officer of the warship.
8. (a) In the case of vessels referred to in paragraph 1 (a) above, if it is proved at this
enquiry that the flag has been illegally flown, but that the vessel is entitled to fly the
flag of a recognised State, she shall, if that State is one of the High Contracting Parties,
be handed over to the nearest authority of that State. If such State is not a High
Contracting Party, the vessel shall be disposed of by agreement between the State
responsible for her detention and the State whose flag she is entitled to fly, and,
pending such agreement, shall remain in the custody of the authorities of the nationality
of the detaining warship.
(b) If it should be established that the use of the flag by the detained vessel was correct,
but that the vessel was engaged in the illicit conveyance of articles covered by
Categories I, II, IV and V, those responsible shall be brought before the courts of the
State under whose flag the vessel sailed. The vessel herself and her cargo shall remain
in charge of the authority conducting the enquiry. The illicit cargo may be destroyed in
accordance with laws and regulations drawn up for the purpose.
(c) In the case of vessels referred to in paragraph 1 (b) above, if it be established that
the vessel had the right to fly the flag of one of the High Contracting Parties but was
engaged in the illicit conveyance of any of the articles covered by Categories I, II, IV
and V, the procedure laid down in the preceding paragraph should be followed.

(d) In the case of vessels referred to in paragraph 1 (b) above, if it be established that
the vessel was not entitled to fly the flag of any of the High Contracting Parties and
was engaged in the illicit conveyance of any of the articles covered by Categories I, II,
IV and V, the vessel and all cargo carried in addition to these articles shall be seized by
such authorities and disposed of according to the national laws and regulations of the
authorities before whom the vessel has been brought. The destruction of this cargo may
be ordered according to the same laws and regulations.
(e) If the authority entrusted with the enquiry decides that the detention and diversion
of the vessel or other measures imposed upon her were irregular, he shall assess the
amount of the compensation which he considers to be due.
9. If the decision and assessment of the said authority are accepted by the detaining
officer and the authorities to whom he is subject, the amount awarded shall be paid
within six months from the date of the said assessment.
10. If the detaining officer, or the authorities to whom he is subject, contest the decision
or the amount of the compensation assessed, the dispute shall be submitted to a Court
of Arbitration consisting of one arbitrator appointed by the Government whose flag the
vessel was flying, one appointed by the Government of the detaining officer, and an
umpire chosen by the two arbitrators thus appointed. The two arbitrators shall be
chosen, as far as possible, from among the Diplomatic, Consular or Judicial officers of
the High Contracting Parties. These appointments must be made with the least possible
delay. Any compensation awarded shall be paid to the persons concerned within six
months at most from the date of the award of the court.
11. The Commanding Officer of a warship who may have stopped a vessel flying a
foreign flag shall in all cases make a report thereon to his Government, stating the
grounds on which he acted. An extract from this report, together with a copy of the
proces-verbal, drawn up by the officer, warrant officer, petty or non-commissioned
officer sent on board the vessel detained, shall be sent as soon as possible to the
Government whose flag the detained vessel was flying and to such of the High
Contracting Parties as may have expressed the desire to receive such documents.
[Enclosure 2]
Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare, Signed at Geneva, June 17, 192568
THE UNDERSIGNED PLENIPOTENTIARIES, in the name of their respective Governments: WHEREAS the use in
war of asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases, and of all analogous liquids, materials or
devices, has been justly condemned by the general opinion, of the civilised world; and

WHEREAS the prohibition of such use has been declared in Treaties to which the majority
of the Powers of the World are Parties; and TO THE END that this prohibition shall be
universally accepted as a part of International Law, binding alike the conscience and
the practice of nations;
DECLARE:
That the High Contracting Parties, so far as they are not already Parties to
Treaties prohibiting such use, accept this prohibition, agree to extend this
prohibition to the use of bacteriological methods of warfare and agree to be
bound as between themselves according to the terms of this declaration.
The High Contracting Parties will exert every effort to induce other States to accede to
the present Protocol. Such accession will be notified to the Government of the French
Republic, and by the latter to all signatory and acceding Powers, and will take effect on
the date of the notification by the Government of the French Republic.
The present Protocol, of which the French and English texts are both authentic, shall be
ratified as soon as possible. It shall bear to-day’s date.
The ratifications of the present protocol shall be addressed to the Government of the
French Republic, which will at once notify the deposit of such ratification to each of
the signatory and acceding Powers.
The instruments of ratification of and accession to the present Protocol will remain
deposited in the archives of the Government of the French Republic.
The present Protocol will come into force for each signatory Power as from the date of
deposit of its ratification, and, from that moment, each Power will be bound as regards
other Powers which have already deposited their ratifications.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Protocol.
DONE at Geneva in a single copy, this seventeenth day of June, One Thousand Nine
Hundred and Twenty-Five.
For Germany
H. VON ECKARDT
For the United States of America
THEODORE E. BURTON

HUGH S. GIBSON
For Austria
For Belgium
For Brazil
CONTRE–AMIRAL A. C. DE SOUZA E SILVA
MAJOR ESTEVÃO LEITÃO DE CARVALHO
For the British Empire
I declare that my signature does not bind India or any British Dominion
which is a separate Member of the League of Nations & does not separately
sign or adhere to the Protocol.
ONSLOW
For Canada
WALTER A. RIDDELL
For the Irish Free State
For India
P. Z. Cox
For Bulgaria
For Chile
LUIS CABRERA
Général de Division
For China
For Colombia
For Denmark
A. OLDENBURG

For Egypt
For Spain
EMILIO DE PALACIOS
For Esthonia
J. LAIDONER
For Abyssinia
GUÉTATCHOU
BLATA HEROUT HEROUY
A. TASFAE
For Finland
O. ENCKELL
For France
J. PAUL-BONCOUR
For Greece
VASSILI DENDRAMIS
D. VLACHOPOULOS
For Hungary
For Italy
PIETRO CHIMIENTI
ALBERTO DE MARINIS-STENDARDO
For Japan
M. MATSUDA
For Latvia

COLONEL HARTMANIS
For Lithuania
For Luxemburg
CH. G. VERMAIRE
For Nicaragua
A. SOTTILE
For Norway
For Panama
For the Netherlands
W. DOUDE VAN TROOSTWIJK
W. GUERIN
For Persia
For Poland
GÉNÉRAL CASIMIR SOSNKOWSKI
G. D. MORAWSKI
For Portugal
A. M. BARTHOLOMEU FERREIRA
AMERICO DA COSTA LEME
For Roumania
Ad referendum
N. P. COMNENE
GÉNÉRAL T. DUMITRESCU
For Salvador

J. GUSTAVO GUERRERO
For Siam
For Sweden
For Switzerland
Sous réserve de ratification:
LOHNER
ED. MÜLLER
For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
J. DOUTCHITCH
GÉNÉRAL KALAFATOVITCH
CAPT. D. FRÉG. MARIASEVITCH
For Czechoslovakia
For Turkey
M. TEVFIK
For Uruguay
ENRIQUE E. BUERO
For Venezuela
62 Not printed.
63 For texts of the convention and of the protocol concerning gases, see enclosures 1
and 2, infra. The Declaration Regarding the Territory of Ifni was not signed by the
American delegates. The final act enumerated the instruments drawn up at the
Conference and declared: (1) That the governments the delegates of which signed it
“have the firm intention of applying strictly their internal laws and regulations to
prevent anything that might constitute a fraudulent commerce in arms within the
meaning of the said laws and regulations, and to exchange with such Parties as may be
concerned all information material for this purpose”; (2) that the convention signed
June 17, 1925, “must be considered as an important step towards a general system of

international agreements regarding arms and ammunition and implements of war, and
that it is desirable that the international aspect of the manufacture of such arms,
ammunition and implements of war should receive early consideration by the different
Governments.” The protocol of signature provided that for the states enumerated in the
preamble of the convention the period allowed for signature of the convention, the
Declaration Regarding the Territory of Ifni, and the Protocol for the Prohibition of the
Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods
of Warfare, should be any date prior to Sept. 30, 1926.
64 A copy of the authentic final text of the convention, together with the annexes, has
been here substituted for the copy enclosed with despatch No. 471. This text is printed
in League of Nations, Proceedings of the Conference for the Supervision of the
International Trade in Arms, transmitted to the Department with despatch No. 544,
65 In English and French: French text not printed. Consented to by the Senate, June 6,
1935, with the reservation that the convention should not come into effect for the
United States until it had come into effect for Belgium, the British Empire,
Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Sweden, and the Union of Soviet
66 Bracketed expression appears in the original. However, as not all of the delegates
participating in the conference were empowered to sign the convention, and as the
protocol of signature left to the states the right of appointing the plenipotentiaries they
wished to have sign the convention, the Secretariat of the League of Nations adopted
the expedient of leaving blank the space for the names of the plenipotentiaries until
Sept. 30, 1926, the date when the period reserved for signature terminated (undated
note verbale from the League of Nations Bureau, French Foreign Office, enclosed in
67 All reservations, except that of Great Britain, are in French only. The translations
here used appear as footnotes in Proceedings of the Conference.
1 The imports included in this table shall be the general imports of arms and
ammunition and of implements of war set out in the attached schedule, arriving from
abroad, i. e., the total of the goods imported for home consumption, into warehouse,
free zones, free ports and all other places excluded from the Customs territory, also
temporary imports, improvement trade, etc., but excluding goods for transit or
transhipment.
When temporary warehousing pending transit or transhipment is permitted, arms and
ammunition and implements of war arriving under these conditions shall not be
considered as imports, provided that the consignments are accompanied by a licence or
similar document mentioned in Article 4 of the present Convention showing some other
country as destination.

2 Arms and ammunition and implements of war covered by Category I shall be tabled
separately from those in Category II.
3 Name of country which issued the licence or similar document mentioned in Article 4
of the present Convention. But when the goods come from a Colony or Dependency,
not issuing licences in its own name, but having an autonomous Customs system, such
colony or dependency shall be shown as the country of origin.
3 Name of country which issued the licence or similar document mentioned in Article 4
of the present Convention. But when the goods come from a Colony or Dependency,
not issuing licences in its own name, but having an autonomous Customs system, such
colony or dependency shall be shown as the country of origin.
4 In legal currency of the importing country. In cases where the values are the result of
conversion on a gold standard basis, this fact should be expressly mentioned in the
heading of this column. In all cases the value shall be shown, except in the case of
samples referred to in Article 3, paragraph 3, of the Convention when it is not
obligatory.
4 In legal currency of the importing country. In cases where the values are the result of
conversion on a gold standard basis, this fact should be expressly mentioned in the
heading of this column. In all cases the value shall be shown, except in the case of
samples referred to in Article 3, paragraph 3, of the Convention when it is not
obligatory.
4 In legal currency of the importing country. In cases where the values are the result of
conversion on a gold standard basis, this fact should be expressly mentioned in the
heading of this column. In all cases the value shall be shown, except in the case of
samples referred to in Article 3, paragraph 3, of the Convention when it is not
obligatory.
1 The exports and re-exports included in this table shall be the general exports and re-
exports of arms and ammunition and implements of war set out in the attached
schedule leaving for abroad, i. e., the total of the goods exported and re-exported from
the internal market from warehouse, free zones, free ports and all other places excluded
from the Customs territory, also temporary exports and re-exports, improvement trade,
etc., but excluding goods for transit or transhipment.
When temporary warehousing pending transit or transhipment is permitted, the arms
and ammunition and implements of war arriving under these conditions shall not be
considered as imports provided that the consignments are accompanied by a licence or
similar document mentioned in Article 4 of the present Convention showing some other
country as destination.
2 Arms and ammunition and implements of war covered by Category I shall be tabled
separately from those in Category II.

3 Country in whose favour the licence or similar document mentioned in Article 4 of
the present Convention has been issued. In the case of an application by a mother-
country on behalf of a Colony or Dependency having an autonomous Customs regime,
such Colony or Dependency should be shown as country of destination.
3 Country in whose favour the licence or similar document mentioned in Article 4 of
the present Convention has been issued. In the case of an application by a mother-
country on behalf of a Colony or Dependency having an autonomous Customs regime,
such Colony or Dependency should be shown as country of destination.
4 In legal currency of the exporting country. In cases where the values are the result of
conversion on a gold standard basis, this fact should be expressly mentioned in the title
of this column. In all cases value shall be shown, except in the case of samples referred
to in Article 3, paragraph 3, of the Convention when it is not obligatory.
4 In legal currency of the exporting country. In cases where the values are the result of
conversion on a gold standard basis, this fact should be expressly mentioned in the title
of this column. In all cases value shall be shown, except in the case of samples referred
to in Article 3, paragraph 3, of the Convention when it is not obligatory.
4 In legal currency of the exporting country. In cases where the values are the result of
conversion on a gold standard basis, this fact should be expressly mentioned in the title
of this column. In all cases value shall be shown, except in the case of samples referred
to in Article 3, paragraph 3, of the Convention when it is not obligatory.
68 In English and French; French text not printed. Submitted to the Senate by the
President on Jan. 12, 1926; at the time of publication of this volume, the Senate’s
advice and consent to ratification had not been given.

Failure of the United States to secure the
adoption of the rules drafted by the
International Commission for the Revision
of the Rules of Warfare69
69 For previous correspondence concerning the revision of rules of warfare, see Foreign
Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 47 ff.
[50] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Washington, January 26, 1924.
[51] The Ambassador in Japan (Woods) to the Secretary of State
[52] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Washington, July 18, 1924.
[53] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[54] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

[55] The Minister in the Netherlands (Tobin) to the Secretary of State
[56] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[57] The Chargé in Great Britain (Sterling) to the Secretary of State

[Document 50]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)70
WASHINGTON, January 26, 1924.
SIR: The Conference on the Limitation of Armament at Washington adopted on February
States, the British Empire, France, Italy and Japan to consider the following questions:
(a) Do existing rules of international law adequately cover new methods of
attack or defense resulting from the introduction or development, since The
Hague Conference of 1907, of new agencies of warfare?
(b) If not so, what changes in the existing rules ought to be adopted in
consequence thereof as a part of the law of nations?
Article IV of the Resolution declared:
“that the Commission shall report its conclusions to each of the Powers
represented in its membership. Those Powers shall thereupon confer as to the
acceptance of the report and the course to be followed to secure the
consideration of its recommendations by the other civilized Powers.”
With the unanimous concurrence of the Powers mentioned in the above resolution an
invitation to participate in the work of the Commission was extended to and accepted
by the Netherlands Government. Moreover, it was agreed that the program of the
Commission should be limited to the preparation of Rules relating to Aerial Warfare,
and to Rules relating to the Use of Radio in Time of War.
A Commission of Jurists representative of the six Powers mentioned met in conference
prepared a set of Rules for the Control of Radio in Time of War,72 and also a set of
Rules for Aerial Warfare73 which were reported to the Powers aforesaid by the
Commission. In its Report the Commission expressed belief “that if these sets of rules
are approved and brought into force, it will be found expedient to make provision for
their reexamination after a relatively brief term of years to see whether any revision is
necessary”.73a

The Government of the United States is led to believe that the Rules as reported
represent a finer achievement with respect to the matters dealt with than could be
anticipated from the action of any other international body, and that they mark a
distinct step forward in promoting the work of international justice in time of war. It is,
therefore, disposed to initiate proceedings looking to the adoption of the Rules by the
several Powers which cooperated in their formulation. This Government is accordingly
prepared to make known to the other interested Powers its readiness, in conjunction
with them, to accept both sets of Rules as reported, and to make inquiry whether they
would be disposed to conclude Conventions in such a sense, annexing the Rules
thereto. As an appropriate basis for such Conventions, the Department believes that the
outline of a treaty proposed by the American delegation on the Commission of Jurists
on February 12, 1923,74 would suffice. That Convention, embracing three short
Articles, provides, after a preamble, (a) for the issuance of instructions to military and
naval forces in conformity with the annexed Rules respecting the use of aircraft (or
radio telegraphy); (b) that the annexed Rules be regarded not as superseding but as
supplementing the Rules as they may from time to time exist, the observance of which
in warfare is enjoined by international law and usage, by international conventions, and
by the dictates of humanity and the public conscience; and (c) that the annexed Rules
shall remain in force until July 1, 1933, and that in case none of the Contracting Parties
shall, eighteen months before that date, have given notice of a desire for the revision of
the Rules, they shall continue in force until the expiration of eighteen months after
notice of a desire for such revision shall be given; the Contracting Parties further
agreeing that, within ten months after such notice has been given, they will meet in
conference for the purpose of revising the Rules.
To the foregoing might possibly be added a fourth Article providing for the adherence
of States other than the Powers above mentioned.
You will accordingly, at an early date, bring to the attention of the Government of the
State to which you are accredited the substance of the foregoing statement. You will
make it clear that the Government of the United States is ready, in conjunction with the
Powers above mentioned, to accept the two sets of Rules reported by the Commission
of Jurists. You will inquire whether the Government of the State to which you are
accredited would be disposed to conclude with the United States and the Powers above
mentioned two Conventions such as were proposed by the American delegation at The
Hague, February 12, 1923, and as above outlined (including a fourth Article as
proposed above), to one of which the Rules for the Control of Radio in Time of War
should be annexed, and to the other the Rules for Aerial Warfare should be annexed;
both Conventions to be ratified according to the constitutional requirements of the
signatory States. You are further directed to inform such Government that the
Government of the United States is prepared, in conjunction with the several Powers
mentioned above, to authorize the signature of Conventions such as those proposed.

CHARLES E. HUGHES
(No. 87), and to the Minister in the Netherlands (No. 80).
74 Not printed.

[Document 51]
The Ambassador in Japan (Woods) to the Secretary of State
TOKYO, April 23, 1924.
[Received May 16.]
No. 459–E
from the Imperial Japanese Foreign Office to which reference was made in the
The note in question sets forth the willingness of the Japanese Government to adopt the
Rules relating to Aerial Warfare and the Rules relative to the Use of Radio in Time of
War, prepared by the Commission of Jurists who met at the Hague from December 11,
I have [etc.]
CYRUS E. WOODS
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Matsui) to the American Ambassador (Woods)
TOKYO, April 19, 1924.
No. 54
MONSIEUR L’AMBASSADEUR: On March 4th last, Mr. Caffery was good enough to address me a
Note asking, under instructions from his Government, for an expression of the views of
the Japanese Government on the adoption of the Rules relating to Aerial Warfare and of
the Rules relative to the Use of Radio in time of War, both prepared by the Commission
I have now the honor to inform Your Excellency that the Japanese Government,
believing, as they do, that the work of revising the rules of warfare promoted by the
Commission of Jurists at the Hague is a matter for sincere congratulation in the interest
of humanity, are happy to acquiesce in the proposal of the American Government to
conclude as among the Powers represented on that Commission the two conventions

substantially on the lines suggested by the American Delegation at the Hague on
February 12, 1923, and presented to me in Mr. Caffery’s Note under acknowledgment,
(including a fourth Article providing for the adherence of States other than the above-
mentioned Powers), the Rules for the Control of Radio in Time of War to one
Convention and the Rules for Aerial Warfare to the other, both Conventions to be
ratified in accordance with the constitutional requirements of the signatory Powers.
I avail myself [etc.]
BARON KEISHIRO MATSUI
75 Not printed.

[Document 52]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)76
WASHINGTON, July 18, 1924.
No. 1061
which you were informed of the results achieved by a Commission of Jurists
representative of the United States, the British Empire, France, Italy, Japan and the
regard to the codification of rules for the control of radio in time of war and also a set
of rules for aerial warfare. You were requested in the instruction under reference to
make clear to the Government to which you are accredited that the Government of the
United States is ready, in conjunction with the powers above mentioned, to accept the
two sets of rules reported by the Commission of Jurists. You were further instructed to
inquire whether the French Government would be disposed to conclude with the United
States and the powers above mentioned two conventions such as were proposed by the
American delegation at The Hague February 12, 1923, to one of which the rules for the
control of radio in time of war should be annexed and to the other, the rules for aerial
warfare should be annexed; both conventions to be ratified according to the
constitutional requirements of the signatory states.
The Department’s records do not indicate that any reply has been received from the
French Government to this matter, which this Government considers highly important
and a step which may have a far-reaching and beneficial effect in the future.
The Japanese Government has informed this Government that it is happy to acquiesce
in the proposals of the United States Government to conclude the two conventions
substantially on the lines suggested by the American delegation at The Hague on
February 12, 1923, believing, as it does, that the work of revising the rules of warfare
promoted by the Commission of Jurists at The Hague is a matter for sincere
congratulation in the interest of humanity. The Department desires that you avail
yourself of an early opportunity to bring this matter again to the attention of the
Foreign Office, referring to the favorable action taken by the Government of Japan, and
emphasizing this Government’s sincere hope that the French Government will now find
itself in a position to give an affirmative reply to the suggestion conveyed in the
Department’s instruction of January 26, 1924.

JOSEPH C. GREW
76 Similar instructions were sent on the same date to the Ambassadors in Great Britain
and Italy, and to the Minister in the Netherlands.

[Document 53]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)77
signed so that they may be submitted for consideration by Senate before Congress
adjourns on March 4. Informally confer with Foreign Office and urgently endeavor to
obtain favorable decision. Telegraph report.
HUGHES
77 Similar telegrams were sent on the same date to the Ambassadors in Great Britain

[Document 54]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
ROME, January 31, 1925.
[Received February 17.]
No. 313
Radio in Time of War, and also a set of Rules for Aerial Warfare, I have the honor to
inform the Department that after repeated efforts on the part of the Embassy to obtain a
definite statement from the Foreign Office in regard to the decision of the Italian
Government concerning this question, I received on January 30th last a reply from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, which was summarized in my telegram No. 22, above
referred to.
The Department will note from the enclosed translation of the Note from the Foreign
Office that while the Italian Government accedes to the principles involved in the
Conventions proposed, it feels that in view of recent developments in radio and aerial
navigation, and the progress made in juridical matters, it would be advisable to
consider the review and expansion of the Conventions. The Note also suggests the
extension of the provisions in the first Convention regarding the control of radio to
include radiotelephonic communication, which the Italian Government feels has today
assumed a position of particular importance.
I have [etc.]
HENRY P. FLETCHER
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs (Mussolini) to the American Ambassador (Fletcher)
[ROME,] January 29, 1925.

MR. AMBASSADOR: I have the honor to refer to the Note of Your Excellency dated January 12,
The proposals which, form the subject of the two Hague Conventions of February,
1923, upon the control of radio during war, and upon the rules for Aerial Warfare, have
been examined minutely by the Italian Government, through its various technical
departments.
The Royal Government is always favorable to any humanitarian movement tending to
the bringing about of accords and acts which regulate the various forms of warfare.
As regards the principles involved, therefore, the Royal Italian Government would have
no difficulty in acceding to the rules established in the Conventions referred to.
However, in view of recent developments both in radio and in aerial navigation, and
because of the progress likewise made in juridical matters, the Royal Italian
Government thinks that it would be useful to review and complete the plans for
conventions prepared at The Hague.
It might also be wise if, in connection with the control of the use of radio, there be
included in the first of the conventions in question an apposite clause extending its
provisions to include radiotelephonic communication, which has today assumed, as you
are aware, a particular importance.
Accept [etc.]
MUSSOLINI
78 See telegram, supra.
79 Neither printed.

[Document 55]
The Minister in the Netherlands (Tobin) to the Secretary of State
THE HAGUE, February 12, 1925.
[Received February 26.]
No. 398
correspondence, I have the honor to transmit herewith copies and translations of a Note
which I received to-day from the Netherlands Foreign Office, replying in great detail to
concerning the two sets of rules prepared by the Commission of Jurists which met at
I have [etc.]
RICHARD M. TOBIN
[Enclosure—Translation82 ]
The Netherlands Minister of Foreign Affairs (Karnebeek) to the American Minister (Tobin)82a
THE HAGUE, February 11, 1925.
No. 4391
MR. MINISTER: Your Excellency’s letter of February 12, 1924, concerning the Rules of
Aerial Warfare and the Control of Radio in Time of War, prepared by the Commission
of Jurists to Consider and Report upon the Revision of the Rules of Warfare has, as
Your Excellency is aware, been submitted to serious study.

Her Majesty’s Government has devoted particular attention to the study of the whole of
these rules which the United States and Japan appear disposed to accept in conjunction
with the other countries represented on the Commission which so carefully elaborated
them. As a result of the examination to which these rules were subjected by the

Netherlands, I am able to reply as follows to the question as to whether the Netherlands
Government would be disposed to conclude two conventions with the United States
and the other countries above mentioned on the basis outlined by the Government of
the United States, one of which would have as an annex the rules concerning aerial
warfare and the other the rules for the control of radio in time of war.
With respect to the form of the conventions to be concluded, Her Majesty’s
Government agrees in principle with the ideas expressed by the American Government
through the intermediary of the American delegation to the International Commission
of Jurists, in its plenary session of February 12, 1923, as well as in the above-
mentioned letter from Your Excellency. On its side, the Netherlands Government
proposes the insertion in each of the said conventions of a provision conformable to the
proposal concerning indemnities made by the Netherlands delegation on the
Commission of Jurists with respect to the rules of aerial warfare and inserted at the end
of the general report of the Commission. It points out that the principle of indemnity
had been approved by the Commission. The Netherlands Government likewise
proposes the insertion in the two conventions of a provision whereby differences which
might arise with respect to these indemnities would be submitted, in the absence of
settlement through other means, to arbitration or to the jurisdiction of the Permanent
Court of International Justice. For it is expedient, when, as is now the case, there is a
question of establishing new rules of international law and particularly new rights for
belligerents, to surround them with guarantees with a view to assuring their strict
application.
While, with respect to the context of the rules to be annexed, it reserves the right to
present observations of detail at the proper moment, the Royal Government would be
grateful if the Government of the United States would be good enough to consider the
question as to whether it is not expedient, in order to obtain as great a number as
possible of adhesions to the two conventions to be concluded, to convoke a new
conference to which all states of a certain importance would be invited, in order
definitely to agree upon the rules above mentioned. It seems that these rules could then
count with more certainty upon general approval and enforcement than if, as is
proposed, the states represented upon the Commission of Jurists agreed amongst
themselves whilst leaving to the other states—of which some may be reckoned as the
most important from the standpoint of military importance—merely the possibility of
adhering to these rules without their having had an opportunity to express their opinion
on these subjects. This procedure also seems better to carry out the idea of the
Washington resolution, whilst it constitutes the best manner of assuring the conclusions
of the Commission being taken into consideration by the other civilized powers. The
Netherlands Government would be glad to learn the view of the American Government
on this important point and would appreciate it if it would take up this suggestion with
the other States represented on the International Commission of Jurists.

Her Majesty’s Government also believes, even if a relatively large number of states
should adhere to the conventions to be concluded, but especially in case they are
concluded only by the states represented on the Commission, that it would be advisable
to remove all doubt concerning the reply to the question as to whether these
conventions must or must not be applied in a war in which the noncontracting states
might be a party. This point is not clearly regulated in the draft treaty presented by the
American delegation on February 12, 1923, and Your Excellency’s letter under
acknowledgment makes no mention thereof.
With respect to the rules regarding aerial warfare elaborated by the Commission which
would be annexed to the above-mentioned convention, the Netherlands Government
believes that these rules could contribute, at least in a great measure, toward bringing
certainty in a domain of international law where, until now, this certainty is lacking,
and toward favoring the development of international law in a direction which seems to
fill the needs of international society as the Netherlands Government understands them.
For this reason, the Netherlands Government, always desirous of promoting the
development of international law, would be happy to subscribe to most of the rules in
question, and it thanks the American Government for having taken the initiative toward
the conclusion of a convention which would set up these rules as provisions of law.
The Netherlands Government, while still referring to the right it has reserved above to
suggest modifications of form later, can agree to the greater part of the provisions of
the project. But, excepting the provisions of chapter VII, concerning which its point of
could hardly be accepted by it in their present form. The Netherlands delegation on the
Commission of Jurists brought forward objections to these stipulations which are
reproduced in the various procès-verbaux of the meetings83 and to which I beg to refer
you. Generally speaking, the delegation believed that the said articles gave too many
rights to the belligerents, to the detriment of neutral interests. The Netherlands
Government would like to see a revision of these stipulations in the sense of a better
protection of the situation of neutral persons and property.
Her Majesty’s Government cannot express its views regarding the contents of chapter
VII of these rules, concerning the right of search, of capture, and of confiscation,
before a new effort has been made to explain the sense, to fill the gaps, and to correct
the faults thereof. The Royal Government does not conceal the fact that the debates
which took place concerning this matter in the Commission of Jurists caused it the
same grave concern that led the Netherlands delegation to make a general reservation
concerning the subject of this chapter, apart from several special objections that it had
against certain points of detail. The motives which determined the attitude of the
delegation are enumerated in the general report of the Commission84 and in the procès-
verbaux of its meetings. As appears from the general report, the delegation pointed out
“that the custom and practice of international law is limited to a right on the part of

belligerent war vessels to capture, after certain formalities, merchant vessels used for
such commerce. Nothing justifies the extension of this right to aircraft, which
constitute a new engine of war entirely different from that of a war vessel, and entirely
incapable of exercising on merchant vessels or on private aircraft a control similar to
that exercised by a war vessel on vessels of commerce. Consequently there is no reason
to grant to military aircraft the right of capture as though it were a war vessel, and no
reason for subjecting commerce to capture when it is done by aircraft. In the
development of international law the tendency must be to accord greater rather than
fewer immunities to private property.”
May I be permitted to recall that this attitude was adopted by the delegation, aside from
the foregoing arguments, for the following reasons: Even if one were inclined for other
reasons to give to military airplanes the right to stop, to search, and to capture merchant
ships and private airplanes, it is necessary to recognize that, in view of the present state
of aviation, it will be impossible in most cases for the said military airplanes to proceed
in accordance with the rules and customs established for the exercise of this right by
vessels against vessels. For these rules and customs require (a) search on the site of
stoppage at sea, (b) (in case of stoppage followed by capture) the placing on board of
the captured vessels of a crew for conducting the prize, and escort of the latter by a war
vessel of the capturing state to one of its ports. It is evident that search at the site of
stoppage at sea, as well as the placing on board of a crew to conduct the prize and
escort to a port of the belligerent state will in most cases be impracticable for airplanes.
The delegation also brought to light the fact that, just because submarines cannot
conform to the rules and customs of maritime war, the use of these same submarines
against merchant vessels was subjected, by the Washington Conference of 1921–22, to
prescriptions of a wider scope. The same thing should have been done with respect to
the use of airplanes against merchant vessels and private airplanes, because they are
even less capable of conforming to the rules and customs above mentioned than are
submarines.
I likewise recall that the discussions which took place in the Commission were of such
nature as even more to increase the fears of the delegation. For it appeared that certain
delegations believed that the visitation and search of a vessel or an airplane stopped at
sea does not necessarily have to take place on the spot, before such vessel or airplane
can be forced to proceed to belligerent territory. It is certain that, if this rule were
admitted—and Her Majesty’s Government, for its part, does not admit it—visitation
and search of vessels would hardly ever take place on the spot, and that the merchant
vessels and airplanes would be almost always taken to belligerent ports, under the
menace of the belligerent’s guns and with all the direful consequences which would
follow. All guarantee against unjustified deviations would disappear; signals not
understood or imperfectly understood, either from units of a same belligerent or from
units of diverse belligerents, a lack of fuel—very possible in the case of airplanes—in
the course of the journey of deviation, and many other circumstances would expose

peaceful navigation to the worst perils; there is also the fact that a great many small
craft which have no radiotelephone or radiotelegraph apparatus on board, would not as
a general rule understand the signals given by aviators.
There is only one case in which the Netherlands delegation on the Commission of
Jurists was ready to permit the capture of a neutral airplane or vessel by a belligerent
airplane; that is, in the case of hostile assistance contrary to neutrality.
On its side, the Netherlands Government believes that its delegation rightly raised the
greatest objections against chapter VII of the rules concerning aerial warfare. If it were
sure that the last word had been said concerning this subject, it would be constrained to
reject this chapter. But it wonders whether amendments to this chapter might not make
it acceptable. It would like first of all to know whether the pretense to the right of
deviation is really the final word of the Governments which have presented it. It would
like, secondly, to be advised of the possibility of having accepted, afterward, the
American proposal concerning the exercise by a belligerent military airplane of the
right of visit against merchant vessels, which proposal appears at the place in the
general report of the Commission where this question is discussed at length.
Finally, the Netherlands Government recalls that its delegation on the Commission of
of the Commission of Jurists). The Netherlands Government could not summarily set
these objections aside. It also wonders whether the provision of article 53 (g) does not
require some modification to do away with the too absolute character of its present
wording. The Royal Government would like to learn the opinion of the other interested
powers on this point. It therefore reserves its attitude with respect to the whole of
chapter VII.
Concerning the proposed convention for the control of radio in time of war, the Royal
Government takes the liberty of referring to the remarks made above regarding the two
conventions to be concluded for the purpose of bringing into force the labors of the
Commission of Jurists. With respect to the rules themselves for the control of radio in
time of war, the Netherlands Government makes the following observations: In a
general manner, and with the sole exception of article 6, it can accept these rules in
principle. Concerning article 6, it would like to ask the interested Governments if they
are not of the opinion that the period of one year mentioned in paragraph 3 of this
article is not much too long, and, secondly, if they do not believe that it would be
advisable to open up the possibility of recourse to an international court (preferably the
Permanent Court of International Justice) in regard to the decisions of the national prize
courts pronounced in cases falling under article 6 of these rules. It is only after having
taken cognizance of the definite opinion of the other Governments that the Netherlands
Government would care to make any definite statement on this subject, and it would be

grateful if the American Government would be good enough to ask the other states—in
the first place those which were represented on the Commission of Jurists—to give
their opinion in this connection.
While awaiting with the greatest interest the remarks which the contents of this note
will suggest to the Government of the United States, I seize this occasion [etc.]
For the Minister:
A. M. SNOUCK HURGRONJE
The Secretary General
80 Not printed.
82 File translation revised.
Netherlands Minister of Foreign Affairs (Van Kleffens) consented to the publication of
this document with the explanation that the point of view of the Netherlands
Government with respect to various points presented therein has undergone
modifications and the present point of view is therefore not in its entirety identical to
83 Not printed.

[Document 56]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, March 12, 1925.
[Received March 21.]
No. 4941
transmit herewith a copy and translation of the reply from the French Foreign Office,
dated March 10th, with regard to the two conventions proposed at The Hague on
February 12, 1923, for the Control of Radio in Time of War and Rules for Aerial
Warfare.
I am forwarding a copy of this despatch with its enclosures to the American Embassy at
Rome and the American Legation at The Hague for their information.
I have [etc.]
MYRON T. HERRICK
[Enclosure—Translation]
The French Minister of Foreign Affairs (Herriot) to the American Ambassador (Herrick)
[PARIS,] March 10, 1925.
MR. AMBASSADOR: Your Excellency was good enough, in a letter dated February 4, 1924, to
inform my predecessor that the Government of the United States of America proposed
to incorporate in a new Convention the rules prepared by the Commission of Jurists
Government recognizes the very deep interest which this suggestion possesses, but an
examination of the rules that have been proposed has shown that most of them
reproduce solutions which have already been adopted by France and included either in
the International Conventions already in force, such as The Hague Convention of
1907,86 or amongst the practices of international law sanctioned by custom.
Other proposals, furthermore, would not be without objection, because, on many
points, the innovations which they imply are not in conformity with certain principles,
such as the freedom of the seas, or are open to criticism from other points of view.

The provisions with regard to aerial warfare which the aforementioned Commission
has more especially endeavored to regulate, are already included to a great extent in the
Convention on Aerial Navigation of October 13, 1919,87 but at times have a tendency
to deviate therefrom.
The ratification by the United States of the Air Convention of 1919, which they have
already signed, would have the advantage of putting immediately into practice the
provisions already accepted for several years and which have received a contractual
basis, while the present suggestion of the Government of the United States would risk
delaying their application by raising fresh discussions, either as to fundamental
principles or form, which might be lengthy, in view of the number of States which
would be called upon to take part therein.
Please accept [etc.]
HERRIOT
85 Not printed.
86 For texts of conventions concluded at the Second International Peace Conference,

[Document 57]
The Chargé in Great Britain (Sterling) to the Secretary of State
LONDON, April 9, 1925.
[Received April 23.]
No. 1166
relating to two proposed conventions relative to the rules for the control of radio in
time of war, and in this connection to forward a copy of the Foreign Office note
mentioned therein, in triplicate.
I have [etc.]
F. A. STERLING
[Enclosure]
The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain) to the American Chargé (Sterling)
[LONDON,] 6 April, 1925.
SIR: His Majesty’s Government have given careful consideration to the proposals of the
United States Government to my predecessor contained in Mr. Kellogg’s note of the
13th February, 1924, enquiring whether His Majesty’s Government would be disposed
to conclude with the United States of America and certain other powers two
conventions such as were proposed by the United States delegation at The Hague on
February 12th, 1923, relative to the rules for the control of radio in time of war and for
aerial warfare, drawn up at The Hague in 1922–23. I regret that owing to the necessity
of an exhaustive examination of the many important questions involved, I have been
obliged to delay replying to Mr. Kellogg’s above-mentioned and subsequent notes.

2. I now request you to inform your Government that His Majesty’s Government, while
warmly appreciating the friendly and humanitarian motives which have prompted these

proposals, have decided to await further international discussion on this question before
formulating their considered views on the Report of The Hague Commission.
I have [etc.]
AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN
88 Not printed.

Negotiations on behalf of the World War
Foreign Debt Commission for the settlement
of debts owed the United States by foreign
governments89
Contents

Belgium
[58] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
Washington, March 26, 1925.
[59] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
[60] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[61] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[62] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
[63] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State

[64] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
[65] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[66] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)

[Document 58]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
WASHINGTON, March 26, 1925.
No. 111
correspondence regarding the repayment by Belgium of certain debts owed to Great
Britain, and the bearing thereof on the obligation of Belgium to make corresponding
payments to the Government of the United States, the Department transmits herewith
the text of a note to the Belgian Government which you are instructed to present at the
first available opportunity.
Please inform the Department by telegraph of the date of the note which you present
pursuant to this instruction.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
[Enclosure]
Text of Note To Be Presented to the Belgian Foreign Office91
Under instructions from my Government, I have the honor to refer to certain
correspondence exchanged in 1919 between representatives of the Government of
Belgium and representatives of the Treasury Department of the United States regarding
the conditions under which the Government of the United States was prepared to make
further advances to the Government of Belgium. I have been instructed to refer in
particular to a letter dated February 5, 1919, from the Belgian Minister in Washington
to the then Secretary of the Treasury, to a letter dated April 22, 1919, from Mr.
Rathbone, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, to Mr. Symons, Counsellor of the
Minister of Finance in Paris, to Mr. Davis of the United States Treasury.
The letter dated February 5, 1919, from the Belgian Minister in Washington to the then
Secretary of the Treasury, was as follows:

“In reply to your letter of January 18th, I have much pleasure in informing
you, on receipt of telegraphic advice from my Government to that purpose,
that the Belgian Government willingly grants the request from the United
States Treasury that advances which it has made or which would be made to
Belgium for food and relief purposes during the period which has elapsed
since the cessation of hostilities, will receive treatment as favorable as that
accorded to advances which may be made to my Government by the British
or French Governments for reconstruction purposes.”
The letter of April 22, 1919, from Mr. Rathbone to Mr. Symons was in part as follows:
“I take pleasure in informing you that the Secretary of the Treasury is
prepared from time to time to establish further credits in favor of your
Government to be availed of from time to time against obligations of your
Government in a corresponding amount at such times and to such extent as
shall be determined by the Secretary of the Treasury up to the amounts
hereafter indicated, for the purposes hereinafter set forth and on the
understanding herein expressed.92
“The amounts of the credits which the Secretary of the Treasury is prepared
to establish in favor of your Government, as aforesaid, (subject to reduction
as hereinafter stated) and the purposes for which the same are to be availed
of, are as follows:
“(a) $2,150,000 or such lesser amount as may be sufficient with the
unexpended credit balance in favor of your Government for relief
purposes in the amount of $28,300,000, to provide for the amounts
which shall become due from your Government to the Commission
for Relief in Belgium in connection with the April program of said
Commission and to defray the cost of the purchase in the United
States of not exceeding 80 tons of wheat and 10 tons of lard, and
shipping charges in respect thereof to the extent such payment is
made to the United States Shipping Board on ships under the
control of the United States Shipping Board;
“(b) $1,000,000 or such lesser amount as may be sufficient to
provide for such purchases of your Government in the United
States up to June 1, 1919, for military supplies as may from time to
time be approved by the Treasury;

“(c) An additional sum sufficient to pay the interest due on May 15,
1919, on obligations of your Government held by the United
States.92
“The advances which may be made by the Secretary of the Treasury to your
Government against these credits will be made on the faith of the assurances
given to the Secretary of the Treasury by the Belgian Minister in his letter
dated February 5, 1919, that advances made or to be made by the United
States to the Belgian Government for food and relief purposes after the
cessation of hostilities would receive treatment as favorable as that accorded
to advances which might be made to the Belgian Government by the British
or French Governments for reconstruction purposes, and on the
understanding that in accordance with the determination of the Supreme
Economic Council in Paris all advances made to your Government after
November 11, 1918, by any of the allied governments and powers associated
in the war for food, relief and reconstruction purposes would be made a first
lien or charge on the amounts received by your Government from the enemy
countries for reparation or indemnity.
“As under the terms of the armistice the cost of the maintenance of the
Belgian army of occupation since November 11, 1918, is to be paid by
Germany, and as it is understood that the only part of this cost for which cash
is received now is the part for which expenditures are incurred in marks, the
balance constituting a claim against Germany to be liquidated out of its
additional payments to Belgium in priority to payments for reparation, the
Secretary of the Treasury is not prepared to make further advances to your
Government except upon its assurance that the Belgian Government will
repay to the Government of the United States the amount of advances made
to your government after November 11, 1918, by the United States Treasury
to provide supplies for the Belgian army, out of the first moneys received by
the Government of Belgium from Germany under the terms of the armistice.”
The letter from Mr. Symons dated May 14, 1919, replying to the above-mentioned
letter of April 22, 1919, from Mr. Rathbone, was as follows:
“I have the honor to inform you that I have received a cable message from
the Minister of Finances of Belgium confirming the acceptance by the
Belgian Government of the conditions established for further advances to
Belgium by the United States Government as set forth in your letter of April
22nd.”

The letter dated June 15, 1919, from Mr. van den Ven to Mr. Davis contained the
following statement:
“In reply to your letter to the Belgian Minister of Finance of April 29, and to
your letters to me of May 12 and May 28, I am requested to inform you that
the Belgian Government agrees to repay to the United States Government the
amount of advances made by the United States since November 11, 1918 for
the purchase of supplies necessary to the maintenance of the Belgian army of
occupation out of the first moneys which Germany will pay to Belgium under
the terms of the Armistice to cover the cost of the maintenance of the Belgian
army of occupation.”

The letter from Mr. van den Ven to Mr. Davis dated July 8, 1919, was as follows:
“In answer to your letter to me of the 21st of June, the Belgian Government
agrees entirely to your understanding of the terms of my letter of June 15th.
The agreement referred to in this letter equally includes moneys paid by
Germany to Belgium to cover the cost of maintaining the Belgian army of
occupation, whether such moneys will be paid under the terms of the
armistice or of the Treaty of Peace.
“The Belgian Government accepts, moreover, that the first moneys received
by Belgium from Germany under the terms of the armistice or the Treaty of
Peace to cover the cost of the maintenance of the Belgian army of occupation
shall be alloted to the Governments of the United States, Great Britain and
France in proportion to the advances made by each of these three
Governments to Belgium since the armistice in support of the Belgian army
of occupation.”
The understanding pursuant to which the Government of the United States continued
after the armistice to make advances to the Government of Belgium is clearly set forth
in the above quoted extracts from the contemporary correspondence which establish
beyond question the duty of Belgium to repay its post-armistice borrowings out of its
receipts from Germany, and to accord to the United States no less favorable treatment
in connection with payments on account of such borrowings than is accorded to other
creditor governments.
On August 18, 1921, the Secretary of State of the United States addressed a note to the
Belgian Ambassador at Washington93 referring to the assurances given by the Belgian
Government in the course of the above-mentioned correspondence, stating that it was
the information of the United States that certain cash payments on reparation account

had been or were about to be made to Belgium, and requesting information as to what
steps the Belgian Government was taking towards the allocation of the proper
proportion of these cash reparation payments to apply on the advances made by the
United States pursuant to the understandings in question. No reply was received to this
communication, and on October 22, 1921, a further note on this subject was addressed
to the Belgian Chargé d’Affaires.93 No reply was received to this second
communication, and on January 3, 1922, a third note was addressed to the Belgian
Embassy93 requesting an explanation of the position of the Belgian Government with
respect to the repayment of the post-armistice advances made by the United States. In a
note dated January 7, 1922,93 the Belgian Ambassador replied that he had drawn the
attention of his Government to the matter and that he would not fail to inform the
Department of the reply of his Government when it reached him. Although more than
three years have since elapsed, the Government of the United States has received no
further reply to its inquiries of August 18, 1921, and the Government of Belgium,
although according to the figures of the Reparation Commission it has received on
reparation account considerably more than one billion gold marks in cash, and than 300
million gold marks in kind, has made no suggestion that any portion of such receipts
should be applied in accordance with the above-mentioned understanding between the
two Governments.
In April, 1922, the Government of Belgium was informed of the creation of the World
War Foreign Debt Commission and of the desire of that Commission to receive any
proposals or representations which the Government of Belgium might wish to make for
the settlement or refunding of its obligations to the Government of the United States,94
and in a note dated April 27, 1922,95 the Belgian Ambassador at Washington stated that
he had been designated by his Government to negotiate with the World War Foreign
Debt Commission with a view to arriving at a satisfactory settlement within the scope
of the Act creating that Commission. The Belgian Ambassador at Washington later
submitted to the World War Foreign Debt Commission certain data regarding the
financial situation of Belgium, stating that his Government would pay the interest due
on the notes maturing in August, 1922, but would be unable to pay the principal, and
informed the Commission that he was sailing for Belgium on June 17, 1922, and that
on his return he would lay before the Commission definite proposals for the
consolidation of the Belgian indebtedness to the United States.95a No such proposals
have, however, been received from the Belgian Government and, excepting payments
which will be made by Belgium out of sums received under Article 4 of the Agreement
signed in Paris on January 14, 1925,96 Belgium is at the present time making payment
to the Government of the United States only on account of the interest accruing on
obligations, now overdue, which were taken by the War Department in exchange for
war material sold to Belgium by the Liquidation Commission of the War Department.
The obligations in question are but a small part of the total indebtedness of the
Government of Belgium to the Government of the United States, which on November

unpaid interest, a total of $471,823,713.39.
In view of the clear understanding reached in 1919 between the Government of the
United States and the Government of Belgium regarding the advances made by the
former Government to the latter subsequent to the armistice, and in view of the failure
of Belgium to negotiate a general debt settlement in substitution therefor, it is with no
little surprise that the Government of the United States has learned that the Government
of Belgium has made substantial payments to certain other creditor governments on
account of post-armistice advances made by those governments for purposes similar to
those for which the Government of the United States made its advances. It appears
from an official publication of the Belgian Government97 that from November 11,
indebtedness are reported to be as follows:
1. Advances in cash to the Commission for Relief in Belgium
2. Advances in cash to the Belgian Government
3. Assignments and loans to the C. R. B
4. Assignments to the Belgian Government
5. Restoration of the Ports of Ostend, of Zeebrugge, and of the
Belgian Coast
6. Interest due on these advances
870,978  –  –
Total
This same publication states that the above-mentioned debt has been repaid as follows:
1. By means of a remittance to England of a sum of on November
20, 1918, deposited to the account of the Belgian Treasury at the
Bank of England before the Armistice and consequently carried to
Germany’s account.
2. By previous deduction from the English credit of Reconstruction,
Coast)
3. By reduction granted by England on the price of materials
(cessions)
4. By installments during January–February [1922] taken from the
sum of installments paid by Germany for “Reparations” account.
Total

The Government of the United States is also informed that on December 31, 1924, the
Belgian Treasury paid to the Canadian Government the sum of 2,278,558.63 Canadian
dollars representing the principal amount of a credit extended by Canada to Belgium in
Canadian products and merchandize, together with interest at 5½%, amounting to
515,769 Canadian dollars. The agreement under which this loan was made to the
Government of Belgium provided that the advances were to enjoy treatment pari passu
with claims of other Allied and Associated Powers of a similar nature.
The Government of the United States has also received information that the
Government of Belgium is paying interest to the Government of Great Britain on the
relief advance of £9,000,000 made by the latter Government subsequent to the
armistice. A letter from the Secretary of the Treasury to the Belgian Minister at
Washington, dated January 18, 1919, referred specifically to the above-mentioned
British credit and stated that
“the United States Treasury must take the position that the advances which it
has made to your Government for food and relief purposes during this period
must receive treatment as favorable as that accorded to advances which may
be made to your Government by the British or French Governments for
reconstruction purposes.”
As indicated above, the Belgian Minister in Washington informed the Secretary of the
1919, from which the above extract is taken, that the Belgian Government agreed that
American advances subsequent to the armistice for food and relief purposes should
receive as favorable treatment as that accorded to advances by the British or French
Governments for reconstruction purposes.
I have the honor to state that, in the light of the foregoing circumstances, I have been
instructed by my Government to inquire when it may expect to receive payments from
the Government of Belgium on account of its indebtedness to the United States
incurred subsequent to the armistice for the purposes set forth in the correspondence
above-mentioned, proportionate to the payments which the Government of Belgium
appears to have made to other creditor governments on similar account.
I am also instructed to add in this same connection that the Government of the United
States would be pleased to have the Government of Belgium make proposals in the
near future to the World War Foreign Debt Commission looking to the funding on a
mutually satisfactory basis of the Belgian obligations now held by the United States
Treasury which bear interest at the rate of 5% per annum, and which, as the
Government of Belgium is aware, are in their present form all overdue or payable on

demand (with the exception of obligations in the principal amount of $2,284,151.40
which mature April 9, 1930).
90 Not printed.
92 The omission which follows was indicated in the original note.
92 The omission which follows was indicated in the original note.
93 Not printed.
93 Not printed.
93 Not printed.
93 Not printed.
Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 399.
97 Rapport fait, au nom de la Commission Permanente des Finances, des Budgets et
des Economies (Chambre des Représentants, séance du 24 Juillet, 1924).

[Document 59]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
[Paraphrase]
negotiations for proposed loan of $50,000,000 from J. P. Morgan and Company to
Belgium. After consultation with the President and with the approval of Secretary of
the Treasury Mellon and Secretary of Commerce Hoover, I informed Mr. Lamont that
the Government of the United States would not look with favor upon any further loans
to Belgium until that Government took definite steps in the direction of funding its
indebtedness to the United States. I gave Mr. Lamont the substance of our recent note
to Belgium and emphasized fact of Belgium’s discrimination against us in the matter of
post-armistice relief debt. He said that his firm would not make loan if the United
States objected. He also read me a cable from his European representative saying that
the Belgians had stated that they were unable to take any steps toward funding their
indebtedness to the United States until a new Government had been formed and until
they had prescribed and passed their budget; and that they thought that they would be
able to discuss a refunding arrangement about September. I informed Mr. Lamont that I
regarded this prospect as unsatisfactory, that it was merely a repetition of what had
taken place in the past, and that this was not the first time that the Belgian Ambassador
was going over to discuss situation with his Government. If his Government could now
negotiate for and contract a loan for $50,000,000 with American bankers, it should
certainly take up negotiations on the debt to this Government.
(2) You will immediately seek appointment with the appropriate Belgian officials and
will make the following oral statement: The Belgian Government is at present
negotiating with American bankers for sale to the American public through them of
$50,000,000 of Belgian bonds. While the Government of the United States does not
wish to oppose flotation by Belgium in the American market of loans essential to the
financial reconstruction of Belgium, nevertheless the Belgian Government will
appreciate that the Government of the United States has a responsibility which must
lead it to see that national interests are protected. Further delay on Belgium’s part in
funding its indebtedness to the Government of the United States might lead to
differences between the two Governments which should be avoided. A settlement is
clearly in the interests of both Governments. The Government of the United States will
not interpose objection to flotation in the United States of proposed $50,000,000 loan

by Belgium on condition that Belgian Government undertake at once to refund its
entire indebtedness to the United States on following principles:98
“(a) In accordance with the policy prescribed by the debt funding
act and the position consistently maintained by the Government of
the United States, this Government looks solely to Belgium for
payment of its indebtedness which on May 15, 1925, with principal
and accrued and unpaid interest, aggregated over $480,000,000 and
which, with the exception of about $2,000,000, is all payable on
demand. Germany may not be substituted directly or indirectly for
Belgium in respect of the pre-armistice debt.
(b) Settlement to be submitted to the approval of Congress, may be
made along the lines of the British-American debt funding
agreement,99 with amortization of the principal of the debt in sixty-
two years and annual payments representing interest and
installments of principal.
(c) Such postponement or payment of the earlier installments of
interest or modification of rates of interest as may be required by
the fiscal and economic condition of Belgium.”
No objection will be interposed by the Government of the United States to floating of
proposed loan should it receive a communication in writing from the appropriate
Belgian officials that Belgium accepts principles set forth in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c)
of above statement and will send at earliest possible moment a commission to the
United States to negotiate settlement with our Debt Funding Commission.
Settlements on substantially same basis have been reached with Great Britain, Finland,
Hungary, Lithuania, and Poland.1
(3) You may hand to appropriate Belgian officials informal memorandum containing
quoted paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) above.
(4) Please cable Department on action taken.
KELLOGG
98 Quoted passage not paraphrased.
(Washington, Government Printing Office, 1927), p. 106.

[Document 60]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
afternoon at conference with the ad interim Ministers of Finance and of Foreign
Affairs. A decision was reached to accept your conditions and they will send me a note
tomorrow to that effect. Text will be immediately cabled Department. The Acting
Minister of Finance (Mr. Van de Vyvere) said that in view of existing exchange
situation the $50,000,000 loan had become immediate necessity and that he had no
alternative, therefore, but to accept required conditions. [He found?] conditions in
paragraph (a) hard, and said that there was a public opinion in Belgium which had
always distinguished between the war debts and the post-armistice debts. He referred to
the negotiations on subject of the war debt which had taken place at Paris with
authorized American representatives during peace conference and said that facts of the
Belgian situation had then been recognized.2 He was fully aware that as the United
States had not ratified the Treaty of Versailles it was not legally bound by its terms, but
he felt that, at least, morally, negotiations should have been resumed where they had
stopped before Belgium should be required to accept certain definite conditions.
I explained in detail impossibility for us to distinguish between war debts and post-
armistice debts as well as impossibility of giving Belgium special treatment in her war
debts in view of debt-funding arrangement, which we had already concluded with other
nations. I pointed out importance of paragraph (c) and said that I felt confident that
when the Belgian commission arrived in the United States it would receive the most
sympathetic consideration. I dwelt especially on desirability that this commission
should proceed with least possible delay. I was assured that it would go forward in July
and would certainly be composed of ex-Premier Theunis and Mr. Hautain, Governor of
the National Bank.
PHILLIPS
France, Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. II, p. 66.

[Document 61]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9:30 p.m.]
65. The following note has just been received from the Foreign Office:
“Mr. Ambassador: Your Excellency’s memorandum of May 31 has received
the attention of the Government of the King. In reply I ask Your Excellency
to be so good as to communicate to your Government the following:
The Government of the King has confirmed several times its determination to
honor its engagements contracted with the United States.
1. As far as concerns the advances granted to Belgium by the Allied and
Associated Governments before November 11th, 1918 the Belgian
Government considers it its duty to remark that according to the terms of
article 232 of the Treaty of Versailles3 Germany is obliged to carry out their
reimbursement. This treaty having become a Belgian law, the arrangements
agreed to by the Government of the King in order to replace the clause of the
Treaty of Versailles which has become void as far as concerns the
Government of the United States by reason of its nonratification, will require
the approval of the legislative powers.
The Belgian Government cannot help but recall that it only accepted to sign
the Treaty of Versailles notably because of the advantages which article 232
accorded to it. Had it been able to foresee that this treaty would not be
ratified by all the signatory powers it would have taken measures to have
Belgium freed entirely from the sums which she had been required to spend
during the hostilities as a result of violation of the treaties of 1839.
The United States not having ratified the Treaty of Versailles the Belgian
Government cannot legally make a point of article 232 vis-à-vis the United
States. The elements of fact however and the moral and juridical
considerations which in 1919 determined the Allied and Associated Powers
to accord special advantages to Belgium by reason of her particular situation
still retain all their value.

The declarations of the President of the United States during the war on the
subject of the complete restoration of Belgium, the constitution [sic]
developed in the course of the peace negotiations, and which demonstrated
the necessity of according to my country a special treatment in satisfaction of
its recognized right to such restoration, constitute a right which continues to
exist whatever may have been the fate of article 232.
During the progress of the conversations which are about to commence the
two Governments should take this into account.
in the table of our public debt. After an accord shall have been arrived at with
the American Government on the subject of their consolidation the necessary
credits must be provided for in the budget and submitted to Parliament.
Having in mind the benefits of the considerations above exposed (sous le
bénéfice des considérations exposes), and it being well understood that the
sum of $480,000,000 indicated by the American Government as capital and
interest of Belgian debt is subject to verification by the negotiators, the
Government of the King adheres in principle to the contents of the
memorandum transmitted by Your Excellency May 31 last and engages itself
to send to Washington at a time to be fixed by agreement between the two
Governments a mission charged to negotiate the consolidation of its debts.
I take this occasion Mr. Ambassador, etc.”
I believe that the contemplated oral communication is embodied in this note.
PHILLIPS

[Document 62]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
[Paraphrase]
(1) Belgian note is unsatisfactory. On our proposition (a), it leaves the matter in doubt
whether the present Government unconditionally accepts it. Article 232, Treaty of
Versailles only requires that Germany reimburse Belgium for money borrowed from
Allied and Associated Governments and does not in any way relieve Belgium of her
primary obligation, and our right to reimbursement from her does not depend,
therefore, upon either ratification of or failure to ratify that treaty.
In regard to our proposition (b), the Belgian note does not pledge that Government to
negotiate on that basis; it simply says that credits must be submitted to Parliament. All
that we ask is that negotiations should be conducted on basis of the three principles set
recommended by the negotiators will have to be submitted to Belgian Parliament for
ratification as recommendations of our World War Foreign Debt Commission will have
to be submitted to Congress.
(2) Subject to paragraph (3) below, you will make following communication to Belgian
Government:4
“The Government of the United States has received the communication of
blank concerning the indebtedness of Belgium to the United States. It is
noted that although the Government of the King adheres in principle to the
contents of the memorandum of May 31, nevertheless attention is drawn to
the pre-armistice advances made by the Government of the United States to
Belgium and it is stated that the conversations which are about to commence
should take into account the position set forth in paragraph one of the
communication under acknowledgment concerning this matter. It is further
noted that, although the Belgian Government does not consider that it can
legally make a point of Article 232 vis-a-vis the United States, the contention
is advanced that Belgium has ‘a right which continues to exist whatever may
have been the fate of Article 232.’

“As stated in paragraph (a) of the memorandum of May 31, the Government
of the United States continues to look solely to Belgium for payment of this
indebtedness, and cannot consent that Germany be substituted directly or
indirectly for Belgium in respect of the pre-armistice debt. The Government
of the United States is in doubt whether the Belgian Government
unconditionally accepts the proposition contained in paragraph (a) of the
memorandum of May 31, and does not find in the communication of the
Belgian Government a pledge that the Government of Belgium will negotiate
on the basis set forth in that memorandum. The Government of the United
States desires more express assurance on this point.
“The Government of the United States has also noted that the Belgian
Government engages itself to send to Washington at a time to be fixed by
agreement a mission charged to negotiate a settlement of the indebtedness of
Belgium, and understands that this mission could go forward in July. The
Government of the United States would be glad) if negotiations could
commence at Washington at a date in July that may be convenient to the
Belgian Government.”
(3) If you think preferable and can obtain satisfactory communication in place of that
quoted in your telegram No. 65, you may proceed on that line. It is essential, however,
to receive unequivocal statement from Government of Belgium (eliminating conditions
stated in its note as quoted in your telegram) that it accepts and will negotiate on basis
of principles set forth in memorandum of May 31 (the capital and interest of the debt to
be subject to verification) and that the Belgian mission will commence negotiations in
Washington next month.
Department will await your reply before taking any action on loan sought by Belgium
from J. P. Morgan and Company.
KELLOGG
4 Memorandum not paraphrased.

[Document 63]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
morning, the other in the afternoon, I presented your position strongly to the ad interim
Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Finance. At last the Ministers decided to send you a
clear and explicit statement of unconditional acceptance of paragraph (a) and
expression of their willingness to negotiate on basis of the three paragraphs of May 31
memorandum.
In view of existing public opinion that in some way Belgium has been relieved of her
war debt, the acting Minister of Finance (Mr. Van de Vyvere) does not feel that he is in
a position to close door in forthcoming negotiations to presentations of circumstances
surrounding Belgium’s case. For this reason their Belgian memorandum is in nature of
an explanation of statements in earlier communication and I think may be accepted as
recession from former position. Memorandum seeks to make clear that although in
Belgium’s opinion the circumstances surrounding negotiations in 1919 are deserving of
consideration in forthcoming negotiations, Belgium does not assert that they constitute
a right or a legal claim.
As the Ministers preferred to have their reply of June 2 remain, I handed them the
memorandum contained in your No. 35, giving it date of June 4; I have received in
reply following memorandum dated June 5, which I hope will be satisfactory to you.5
Please telegraph me your decision.
The Belgian Government wishes to dissipate doubt as to its unconditional
acceptance of the proposal contained in paragraph (a) of the memorandum of
the 31st of May.
Its object in presenting the arguments as contained in paragraph 1 of the note
of June 2 is not with a view to maintain the substitution of Germany for
Belgium as debtor nor to contest that Belgium alone is accountable to the
United States for the payment of its debt. The statements were made for the
purpose of assuring to the negotiators the opportunity of bringing out all the
circumstances in their case. Belgium believes that these circumstances are

worthy of consideration but does not pretend that this constitute[s] a right or
a legal claim.
Belgium therefore means to give an express assurance that it will negotiate
on the bases of paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) proposed in the memorandum of
May 31st.
The Belgian Government undertakes to recommend for the approval of the
legislative power the arrangements which it hopes sincerely will result from
these negotiations.
PHILLIPS
5 Memorandum not paraphrased.

[Document 64]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
[Paraphrase]
not cover sending of a mission (see last paragraph memorandum Department’s No. 35,
June 3, 7 p.m.). If the Belgian Government gives you written assurance that it will send
a mission in July to negotiate a settlement, you may state that the Government of the
United States considers Belgium’s assurances satisfactory. Immediate answer is desired
so that we can notify Morgan and Company on Monday.
KELLOGG

[Document 65]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
intention to send the mission to Washington in July they were entirely ready to give the
necessary assurance in writing.
Theunis being still absent in Italy the actual date in July of his departure for the United
States is not definitely settled. However it is certain that the negotiations can begin next
month.
The written statement received and dated today is as follows:
“The Government of the King has taken note of the desire expressed by the
Government of the United States in its note of June 4 last with a view to
opening the negotiations in Washington in July next at a date which would be
agreeable to the Belgian Government. The Government of the King is in
accord as to the commencing of the negotiations next month and it will come
to an understanding shortly as to the date upon which it will be convenient
for the Belgian commission to go to Washington.”
I have informed the Foreign Office that the Government of the United States considers
Belgian assurance as satisfactory.
PHILLIPS

[Document 66]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
[Paraphrase]
Belgian Government will send mission in July to take up debt negotiations.6 We have
also informed Morgan that Department has no objection to the $50,000,000 loan.
GREW
6 The Belgian commission sailed from Cherbourg, France, on July 80. For the opening
of negotiations, text of the agreement signed August 18, and other relevant material,
see Combined Annual Reports of the World War Foreign Debt Commission, pp. 166–
182.

Czechoslovakia
[67] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)
Washington, April 4, 1925.
[68] The Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) to the Secretary of State
[69] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)
[70] The Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) to the Secretary of State
[71] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)
[72] The Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) to the Secretary of State

[73] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)
[74] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)
[75] The Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) to the Secretary of State
[76] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)
[77] The Czechoslovak Chargé (Lípa) to the Secretary of State
Washington , September 21, 1925.

[Document 67]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)
WASHINGTON, April 4, 1925.
No. 252
SIR: With reference to previous correspondence regarding the indebtedness of
Czechoslovakia to the United States, the Department transmits herewith the text of a
note to the Czechoslovak Government which you are instructed to present at the first
available opportunity.
Please inform the Department by telegraph of the date of the note which you present
pursuant to this instruction.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
[Enclosure]
Text of Note To Be Presented to the Czechoslovak Government
Under instructions from my Government, I have the honor to refer to certain
correspondence exchanged in 1919 between a representative of the Government of
Czechoslovakia and a representative of the Treasury Department of the United States
regarding the conditions under which the Government of the United States was
prepared to make further advances to the Government of Czechoslovakia, that is to say,
to a letter dated May 19, 1919, from Mr. Norman H. Davis, Finance Commissioner of
the United States, to Mr. Edouard Beneš, Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Czechoslovakia, and to the reply from Mr. Beneš dated June 26, 1919.
The letter from Mr. Davis, dated May 19, 1919, was as follows:
“The Government of the United States of America has made advances to the
Government of your country for relief and reconstruction purposes, and the
question of further advances is under consideration.
“The Secretary of the Treasury desires me to express to you his opinion that,
in view of the circumstances under which, and the purposes for which, these

advances are made, it is proper that your Government should agree not to
take any action by way of legislation, concessions, or agreements which
might put any of the Allied or Associated Powers or their nationals in a more
favorable position than the United States government or its nationals, or
which will discriminate against the nationals of the United States.
“I shall be glad to hear from you, so that I may communicate your reply to
the Secretary of the Treasury.”
“I beg you to excuse my involuntary delay in replying to you. I sent your
letter to Prague, for the information of my colleagues of the Cabinet,
especially the Minister of Commerce, and received no immediate reply.
“For my part, I can assure you that our Government wholly shares your point
of view on the question of which you spoke in your letter of May 19, 1919.
The Czechoslovak Government recognizes with the utmost satisfaction the
great services, both financial and economic, rendered it by the Government
of the United States. It has no intention whatever of favoring one of our
Allies to the detriment of another or of taking measures vis-à-vis one which
could be unfavorable to another. It intends to continue the same policy—in
the field of economics and finance—that it practiced during the war, namely,
of having the same general attitude toward all our allies.
“Please accept, Sir, the expression of my highest sentiments.”
In view of the understanding set forth in the above correspondence regarding the
treatment to be accorded to the advances made by the Government of the United States
to the Government of Czechoslovakia, it is with no little surprise that the Government
of the United States has learned that the Government of Czechoslovakia, although it
has made no corresponding proposal to the Government of the United States, has
agreed to repay to the Governments of Denmark, France, Great Britain, Holland,
Norway, Sweden and Switzerland within five years, with interest at five per cent., the
relief indebtedness of Czechoslovakia to those Governments. My Government is also
informed that the Government of Czechoslovakia has agreed to pay separately to each
of the above-mentioned Governments the amount of interest, if any, calculated at the
rate of six per cent, per annum and accumulated semi-annually, which on January 1,
1925, was due and unpaid, and to constitute the payments to be made pursuant to these
arrangements a first charge on receipts accruing to the Government of Czechoslovakia
by way of compensation, reparation or indemnity from ex-enemy Governments, other
than receipts by way of restitution in kind, and subject to any charges already created in
respect of previous loans.

The Government of the United States has accorded the most considerate treatment to
the Government of Czechoslovakia in connection with the indebtedness of the latter to
the United States. Although as early as April 25, 1922, I had the honor to inform the
Government of Czechoslovakia of the creation of the World War Foreign Debt
Commission and of the desire of that Commission to receive any proposals or
representations which the Government of Czechoslovakia might wish to make for the
settlement or refunding of its obligations to the Government of the United States,8 it
was not until May, 1923, that representatives of the Government of Czechoslovakia
commenced negotiations with the World War Foreign Debt Commission in
Washington, and although nearly two years have elapsed since the visit of the
Czechoslovak Debt Commission,8a no proposals have been received by the World War
Foreign Debt Commission for either the settlement or the refunding of the indebtedness
of Czechoslovakia to the United States which as of November 15, 1924, amounted to
of the indebtedness of Czechoslovakia to the United States was incurred entirely for
relief purposes, including the repatriation of Czechoslovak troops from Siberia, and
among the obligations held by the United States Treasury is a relief bond, Series “A”
Governments of Denmark, France, Great Britain, Holland, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland, which were the subject of the recent agreement referred to above.
Under the circumstances, I am therefore instructed to state that the Government of the
United States cannot agree that the Government of Czechoslovakia should make no
payments to the United States on account of its indebtedness while making payments to
other Governments on account of indebtedness to them incurred by Czechoslovakia for
similar purposes, and that the Government of the United States will not acquiesce in
any discrimination against the United States in favor of other creditor governments
either through agreements such as those recently concluded or otherwise. My
Government therefore would be pleased if it could receive from the Government of
Czechoslovakia an appropriate proposal for the payment or refunding of the obligations
of the Czechoslovak Government now held by the United States Treasury which,
are all payable on demand either in terms or because over-due.
7 A translation has been substituted by the editor for the French text which here
followed.

[Document 68]
The Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:55 p.m.]
any intention of discriminating against the United States by arranging payment of so-
called Nansen relief bonds and believes such impression is based on misunderstanding.
Will write me in explanation.
EINSTEIN
9 Note dated April 30.

[Document 69]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)
Czechoslovakia.
Should you find it necessary to discuss this matter with Dr. Beneš, you should bear in
mind first that his letter of June 26, 1919, pledged his Government not to discriminate
against the United States; second that the Czechs agreed to the London arrangement for
refunding the relief credits extended by each Government except the United States
without informing or consulting this Government or offering similar terms to it; third,
that this action is in fact discrimination against the United States; fourth, that in
addition to the foregoing the United States holds a Czech relief bond, due and payable
January 1, 1925, identical in terms with those refunded under the London agreement;
fifth, that among the terms of this bond is an undertaking by Czechoslovakia that it will
make no payment in respect of any such relief bond “unless a similar payment shall
simultaneously be made upon all the obligations of said series issued by the Republic
of Czechoslovakia in proportion to the respective obligations of said series”. Payments
under the London agreement therefore violate this specific assurance.
Belgium and Rumania have also similarly discriminated against the United States and
this Government has made vigorous representations through the Embassy at Brussels
and the Legation at Bucharest.10
KELLOGG
Doc. 110 and Doc. 111].

[Document 70]
The Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) to the Secretary of State
[Received 3:30 p.m.]
1919; if he had remembered this he would have negotiated differently with
Great Britain.
2. He reaffirms the intention of Czechoslovakia to honor all her engagements.
3. On his return from Geneva where he goes tomorrow he will take up the
debt question with the Minister of Finance and give me early answer. My
impression is that he will settle relief bonds on the same terms as extended to
other governments.
EINSTEIN

[Document 71]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)
[Paraphrase]
26. On July 6 the Czechoslovak Chargé, Dr. Lípa, conversed at the Department with
Mr. Richardson, Acting Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs. Dr. Lípa
stated that he was under instructions from his Government to say that it had been
giving consideration to your note of May 2 regarding indebtedness of Czechoslovakia
to the United States and that his Government had in principle agreed to meet all
obligations toward this Government. Specifically, they agree to recognize the sum of
approximately $80,000,000 verified by commission which came to Washington in
1923; to negotiate in immediate future for verifying of balance of about $11,000,000
that is still in dispute between Czechoslovakia, War Department, and Shipping Board,
the verified amount on account of these items to be added to the already admitted
$80,000,000; and to acknowledge the total as the sum of indebtedness of
Czechoslovakia to the United States.
According to the Chargé, the Government of Czechoslovakia is prepared to negotiate at
once conditions of payment of the $80,000,000 verified, and to do so either through the
Czechoslovak Legation in Washington or through a special mission, whichever the
Government of the United States might deem preferable.

Dr. Lípa stated that above points would be incorporated in formal communication to be
addressed to this Government within a week or so, and he wishes to ascertain if they
would constitute a basis satisfactory to the World War Foreign Debt Commission upon
which to begin negotiations, as his Government does not wish to send a formal
communication in sense of the foregoing if the conditions are unacceptable.
The Department has communicated substance of Chargé’s statement to Treasury
Department for its comment, and would be pleased to have you report by telegraph any
information discreetly available on actual intentions of Government of Czechoslovakia.
GREW

[Document 72]
The Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) to the Secretary of State
[Received 2:50 p.m.]
d’Affaires; other nations having expressed their wish to negotiate debt settlement
Czechoslovakia no longer regards itself as obligated to them and wants to proceed
independently to effect debt settlement. Dr. Beneš reported he personally favored
beginning immediate payments but his view was opposed by Minister of Finance. Note
regarding debt settlement would come up for final decision of Cabinet next Tuesday
and would be communicated to the Legation before the end of the week.
EINSTEIN

[Document 73]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)
Czechoslovak Chargé:
“The World War Foreign Debt Commission would be glad to negotiate upon
the settlement of the entire Czechoslovak debt to the United States with a
commission from Czechoslovakia having due power to negotiate and
conclude a settlement. Arrangements could be made in the debt settlement for
an appropriate adjustment of any part of the total indebtedness not now
admitted by Czechoslovakia to be due. There is no reason, however, why a
debt settlement need await a verification of the total since this is simply a
mechanical matter of auditing the accounts, and any debt settlement should
cover the entire debt whatever it is ultimately determined to be.”
Please keep Department informed by telegraph of further developments.
KELLOGG

[Document 74]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)
[Paraphrase]
left at Department by Czechoslovak Chargé:11
“The Czechoslovak Minister of Foreign Affairs, Dr. Eduard Beneš, thanks
Secretary of the Treasury Mellon, as the chairman of the World War Foreign
Debt Commission, for his communication.
The Czechoslovak Government is desirous of entering negotiations to cover
the entire debt, and at the same time to verify any part thereof not yet
admitted to be due, so that the final settlement would cover the entire debt. It
is prepared to commence negotiations upon the settlement of the debt
question with the United States of Belgium, France, and Italy. A notification
as to whether or not such a time would be acceptable is therefore requested.
An official reply to the note of the United States Government will be
dispatched about the coming Tuesday or Wednesday at the latest.”
Today an informal memorandum was handed the Czechoslovak Chargé stating that as
far as a settlement with this Government is concerned there is no connection between
the indebtedness of Belgium, France, Italy, and Czechoslovakia to the United States,
and that for that reason it would not be acceptable if negotiations looking to the funding
of Czechoslovakia’s indebtedness to the United States were not commenced until
indebtedness of the other three Governments to the United States had been settled. On
the contrary it was stated that commission to negotiate settlement of indebtedness of
Czechoslovakia should, as indicated in the Chargé’s conversation with Mr. Richardson
on July 6, 1925, come to Washington in very near future, the earnest hope being
expressed that initiation of negotiations at Washington would take place not later than
first week in September.
KELLOGG
11 Memorandum not paraphrased.

[Document 75]
The Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) to the Secretary of State
Foreign Affairs.12 In this, after reiterating statements already transmitted, Czechoslovak
Government: 1. Gives formal assurance of recognizing $80,234,000 as its debt to the
United States.
2. In accordance with the desire of the American Government it will proceed either to
verify the unconfirmed balance or else adjudicate this in round figures without
verification.
3. The Czechoslovak Government is not at present in a position to make a concrete
proposition [as?] regards the payment or funding of the debt. In order, however, to
show its intention to fulfill its obligations and to carry these out immediately it
proposes to the United States Government without prejudice to other eventual
decisions, to insert at once in the 1926 budget the sum of $2,500,000 to be paid during
1926 as a first installment on their recognized debt of $80,234,000.
Not knowing the financial situation in 1927, it cannot yet state what sum will be
reserved for the next payment in 1927. The payment effected in 1926 will, however, be
followed regularly by other annual payments. It thereby wishes to give concrete public
notice [of] its intention to carry out its obligations. It hopes that the United States
Government will likewise show good will. The Czechoslovak Government does not
wish at once to ask for a moratorium but would be obliged to do so if the negotiations
with the Debt Commission at Washington were to impose annual charges greater than
its actual situation could bear.
4. The Czecho[slovak] Government does not submit any proposed basis regarding its
debt to the United States:
(a) Because the total sum has not been definitely established, although this
need not prevent negotiations nor the payment of installments.
(b) The Czechoslovak Government is not yet in a position to determine with
certainty its actual or future financial situation; it believes that all
negotiations for the remittance war and post-war debts should be based on

the capacity to pay. It does not seek to assimilate nor to link its indebtedness
with the different obligations of Allied or enemy states and recognizes that
the United States Government regards the Czechoslovak debt as an
obligation of a different nature from these.
(c) It believes that [as] the United States Government has adopted the
principle of proceeding with debt settlement in accordance with the particular
situation in each debtor state, the Czechoslovak Government has no wish to
appeal to the United States Government by the example of other states but
desires to bring its attention to its own flagrant situation. A brief statement of
this follows. It says that if in view of these circumstances we must prepare
for a settlement of our debt to the United States we shall find ourselves
“singularly embarrassed.” There follows an account of the financial sacrifices
made by Czechoslovakia since the war in stabilizing exchange and in
taxation. The hope is expressed that Czechoslovakia will not be penalized for
these efforts which have assisted European reconstruction but will be able to
enjoy the application of the same principles which underlay the
For all these reasons it is difficult for the Czechoslovak Government to submit to the
United States Government a full proposal for the settlement of its debts, instead it asks
the United States Government to express its desires.
To prove the wish to carry out its obligations, Czechoslovakia will begin the payment
of the debts even before the settlement is agreed upon unless future negotiations should
otherwise provide. The rest can be left to the generosity of the American Government
for whose services gratitude is expressed. The Czechoslovak Government is ready to
negotiate the question either by diplomatic channels or by a special commission in
accordance with the preference of the United States Government. In order, however, to
give full information and the necessary instructions to the Czechoslovak delegates, the
United States Government is asked to take into consideration the ideas expressed in this
note and if possible reply to the suggestions submitted.
Text of the note with comments will be sent by pouch.
EINSTEIN
12 Not printed.
by the Reparation Commission.

[Document 76]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)
it bears:16a
“Under instructions from my Government, I have the honor to acknowledge
concerning the indebtedness of Czechoslovakia to the United States.16c
My Government notes that the Czechoslovak Government formally
acknowledges its indebtedness in the principal amount of $80,234,808.02 and
that it is ready to proceed immediately to a verification of settlement in
respect of the remaining sum, the principal amount of which is
$11,644,863.01. My Government considers that, since the amount in question
is but a relatively small part of the total indebtedness of Czechoslovakia to
the United States, a settlement might be made in respect of the total principal
sum of $91,879,671.03, and in respect of unpaid interest, and that any items
in dispute which may thereafter be established not to be due to the
Government of the United States may be suitably credited in a manner to be
specified in the debt funding arrangement.
My Government has also noted the views expressed in regard to the fiscal
and economic condition of Czechoslovakia. I am authorized to assure you
that the World War Foreign Debt Commission will be prepared to give due
consideration to such data as the representatives of Czechoslovakia may wish
to present in that regard.
With respect to the suggestion that the Czechoslovak Government pay to the
United States in 1926 the sum of $2,500,000 as a first installment on the
acknowledged debt, I am instructed to say that my Government, especially in
view of the settlements made by Czechoslovakia with other creditor
governments in disregard of the agreement between Czechoslovakia and the
United States as set forth in my note of April 30, 1925, could not agree to
postpone a settlement or make only a partial settlement of Czechoslovakia’s
indebtedness. My Government feels confident that a suitable basis of
settlement in respect of Czechoslovakia’s indebtedness to the United States

can readily be reached at the present time. In this connection, it may be
pointed out that the service of Czechoslovak foreign loans already floated
calls for annual payments larger than those which would be required under a
settlement of the indebtedness to the United States along the line of the
settlements already made between the Government of the United States and
other debtor Governments. It may further be pointed out that, according to
the basis of such settlements, the annual payments due on the entire
indebtedness of Czechoslovakia to the United States would not be more than
approximately one percent, of the total present Czechoslovak budget. The
Government of the United States accordingly considers that the
Czechoslovak Government, if it can assume the obligation to pay the service
of large private loans over a considerable period of years, can forecast its
future financial condition sufficiently well to enable it to enter into a suitable
agreement with the World War Foreign Debt Commission.
My Government, therefore, as indicated in my note of April 30, 1925,
expects the Czechoslovak Government promptly to take suitable action
looking towards the settlement of its indebtedness to the United States, and
would be glad if the Czechoslovak Government would send to the United
States at its earliest convenience a Commission duly authorized to enter into
a settlement of the entire amount of the debt in question.”
GREW
16 Not printed.

[Document 77]
The Czechoslovak Chargé (Lípa) to the Secretary of State
The Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of the Czechoslovak Republic presents his
compliments to His Excellency, the Honorable Secretary of State, and with reference to
the Commission which has been sent by the Czechoslovak Government to the United
States in connection with the settlement of Czechoslovakia’s indebtedness to this
country consists of the following members:
Dr. Vilém Pospíšil, Head of Commission;
Mr. Jan Kučera, from the Ministry of National Defense;18
Dr. Karel Brabenec, from the Ministry of Finance;
and of financial experts:
Dr. Eugen Lippansky, from the Ministry of Finance, and
Mr. Zikmund Konečný, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
This Commission will sail for the United States from Cherbourg on the steamship
WASHINGTON , September 21, 1925.
17 Not printed.
18 By a note dated September 23 from the Czechoslovak Chargé, this line was
corrected to read, “Mr. Karel Kučera, Assistant General Director of the Banking Office
of
the
Czechoslovak
Ministry
of
Finance.”
(File
No.
W
89
Czechoslovakia/120.) 19 For negotiations with the World War Foreign Debt
Commission and text of agreement signed Oct. 13, 1925, see Combined Annual
Reports of the World War Foreign Debt Commission, pp. 193–204.

France
[78] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[79] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[80] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[81] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[82] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[83] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

[84] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[85] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[86] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[87] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Washington, February 6, 1925.
[88] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[89] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[90] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

[91] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[92] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[93] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[94] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[95] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[96] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[97] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

[98] The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
Washington, September 16, 1925.

[Document 78]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
550. Had most satisfactory talk at lunch today with Premier Herriot, Minister of
Finance Clémentel, and M. Bunau Varilla, owner of Le Matin. Herriot believes that
France’s debt to us should be funded, and that in the circumstances question of
reduction should be avoided. He said that precipitate action, however, would be
dangerous and that it would be necessary beforehand to prepare a healthy public
opinion. This attitude highly satisfactory in my opinion, as until today I had feared that
in order to consolidate his position Herriot might hurry negotiations too much. It was
also in my mind that Ambassador Jusserand before leaving Washington might endeavor
to press matters to a conclusion. A greater consideration than need for haste is danger
of an adverse vote in Parliament.
Premier stated that he would in near future submit to me for my suggestions and
criticisms plan for debt funding having Clémentel’s approval. He said that if you found
plan feasible in principle even with modifications, then manner of negotiating further
could be considered. He feels that there are manifest advantages in proceeding in this
way in matter. He was uncertain as to British attitude but wished me to tell you that as
result of discussions with Austen Chamberlain20 during latter’s recent visit to Paris they
had reached cordial agreement regarding many points.
HERRICK
20 British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

[Document 79]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
home today and he handed me note regarding the state of French public opinion
relative to the French debt to the United States which Clémentel had drawn up. The
note suggests a complete moratorium for 10 years, no interest for the following 10
years, and one-half percent interest after that until end of amortization 90 years after
first payment.
These terms appear so unacceptable to American public opinion that I shall not cable
text of note but shall forward it by pouch unless otherwise instructed by Department.
Although note seems inadequate even as basis for negotiation, I shall, however, confer
with Herriot and Clémentel as they originally suggested, unless Department instructs
otherwise, and shall endeavor to persuade them to make more favorable proposal.
Herriot showed me copy of a cable he had sent to Ambassador Jusserand directing him
to point out to you that Clémenters inventory regarding the financial situation in France
affirmed responsibility of France for her debts in three different places. In view of fact
that the editor of the Paris edition of the Herald told me that he had inadvertently
omitted mention of these three statements referred to, you might think it advisable to
give some publicity to Jusserand’s explanation.
HERRICK

[Document 80]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
493. Extracts from statement of so-called “balance sheet of France” issued by Finance
Minister Clémentel21 has [have] been given wide publicity in press and have caused
most unfavorable impression. It would appear that Clémentel endorses a policy not in
accord with the statements heretofore made to you as reported in your letter of
December 12th,22 or with the statements made to the World War Foreign Debt
Commission by M. Parmentier. For instance, the report is said to contain the
following:23
“This technical exposition of the elements which constitute our debt to the
United States and Britain doesn’t seem, however, sufficient to justify a brutal
addition to our liabilities of the sums which it seems to represent.
“The question of a settlement of our debts to Britain and America has just
raised the general problem of interallied debts, an examination of which has
not yet been seriously taken up because of the uncertainty existing from a
lack of accord among the Allies on ways and means of the payment of
reparations by Germany. …24 If we abandon the juridical plane and look on
the matter from the higher view of cooperation and fairness, strict justice
would seem to demand a general pooling of war expenditures and their
allotment among the allied States proportionately to the riches of each one,
and without taking count of the particular engagements which the necessities
of the moment imposed. …24 at least France could hope that the rank she
occupied on the long list of sorrows and devastations would give her the right
to legitimate concessions in the domain of compensations.24a
If the abstention of our principal debtor has not yet permitted us to undertake
a settlement, for which we first hoped, nevertheless we cannot consider the
possibility of assuming the burden of annual payments which may be fixed
until we have first completed the work of reparation of the damages which
our devasted regions suffered, and until the payments due us under the peace
treaty have created for us the necessary resources.25

France doesn’t intend to repudiate any contracts she has made, and her
signature always will be held sacred. But she is convinced that an appeal to
the sentiments of justice which grouped so many nations around her in the
war will not be in vain, and she is convinced that her allies and friends will
respond to the hopes she places in their conscience and their sentiments of
justice and solidarity.”
M. Clémentel is also reported as advancing the argument that France should receive
due compensation for the fact that her soil was the common battle ground; that
inasmuch as the Governments of Britain and the United States collected large sums in
taxes by virtue of expenditures which France made within their borders, the total of
these taxes should be deducted from the French debt; and that advances made by
France to her Allies of some fifteen billion francs should be taken into consideration.
France’s debts to Great Britain and the United States are spoken of as so-called
political debts.
2) Senator Reed, of Pennsylvania, whose friendship for France is well known,
discussed the Clémentel statement in the Senate yesterday. After stating the amount of
the advances to France, Senator Reed pointed out that in order to pay the current
interest which French tax payers should have paid, we have taken from our tax payers
approximately eight hundred million dollars in the last 6 years. He said:
“We have a full understanding of France’s difficulties. We understand how
hard it is for her and for Italy and for Belgium and these other countries to
collect what is coming to them from Germany, and that is why our people
have not wished us to press unduly for the payment of these foreign debts;
but the debtor nations have taken no steps toward refunding the debts, they
have paid no interest upon it, and they have not even given authority to any
of their official representatives to come to any terms with our country toward
refunding.
Mr. Parmentier came here in 1922 absolutely naked of authority to come to
any settlement, or even to recommend any settlement to his own Government
as far as we were able to learn. The French ambassador—Mr. Jusserand—has
done the best that his great talent enables him to do, but he is without
authority. He has done much to keep the situation placid. He deserves the
gratitude of his country to an extent that I believe few of his own countrymen
as yet understand, because his efforts have gone far toward preventing this
question from becoming acute. But now, Mr. President, from France itself,
and from Paris, and from the cabinet of the present administration, comes a
step which our people can not fail to regard as being some evidence of an

official intention to repudiate that war-time debt—the publication of a
balance sheet, listing the obligations of the French Republic, that absolutely
omits the debt to America or the debt to Great Britain incurred during the
time of the war—and I do not believe that the United States Senate ought to
take an adjournment after the publication of that balance sheet without some
voice being raised in protest against it.
I make no threats. I do not believe that anyone in the Senate desires to make
any threats. I know that I speak wholly out of friendship for France, but with
an acute realization of the fact that American taxpayers are paying every day
a debt that France owes. France must be told by her friends that her inaction
in this matter throughout the past 5 years has puzzled those of us who look
toward her most affectionately, and she should be told that this publication of
last week has alarmed her friends and alarmed them very gravely. France
must be made to see—and when I speak of France I speak of her because this
publication comes from the French ministry, although what I say applies as
well to the other countries that are still in the same position—that her present
course can result only in a chilling of that affection that she has found to exist
here in America throughout the past decades. It can have only that result, Mr.
President, and she must be told it by her friends, and she must be told that
each day of delay in achieving a refunding of that debt makes it more
difficult to grant her leniency in terms of payment. Her taxpayers deserve
consideration. Their sufferings must be remembered, and the terms of
payment must take into account the difficulties of payment on her part, but
each day that she waits makes that more difficult of achievement. And,
finally, she must be told by her friends that future French loans in America
would be made impossible by a repudiation of the existing debt.”
3) In reply to an inquiry from one of the correspondents at the morning press
conference yesterday, I pointed out, not for quotation, that
“What Mr. Clémentel had said was not an official communication to this
Government; that it had not been communicated to this Government directly
or indirectly. So far as its communications to us were concerned the French
Government had never suggested that it repudiated its obligations or asked
for their cancellation. On the contrary the French Government had always
stated to us that it expected to pay although it had stated its difficulties in
arranging for payment and that it would like to have easy terms. Only
recently the French Ambassador had stated that France did not ask for a
cancellation of its debt and when the French Commission was here some
time ago, headed by Mr. Parmentier, while they were not ready to make a
funding proposition they did not ask that the debt should be cancelled or
repudiate its obligations. So it is my understanding that France acknowledges

her debt and intends to pay. While the United States does not wish to be
oppressive, we recognize no grounds in law or equity, (there can of course be
no question of our legal position), why the debt should be reduced or
cancelled.
The attitude of the American Government has been made clear again and
again in official pronouncements. These statements had been made by the
President himself. This Government had always opposed the cancellation or
an international conference which would bring our debt into discussion. An
analysis of the manner in which the debt was incurred would show that our
position was entirely equitable. After our army went to Europe there were
vast purchases in France and large obligations incurred by our Government to
France which were set off against the indebtedness owed by France to us.
Besides enormous sums lent France during the war an additional billion
dollars was lent her after the Armistice, exclusive of the $400,000,000 for
purchase of surplus army supplies after the war. It would be a very serious
mistake not to recognize our debt and provide for its discharge as
international credit should be maintained.
The United States would not consent to any arrangement for the pooling of
our debt. This Government regards the debt question as a matter for
Congress, and a Commission was formed for funding the debts owed to the
United States.”
[Paraphrase.] 4) While this Government has not received an official communication of
the Clémentel statement, it has nevertheless been widely published and cannot,
therefore, be ignored. In order to make clear our position and to remove any
misunderstanding in regard to a proposal for partial or entire cancellation of the debt,
you will please find an early occasion to take up the matter informally with the Premier
and the Minister of Finance in the light of the foregoing. They should understand that
public opinion in this country reacts promptly and definitely to statements such as those
of M. Clémentel which raise a question as to the French Government’s intention to pay
its debt or as to the equity of such payment, and the United States Government must
expect that the French Government will take an early occasion to give evidence of its
intention to pay and make proper provision for refunding of its debt.
Results of your conversations should be cabled and please advise also as to desirability
of making formal written communication of our views. [End paraphrase.]
HUGHES
21 Inventaire de la Situation Financière de la France au Début de la Treizième
Législature, présenté par M. Clémentel, Ministre des Finances (Paris, Imprimerie

Nationale, 1924).
24 Omission indicated in the original telegram.
24 Omission indicated in the original telegram.
24a Omission which follows is indicated in the original telegram.
25 Omission which follows is indicated in the original telegram.

[Document 81]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:57 p.m.]
618. Clémentel called on me this morning and stated that he greatly regretted and was
at a loss to understand the impression which his inventory has made in the United
States. He said that the principal reason for the publication of the inventory was to
prepare French public opinion for the realization that France must pay the sums she
owes. He stated that far from suggesting any idea of repudiation his report repeatedly
affirmed the responsibility of France for her debts and in support of his statements cited
pages reads as follows:
“The possible opening of these negotiations does not permit us today to
elucidate this problem in such a manner as it requires, the preparation of
France’s dossier not being, moreover, finished yet. Nevertheless we must not
fail to show briefly at this time the principal elements of this question in
order to reserve for the interallied debts in the general balance sheet of our
country the real place and importance which should be assigned to them.
And if in the scales in which shall be measured the contribution of each state
to the common victory the blood which was shed cannot be weighed, at least
France can hope that the rank which she occupies on the long list of sorrows
and devastations will give her the right to legitimate consideration in a
domain where the granting of compensations is to be considered.
France does not intend to repudiate any of the contracts which she has agreed
to and her signature will always be sacred to her. But she is convinced that an
appeal to the sentiments of justice which have grouped around her so many
nations during all the war will not remain in vain; she is convinced that her
allies and her friends will respond to the hopes which she places in their lofty
conscience and their sentiments of justice and solidarity.
Upon the extinction of the debts adjusted on a fair basis taking into account
all the elements which affect them according to the very terms of the last
Paris agreement, terms confirmed by the Prime Minister of Great Britain in
his closing speech at the London conference, terms in which can be found the
thought which inspired the proposal of Bonar Law and Lord Curzon, she will

devote her patient and courageous effort. Thus will be vindicated the
confidence which all the lenders of the world have placed in the word of a
people which has not ceased for 10 years to give proofs of its energy and
[self-denial].
The settlement of interallied debts is still in abeyance and we cannot figure
out today the burden which we shall be called upon to assume on this account
after a careful study in all loyalty with our great Allies who we are certain
would wish to bring to this settlement the cordial spirit of solidarity which
united us on the battlefield in the defense of the common [cause].
Moreover, the application of the principles of the Dawes plan which
subordinates the payments of a debtor state to its capacity of payment and to
the possibility of making transfers without weakening its exchange and
damaging its national economy on the one hand, on the other hand the
necessity of subordinating the payments to the collection of Germany’s
settlements give us the certainty that a liberal moratorium and long delays
will be granted to us for the payment of the debt which it shall have appeared
fair and legitimate to hold us liable for.
It does not appear therefore that during the coming years the equilibrium
which we have laboriously established will be prejudiced.”

conversation with Clémentel this morning I made citations to him of these portions of
his report referred to in your cable. He requested a copy of the citations and at my
suggestion will telegraph Jusserand detailed explanation. He appeared very upset at
what he repeatedly assured me was the entirely mistaken impression that his report has
given in the United States. He said that the whole report must be read together to get its
real meaning.
HERRICK

[Document 82]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 6:20 p.m.]
nothing about the latter’s note, and believe it may be advisable, considering nature of
proposal, for Department to regard it as confidential.
Detailed newspaper rumor has already appeared in regard to the note, but I believe that
this is attributable to source which has since been stopped. I am informing press
correspondents that there is no new development.
HERRICK

[Document 83]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
your suggestion and will refrain from comment to press as far as possible. The press
here have information, however, to effect that France has made definite offer which
includes 10-year moratorium followed by payment through 80 years at rate of one-half
1 percent. As the press here is dealing extensively with matter on Paris source of
information, it may be difficult, if not impossible, to regard contents of note as
confidential. Please telegraph full text.
HUGHES

[Document 84]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
memorandum on the state of French opinion relative to France’s debt with regard to the
United States.
“1. For a long time French public opinion believed in a general cancelation of
debts contracted between the Allies during the war. France was conscious of
having given to the common cause more than any other nation in the world;
she had sacrificed the greatest number of men; she gave her richest provinces
for battlefields. She thought she was right in expecting the Allied nations to
forgive her the sums she had asked of them in order to conduct the common
war, as she herself would have forgiven her Allied debtors.
Furthermore this attitude of French opinion found its justification as regards
the debt contracted towards the United States in the speeches that were made
in 1917 in the American House of Representatives and the Senate and which
it is unnecessary to recall here.
A perfect expression of French opinion at the end of the war and during the
first years which followed the cessation of hostilities is summed up in Mr.
Lloyd George’s speech in the House of Commons in February 1915: “A war
alliance cannot be concluded on principles of limited responsibility. If one of
the nations of the alliance has instructed and armed more men than another
allied country is able to do it should use them against common enemy
without considering the fact that the others cannot for the time being furnish
a similar contribution. The same principle applies also to a nation which has
greater resources in capital or credit. It should use them to the greatest extent
for the good of the alliance even if the other nations may or may not be
capable of making a similar contribution.”
2. Little by little however beginning with 1919 French opinion realized that
the United States would never agree to a general and complete cancelation of
interallied debts. It then appeared to it fair that the problem of interallied
debts should at least be dealt with in its entirety and united with that of

reparations. France on the one hand has lent, itself, considerable sums to
poorer Allies and these sums amount to almost half of her external debt. She
had on the other hand provided for the reconstruction of the devastated
regions which constitute a heavy charge on her budget. Germany, who should
have met these expenses, has not done so.
French opinion could, therefore, legitimately ask that France should only pay
her creditors in proportion to the payment made by her debtors. Such an
opinion tended to a general compensation of interallied debts and to
subordinate France’s payments for the settlement of her debts to those of
Germany for the reconstruction of the devastated regions.
This opinion, which appears so eminently fair, is moderate, since it places on
the same footing the debts between Allies contracted in a common cause and
Germany’s debt for the reparation of the ruins which she caused. It was
expressed many times by the British and French Premiers; but it was not
accepted by the Government of the United States.
3. However, the French Government has never repudiated the war debts of its
country. But it would be very difficult to make French opinion accept a
method of settlement in accordance with the principles which have always
been maintained by the American Government: Integral maintenance of the
nominal amount of the debt; treating this debt independently of payments by
Germany.
But the adoption of such principles can only be reconciled with very easy
conditions of settlement. It is in particular indispensable that the amortization
table should show a long moratorium and very small annuities at the start in
order to permit France: one, to wait until the Dawes Plan has entered into a
period of effective application; two, to settle external commercial debts and
in particular the debt due by reason of the purchase of American stocks;
three, to wait for the time when the expenses resulting from the war
(pensions, annuity allowances for reconstruction) shall begin to decrease.
It is under these conditions that French public opinion may be led to adopt
such a plan as the following which is only submitted in a purely unofficial
and private manner: Fixing the nominal amount of the debt to the amount of
this debt in capital, that is to say at $2,933,000,000; complete moratorium for
in connection with the following table (in millions of dollars):
Number of
annuities
Rate of interest Annuity value Capital to be [amortized]
at the end of each period
10
0
0
2933

20
½
30
2611
20
½
40
2045
20
½
50
1210
20
½
65
1210
In order to combine in a certain measure the value of the annuities and
France’s capacity of payment, a principle which is in [conformity] with all
the American declarations, it should be understood that on the day when
Germany shall fulfill only a portion of the obligations stipulated by the
Dawes Plan the portion of the French annuity corresponding to the interest on
the debt would be reduced in the same proportion. The payment of a certain
percentage of part of this annuity corresponding to the amortization could
also be deferred and carried over to the following year. The nominal capital
of the debt would remain unchanged.
The same rules would apply in case only a partial German annuity should be
paid to France according to one of the methods stipulated in the Experts Plan.
American stocks:
French public opinion realized that the nature of this debt is quite different.
The French Government has always regularly paid the interest on the price
agreed upon and it has no intention of asking for a reduction of this debt as
the one that it requests regarding the war debt.
It should be pointed out, however, that by reason of the fall of the franc the
sale [of] the stocks, bought for $400,000,000 only produced an approximate
figure of $220,000,000 and thus constitutes a very burdensome transaction
for France. Remembering that at the time of the cession of these stocks the
American representatives declared on many occasions their desire that this
transaction should not result in a loss to France, the French Government
hopes that the American Government will consent either to reduce the
nominal amount of its credit to a price nearer the real sale price of these
stocks or to grant a reduction in the rate of interest being paid on the cession
price.
In admitting, for example, that the rate should be fixed retrospectively at 2
percent from 1919 France would remain liable for a debt of $350,000,000
which she could amortize in 20 years by an annuity of $22,000,000.
Conclusion:

Since the Armistice, France has made heavy payments abroad and in
particular to the United States on account of its so-called ‘commercial’ war
debt. These payments can be evaluated at approximately the following
amounts (in millions of dollars):
Commercial debt American stocks Total
70
20
51
20
50
20
49
20
48
The figures quoted are calculated after deducting the new loans issued on the
American market and the treasury credits opened to France in 1920. It is
therefore truly a question of real disbursement[s] the total of which has had to
be transferred to America and which have weighed heavily on our Treasury
and the balance of our payments abroad.
Similar payments must still be made in the coming years according to a
decreasing scale.
In order [that] transfers on account of the political debt may be possible it is
therefore indispensable that the annuity destined for the service of the
political debt should be very small at the beginning and increase in
proportion to the extinction of the commercial debt.
The plan of settlement adopted must, none the less, consider the transfer
problem as a whole in conjunction with the exchange rate and the eventual
use of bonds for example in part payment.”
I have informally and personally made the three following suggestions of changes in
Clémentel’s memorandum: (1) that there should be eliminated from the unofficial
memorandum the clause relating to the debt payments being dependent on the working
out of the Dawes Plan; (2) that no reference should be made to American stocks
(surplus food supplies, equipment, etc., belonging to the American Expeditionary
Forces which were turned over to France after the Armistice); (3) instead of a flat rate
of one-half percent interest for the whole time there should be periods when some
method, should be set up when an advance interest rate may be considered.
I had hoped to receive an indication of how Herriot received this suggestion before
cabling full text.

I must emphasize the fact that Clémentel does not consider his memorandum a
“definite offer” but rather a tentative personal and unofficial suggestion.
HERRICK
26 Telegram in four sections.

[Document 85]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Mellon27 informs me that due note has been taken of contents of last paragraph of your
telegram under reference; that he will regard the memorandum as confidential; and that
in view of Clémentel’s statement as to the nature of the memorandum, it does not seem
possible to consider it as being in any way a proposition from the French Government
to this Government or to the World War Foreign Debt Commission.
Mr. Mellon observes that while there appears to be no intimation from you that a reply
to Clémentel’s memorandum is expected, he assumes that I shall be communicating
with you, and in this connection he states that the terms suggested in Clémentel’s
memorandum for dealing with the debt of France to the United States do not seem to
offer a practical basis upon which negotiations might be begun. Mr. Mellon adds that
he will appreciate receiving any information that may have come to you respecting any
discussions that may have taken place in Paris respecting inter-Allied debts.
HUGHES
27 Andrew Mellon, Secretary of the Treasury and chairman of the World War Foreign
Debt Commission.

[Document 86]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
79. The trend of events in regard to the question of debt settlement has me greatly
worried. A speech by M. Marin in the Chamber of Deputies on January 21 is a fairly
accurate representation of the views of the man in the street, and a more difficult
situation will arise if this opinion be allowed to crystallize. I do not know whether the
United States realizes the financial crisis that France is now facing. At the present
moment it is almost impossible for the Government to make any concrete effort at debt
settlement which would meet American approval. If matter is allowed to rest I fear that
opinion here may become general that we are not prepared to make reasonable
settlement and that a frame of mind will be built up which not only would intensify
French lack of confidence in their finances but would make it impossible for any
Government to make further proposals. I have been indirectly informed that Clémentel
feels that proposal contained in his memorandum is his last word, and although from
our point of view it is unsatisfactory, he is being criticized here for having offered too
much; I am reliably informed that the Governor of the Bank of France has said that in
his opinion Clémentel had offered more than France could afford.
I feel that M. Herriot’s government has made greater efforts to bring about settlements
of pending questions than any preceding one, perhaps greater than may be made by
succeeding governments. For this reason it seems to me that an effort must be made to
persuade French Government to reopen question by making official communication of
some sort which, even if not satisfactory to us, would serve as basis for further
negotiations.
Such effort as this, it seems to me, would serve two purposes; first, it would forestall
formation of opinion here that the United States is a merciless creditor, and second, it
would prevent fixing of American opinion in the idea that France intended to repudiate
the debts.
it would not be well to endeavor to have the Clémentel proposal renewed in an official
form. I have not yet heard (and I have not pressed for a reply) whether Clémentel was

willing to adopt suggestions I made and of which I informed Department in my No. 8,
communication of this sort, it seems to me, would at least serve to focus American
public opinion on financial condition of France and would keep French public opinion
from thinking us hard and unjust. I am aware of the thorny aspects of the problem, but
if matters are allowed to drift I fear that our moral influence in Europe may be
weakened for many years and that our own public opinion may become
correspondingly harder.
Please do not think that this telegram is dictated by any desire to give way to public
sentiment here. I am expressing an opinion based on conversations with Americans
here representing various interests, financial and otherwise, some of whom seem even
more alarmed than I am.
I have not in any way sounded any French sources and I do not know whether it will be
possible to obtain the official communication to which I have referred from the French
Government. If an agreement is reached with Great Britain along lines that have been
suggested, our position in Europe will become still more difficult and what is called our
rigid attitude will be exploited against us by others. I feel that if only a slightly
modified version of the Clémentel memorandum can be obtained officially from the
French Government, and even if resulting American opinion be clearly opposed to it,
the way is paved for an invitation from the French Government to the World War
Foreign Debt Commission to send representatives here to examine financial status of
France and in this way be in position to determine for itself kind of settlement which is
within capacity of France to make.
HERRICK
28 Telegram in three sections.

[Document 87]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
WASHINGTON, February 6, 1925.
MY DEAR MR. AMBASSADOR: I am grateful to you for writing me so fully in relation to the
French debt and I have not failed to consider most carefully the suggestion in your
telegram of January twenty-third.
There are certain difficulties which must be faced. One is that the funding of the debt is
in the hands of a special Commission created by Congress. It is unwise to deal with the
matter in a way which will evoke criticism in Congress or to ignore the Commission.
For this reason the matter does not lie within the ordinary range of diplomatic
conversations. Another difficulty is that any effort to try out questions privately in
advance is destined to fail. Such confidences are hard to keep and before they go very
far something leaks out in Paris or here and then there is misunderstanding,
explanation, and the necessity of informing a public whose curiosity has been piqued.
Confidences are of little use unless they are imparted to the Commission and then they
are no longer private.
I confess I am greatly troubled and I do not think that any way out will be found short
of frank and full interchanges. Opinion hardens on this side largely because of the
disposition to believe that there is no intention to pay. On the other side there is a
danger of increasing ill will because we are supposed to be harsh and lacking in
consideration of difficulties abroad.
The way out, as it seems to me, is to face the facts; on the other side to dissipate the
notion that the debt is one that ought not to be paid or that there is no intention to pay
it; on this side, to deal with the economic verities. If the French Government makes an
offer at long range it is practically certain to be unacceptable in its terms and we have
no suitable opportunity for negotiation and efforts to arrive at an understanding.
If the French Government were to send here a delegation who would put all the cards
on the table, show the exact economic situation and endeavor to bring about a common
agreement as to the underlying facts then perhaps we could make some progress. If this
were done with the Commission itself, the best impression would be produced. The
point is to have perfectly candid interchanges in the manner that will be most
influential in affecting the opinion of Congress. I fear that anything attempted outside
the Commission would have small chance of success although of course it is possible a
delegation of the right sort sent abroad, if invited by the French Government, might be

helpful. This however would need great care in working out as nothing I assume would
be more offensive to the French than the idea of an investigating committee while such
a Commission would not meet opinion here unless there were included in it those who
were believed to represent the insistent demand of this country. I think that before
anything is done in that direction there should be opportunity for consultation with the
President and definite instructions.
I cannot speak officially in regard to the debt as the Department of State is really only a
vehicle of communication, Congress having taken control of the subject. But I am
unable, as I have said, to escape the conclusion that the sooner we get down to a direct
and comprehensive discussion of the economic situation involved, meeting
representatives of the French Government face to face not for the purpose simply of
presenting a plan but of exposing a condition with the hope that a plan could be
matured, can we be measurably successful in dealing with this problem.
With kind regards [etc.]
CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 88]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PARIS, March 20, 1925—noon.
188. Minister of Finance has called on me and intimated that he would study
modifications I had suggested of his proposals and of which I informed Department in
financially and otherwise to France of settlement of debt question, and I am hopeful
that he will modify his proposals to extent where it may be possible for the Debt
Commission to regard them as basis for negotiations.
Franklin-Bouillon, the President of the Foreign Affairs Committee, Chamber of
Deputies, and one who is likely to hold a position in the Cabinet if a not unlikely
change of government takes place, has told me that the French must concentrate on
problem of security, but once this problem is solved, he hopes for settlement of debt
question. He has in mind a small joint committee, of which he would be the head,
representing both the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies, who would be empowered
by the Committees for Foreign Affairs of the Senate and the Chamber to go to
Washington in the autumn to negotiate with the World War Foreign Debt Commission.
HERRICK

[Document 89]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
letter of March 19, 1925,30 bearing on French debt.
Clémentel has just sent me a note dated March 28, 1925, of which the following is a
translation, enclosing a new text of his memorandum of December 30 which should be
considered as canceled.
“My Dear Ambassador: You were good enough to transmit to me on January
3 last certain personal remarks concerning the terms of the memorandum
which I handed to you on December 30 with regard to France’s debt towards
the United States.
The French Government in its desire to arrive at an understanding between
the United States and France is willing after the unofficial exchange of views
which you were good enough to initiate and which you were good enough to
offer to continue to present to the parliamentary commissions and then if it
obtains their favorable opinion to Parliament itself a plan for the amortization
of France’s war debt based on the points contained in my memorandum
which has been modified by giving the greatest possible consideration to the
suggestions you were good enough to make to me.
I desire to say to you, and I am all the more at liberty to do so since it is not
yet a question of official negotiations but of unofficial preparatory
conversations, that it seems that French public opinion and Parliament cannot
go further than I indicated and that great efforts will be necessary, efforts
which the Government is prepared to make in order to obtain the adherence
of Parliament which as you know is necessary.
France’s proposals must indeed take loyally into account her possibilities of
payment and it is difficult at the present time, only six months after the
coming into force of the Experts’ Plan, to foresee what her possibilities will
be.

I am sending you therefore a new text of my memorandum of December 30
in which the following changes have been made:
(1) France’s entire debt towards the United States would be fixed at its total
in capital, that is to say, at about $3,340,000,000 (the value of American
stocks included).
(2) This debt would be extinguished by annual payments corresponding to
the following table:
Number of
annuities:
Rate of
interest:
Value of annuities:
(in millions of dollars)
5,
½ percent,
20,
10,
½ percent,
40,
20,
1  percent,
55,
20,
1½ percent,
70,
28,
2  percent,
85,
(3) The French Government is willing to agree that the rhythm of the
amortization in capital of the debt should not be contingent upon the
payments which France is to receive from Germany. The portion of the
annuities representing the amortization would therefore be paid integrally and
regularly to the United States whatever may be the degree of execution of the
Dawes Plan.
Only the payment of the portion of the annuities corresponding to the interest
of France’s debt would remain dependent upon the payments made by
Germany and the possibility of the transfer of these payments.
If it appears to you possible to transmit this memorandum privately and
unofficially to the Government of the United States it should be understood
that it takes the place of the first memorandum which should be considered as
canceled.
Very sincerely yours, (Signed) Etienne Clémentel.”
a.m. as follows: Section 1, paragraph 2 omit “as she herself would have forgiven her
“The adoption of such principles can only be reconciled with very easy
conditions of settlement. It is, in particular, indispensable that the
amortization table should show quite small annuities at the start in order to

permit France: To wait until the Dawes Plan has entered into a period of
effective application and the expenses resulting from the war (the pensions,
annuity allowances for reconstruction) shall begin to decrease.
It is under these conditions that French public opinion may be led to adopt
such a plan as the following: Fixing the nominal amount of the debt to the
amount of this debt in capital, that is to say, at $3,340,000,000 (the value of
American stocks included); rate of interest and amortization in conformity
with the following table: (Here insert table quoted in foregoing letter.)
In order to combine in a certain measure the value of the annuities and
France’s possibilities of payment, a principle which is in conformity with all
the American declarations, it should be understood that if Germany were to
fulfill only a part of the obligations prescribed by the Dawes Plan or if only a
portion of the German annuity should be paid to France in accordance with
one of the methods provided for in the Experts’ Plan, the portion of the
French annuity corresponding to the interest of the debt should be reduced in
the same proportion.
But France would undertake to pay regularly and integrally to the United
States the portion of the annuities representing the amortization, whatever
may be the degree of execution of the Dawes Plan.”
Portion of old text bearing upon American stocks is omitted from the new
memorandum.
The new memorandum indicates that the suggested changes which I mentioned in my
modification of his first proposal I construe to be symptomatic of the present
government’s earnest desire for practical solution of this problem. I venture the opinion
that it is an opportune moment to act because the French Government realizes now that
the absence of progressive negotiations is restrictive to French credit. Moreover while
the payment of entire debt has been unofficially avowed by the French Government yet
I believe that important advantages would attach to the official and outspoken
recognition of that principle. The harmful and befogging beliefs concerning the French
attitude and that we are exacting creditors should then be dispelled. In this connection
relative to the detrimental effect of marking time. To reject Clémentel’s new
memorandum without a constructive suggestion from our Government as to what might
constitute a starting point would have a depressing effect and tend to jeopardize future
negotiations.

Accordingly in spite of the fact that the new memorandum does not embody all that is
to be desired, nevertheless I earnestly hope that in view of the conciliatory changes in
comparison with first proposal it may serve as a starting point. In that case I do not
believe that it would be difficult to induce the present government to consent to taking
steps along some of the lines suggested by Mr. Hughes in his letter of February 6th,
1925 to me.
Complete text of new memorandum by next pouch.33
HERRICK
29 Telegram in two sections.
30 Letter not printed.
33 Not printed.

[Document 90]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
184. I desire you to take the earliest suitable occasion to take up with the proper French
authorities question of the French debt. You should shape your conversation along
following lines: (1) The Government of the United States believes that negotiations
looking to an agreement on a suitable basis for refunding of France’s debt to the United
States should be undertaken at earliest practicable moment. In latter part of November
1924, the French Ambassador, Mr. Jusserand, called on Secretary of the Treasury
Mellon, chairman of the World War Foreign Debt Commission, and indicated that the
French Government was desirous of an endeavor to arrive at some terms of settlement
which might prove satisfactory to both Governments. Secretary Mellon discussed the
matter with the other members of the Commission and on December 1, 1924, informed
Ambassador Jusserand on behalf of the Commission34 that the Commission were
prepared to recommend to Congress the British terms with such modifications as would
meet the difference in the existing economic situation in France; that it would appear
that payments upon the principal of the debt could be begun at once, and that the
differences referred to should find expression in an examination of the various
questions which relate to payments of interest.
Subsequent to this exchange of communications, certain personal and unofficial
suggestions for dealing with French debt to the United States were submitted to you
privately. These suggestions did not seem to offer a practical basis, however, upon
which negotiations might be begun. In light of present circumstances the Government
of the United States believes that discussions should be continued in more official
manner and should take form of proposals more likely to prove acceptable to World
War Foreign Debt Commission and to Congress. It is believed that the statement
communicated to Mr. Jusserand by Secretary Mellon can appropriately be made basis
for further discussions of the question. The Government of the United States is not
unmindful of financial difficulties of France and appreciates fully that any arrangement
made must take actual economic and financial situation into account. It does not follow,
however, that no steps toward refunding should be taken, as this Government believes
it to be in interest of Governments of both France and the United States that a definite
basis of settlement be found as soon as possible.

(2) I fear that if no settlement is made in next few months, or at least if no substantial
progress is made, public feeling in United States may grow that France does not have
serious intention of paying, and that feeling thus created will make suitable
arrangement in light of all the circumstances exceedingly difficult to reach. The
Government of the United States would prefer not to send a formal communication in
the matter to France at this time, and hopes that it will not be necessary to do so. For
this reason you will appreciate importance of putting matter before French Government
in such manner that advisability of taking action suggested will be fully understood. It
is preferable to elicit overture from France, if possible, in order to avoid appearance of
pressure from this Government which might produce unfortunate reaction from French
public opinion. M. Clémentel’s second personal and unofficial memorandum to you (as
I have already indicated above) would not appear to be any more acceptable as a basis
for negotiation than his first, which Secretary Mellon did not find to offer a practical
basis upon which negotiations might be begun. It appears instead to be desirable to use
the communication made to Mr. Jusserand by Secretary Mellon in December as starting
point for the present discussions and to have your representations upon it. While it is
confidently believed that at that time the Ambassador did not fail to advise his
Government of the statement made to him by Secretary Mellon, it is desired that you
hand to the proper French authorities, when you have your conversation with them, a
memorandum containing the statement communicated to Mr. Jusserand by Secretary
Mellon on December 1, 1924.
(3) Please repeat foregoing to Embassy in Great Britain, with report of action you take,
for Ambassador Houghton’s information.
KELLOGG

[Document 91]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
conversations with Premier, Painlevé, Minister of Finance Caillaux, M. Loucheur,36
and with M. Franklin-Bouillon,36 who came at his own request on May 5 to talk matter
over with me. We had talked together just before he left for Angora, and he had
mentioned the difference in the rate of exchange between time when these loans were
contracted and present, and that it seemed equitable some adjustment should be made
so that France would not have to pay in francs more than she would have to pay were
exchange at par. I had merely listened, and not until Painlevé also raised this point did I
see that Franklin-Bouillon was seriously presenting it as an argument. I very briefly
explained its fallacy to Painlevé, and when Franklin- Bouillon brought the idea up
again on May 5 I pointed out its absurdity as an argument after the recent issue of notes
when no guarantee existed that there would not be a further emission; I think I
succeeded in dispelling any idea on his part that there was trading basis on this point.
Yesterday Franklin-Bouillon again asked to see me, in the meantime having taken my
advice to consult some of the great French bankers. He said that first thing to do, in his
opinion, was to agree on certain basic principles which he set forth as follows: (1)
Great Britain to be paid pari passu with the United States; (2) France to be granted a
He had expressed these views to Caillaux; the latter had agreed; and Franklin-Bouillon
said that he thought we would soon receive an official proposal along those lines. I said
that I was glad to hear it, as I knew that my Government was expecting some overtures
from France; that as far as terms were concerned, all I could say was that neither of the
proposals made by M. Clémentel was thought by the Debt Commission to offer a basis
for negotiation, and that to be successful a proposition along lines of Secretary
Mellon’s statement (of which I handed him a copy) should be made.
At first he was somewhat moved, and said it was hopeless were we to stipulate the
British terms and immediate payments; that it was impossible for them to pay anything
until restoration of the devastated regions had been completed, and that this would take

about 4 years. I referred to the qualifying words in Secretary Mellon’s statement, and
said that although I had been given no interpretation of their exact meaning, they did
not, in my opinion, seem to exclude any of the principles which he had set forth; as to
payments on the principal, France was already paying 20 millions yearly, and that
British agreement started with 23 millions, which was no great difference. He is going
to discuss matter with the Government this morning and will come to see me this
afternoon.
For my own personal information I should appreciate an expression of Secretary
Mellon’s view on principles set forth by Franklin- Bouillon. I do not mean by this to
ask for statement of what Debt Commission will be willing to accept, but only to
ascertain principal lines on which I must work to evoke from French Government a
proposal which Debt Commission would be willing to consider as a basis for beginning
of negotiations.
Repeated to American Embassy, London.
HERRICK
35 Telegram in two sections.
36 Member of the Chamber of Deputies.
36 Member of the Chamber of Deputies.

[Document 92]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
Secretary Mellon, and Secretary Hoover.
(2) We thoroughly agree with your view that suggestion regarding difference in rates of
exchange cannot be taken into consideration, and we are gratified that you have
dispelled any idea that a trading basis on that point is possible.
(3) The basic principles put forward by M. Franklin-Bouillon are not acceptable. It
should be recognized that this Government can make no commitment of any kind to
agree to a basis which might be agreed upon between Great Britain, and France, and
that we must insist that debt of France to the United States is entirely separate. His
suggestions with regard to a moratorium and period over which payments are to be
made are covered in statement Secretary Mellon gave to Jusserand on December 1,
1924, of which you handed him a copy.
(4) It is gratifying to note indication that official proposition may soon be made, but I
am confident that you will appreciate importance of bearing in mind fact that actual
negotiation of terms is matter for World War Foreign Debt Commission, and that
neither the Department nor its representatives are authorized to negotiate. Any
indication on your part of views of Debt Commission besides those set forth in
Secretary Mellon’s statement to Jusserand of December 1 might, at present stage, lead
French officials to endeavor to draw you into discussion of particular terms. It is our
desire to elicit from French Government an official proposal to Debt Commission on
basis of Secretary Mellon’s statement (copy of which you handed to M. Franklin-
Bouillon) in which sole area for discussion is adjustment of interest payments to
economic necessities of France. A proposition of this nature might be presented to
Secretary Mellon by Ambassador Daeschner and in this way serve as basis for further
discussion with Debt Commission.
KELLOGG

[Document 93]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 1:15 p.m.]
think Franklin-Bouillon desired United States to commit itself to basis upon which
France and Great Britain might agree. His principle is that as French debts to Great
Britain and to the United States are approximately equal it is impossible for France to
discriminate in favor of one against the other. Practical result is that French Treasury
must be prepared to pay double what may be agreed upon with the United States, and
that this fact has naturally to be considered in estimating amount France could pay us.
Your paragraph 4. I have never failed to be aware that negotiation of terms is wholly
matter for Debt Commission and I think the French understand that perfectly. During a
conversation with Franklin-Bouillon this morning I put forward your suggestion in
regard to Ambassador Daeschner and Secretary Mellon.
Caillaux and Minister for Foreign Affairs Briand have been officially appointed to
study question of the interallied debts, and I have slight doubt that an official proposal
will be forthcoming in comparatively near future.
Repeated to American Embassy, London.
HERRICK

[Document 94]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
203. Inquiries from newspaper correspondents made necessary a statement Saturday by
the Department regarding debt-funding negotiations, and for information of the
correspondents, but not for quotation, the Secretary said:
“The correspondents are aware that debt-funding arrangements have been
completed with Great Britain, Finland, Hungary, Lithuania, and Poland by
the World War Foreign Debt Commission.37 Among the countries with which
debt-funding arrangements have not been completed are Belgium,
Czechoslovakia,38 France, Italy, and Rumania.39 In pursuance of authority
given by Congress, it is function of the Debt Commission to keep subject
before these Governments with whom arrangements have to be made, and the
duties of the Secretary of State are to carry out, in communication with
foreign Governments or with our Ambassadors and Ministers, the orders of
the Debt Commission. The correspondents will readily understand that the
Secretary of State cannot publish the various communications to our
Ambassadors and Ministers or conversations between them and the
representatives of foreign governments. The Secretary could only say that
these matters had been brought to the attention of these governments, and
that he is very hopeful that they are taking steps to open subject of settlement
of the debt with the World War Foreign Debt Commission. We earnestly
desire and hope that negotiations will be entered upon promptly and brought
to satisfactory conclusion at earliest moment possible.
“France is only one of countries which have been urged to reach settlement
with the Debt Commission, and it would be a matter of great satisfaction, of
course, if French Government should take steps promptly to send a
commission to negotiate and conclude with our World War Foreign Debt
Commission, a suitable arrangement for payment or funding of debt of
France to the United States, and that he had received impression from press
reports that the French Government has in mind such action in near future.”

The foregoing statement is the sole basis for newspaper stories about a circular note to
debtor governments. Department has not sent any such note and none is thought of.
At press conference of May 18 one correspondent inquired if there was any authority
for reports that nine countries had been approached. Secretary said he did not make that
statement and that he could not say nine countries had been approached. Another
correspondent said that a newspaper article had indicated that there had been a circular
note. Secretary replied that there had not been any, and that whatever had been done
through conversations with Ministers and Ambassadors had been done separately, not
all at same time.
Repeat the foregoing to American Embassies Belgium and Italy, and Legations
Czechoslovakia, Greece, Latvia, Rumania, and Yugoslavia.
KELLOGG
37 See Combined Annual Reports of the World War Foreign Debt Commission, pp. 106,
Doc. 66 and Doc. 67] ff.

[Document 95]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
336. At lunch day before yesterday with Briand, Caillaux, and others at home of M.
Bunau Varilla, owner of Le Matin, the French debt to the United States was discussed
at length. Briand stated that he would: (1) Admit publicly indebtedness of France to the
United States at public luncheon on July 3; (2) in no way link France’s payments to the
United States with receipts from Germany on account of reparation payments; (3) open
correspondence with the Government of the United States through Ambassador
Daeschner admitting indebtedness of France and asking for information on principal of
the debt, its maturity, interest to be charged, and length of moratorium to be granted;
(4) send small official commission to the United States armed with sufficient authority
to confer with World War Foreign Debt Commission and to conclude negotiations at
such time as progress of preliminary negotiations shows conclusively that visit of
commission would be successful.
At a luncheon at Bunau Varilla’s on June 9, at which Caillaux and Painlevé were
present, the debt question was discussed, and opinions voiced at that time by Painlevé
coincide with Briand’s intentions described above.
Caillaux requested Bunau Varilla to intimate to me that he felt no great security in
tenure of his present office, but that he thought plans outlined above would be carried
out whether he fell or not.
Repeated by mail to American Embassy, London.
HERRICK

[Document 96]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
can find it possible to suggest that in speech on July 3 intention be publicly announced
of sending commission to Washington to enter upon debt-funding negotiations, and that
an early date be set for commission’s departure.
KELLOGG

[Document 97]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 4:05 p.m.]
to American delegation to Exposition of Decorative Arts, Briand said in speech that
propaganda carried on in the United States to show that France was imperialistic had
been silenced by attitude of French Government, that new propaganda that France was
trying to avoid paying her debts would be silenced in same way, and that the French
Government had decided “to send in the very near future a commission to the United
States to settle the debt, naturally, in such a manner as the state of the French finances
permits”.40
I feel that in view of present conditions here this statement was as categorical
announcement as could well be expected; hope it is satisfactory to you.
HERRICK
40 Quoted passage not paraphrased.

[Document 98]
The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
[Translation41 ]
WASHINGTON, September 16, 1925.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that the mission charged
with the duty of assisting Mr. Joseph Caillaux, Minister of Finance, in his forthcoming
negotiations with the Secretary of the Treasury in Washington for the settlement of the
debt of France to the United States, will consist of:
Mr. Henry Bérenger, Senator, General Reporter of the Finance Committee of
the Senate;
Mr. Louis Dausset, Senator, Reporter of the Budget of Finances in the
Senate;
Mr. Fernand Chapsal, Senator, formerly Director of the Ministry of
Commerce;
Mr. Paul Dupuy, Senator;
Mr. Vincent Auriol, Deputy, formerly Chairman of the Finance Committee of
the Chamber of Deputies;
Mr. Lucien Lamoureux, Deputy, Assistant General Reporter of the Finance
Committee of the Chamber of Deputies;
Mr. Maurice Bokanowski, Deputy, Member of the Finance Committee of the
Chamber of Deputies;
Mr. de Chambrun, Deputy;
Mr. Joseph Simon, formerly Inspector General of Finance, Vice President of
the Société Générale;
Mr. Moreau-Néret, Assistant Director of the General Movement of Funds and
Minister of Finance;
Mr. Haguenin, Inspector of Finances.

The Ambassador of France at Washington and Mr. Lacour-Gayet, Inspector of
Finances, Financial Attaché of the Embassy of the Republic at Washington, will also
form part of that mission.
The mission embarked at Havre on the 16th of this month on the ship Paris, which,
barring accident, should arrive in New York on the evening of the 22d.42
Be pleased to accept [etc.]
E. DAESCHNER
41 File translation revised.
42 For the negotiations between the Caillaux mission and the World War Foreign Debt
Commission, see Combined, Annual Reports of the World War Foreign Debt
Commission, p. 44.

Greece
[99] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Greece (Goold)
Washington, July 31, 1925.
[100] The Chargé in Greece (Goold) to the Secretary of State
[101] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Dulles)
[Washington,] November 12, 1925.
[102] The Greek Minister (Simopoulos) to the Secretary of State
Washington, December 26, 1925.

[Document 99]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Greece (Goold)
WASHINGTON, July 31, 1925.
No. 237
communications regarding the indebtedness of Greece to the United States, you are
instructed to present the following note to the appropriate Greek authorities:
“Under instructions from my Government, I have the honor to refer to the
agreement dated February 10, 1918, between representatives of the
Governments of Greece, Great Britain, France and the United States,
providing for the extension of credits to the Government of Greece under
certain terms and conditions as therein set forth.44 Pursuant to the provisions
of this agreement, as modified by correspondence between the United States
Treasury and the Greek Legation in Washington, the Government of the
United States made three advances to the Government of Greece aggregating
$15,000,000, and as evidence thereof the Treasury Department holds a
demand obligation of the Greek Government dated June 21, 1918, and
reading in part as follows: ‘As soon as practicable after the close of the war,
this obligation will be converted by the Royal Greek Government into
definitive obligations in suitable amounts having a date of maturity in
accordance with the provisions of a certain agreement dated February 10,
1918, of the Royal Greek Government, approved by the financial delegates of
the United States, of Great Britain and of France, but such date of maturity
shall not in any event be later than the maximum limit permitted by the laws
of the United States.’ The provisions of the agreement of February 10, 1918,
referred to in the text of this obligation stipulate that the advances made to
the Government of Greece under the terms of that agreement shall be repaid
by the end of the fifteenth year following the cessation of hostilities.
“Up to the present time, the Government of the United States has received no
proposal from the Government of Greece looking to the conversion of the
above-mentioned obligation into definitive obligations of the Greek
Government, or for the settlement in any other manner of this indebtedness,
although it is recalled in this connection that on December 15, 1924, M.
Roussos, the then Minister of Foreign Affairs, authorized Mr. Laughlin to

inform my Government that it might publicly announce the intention of the
Greek Government to take up the regulation or funding of its indebtedness to
the United States.45 As stated above, however, no definite proposals to this
effect have as yet been submitted by the Government of Greece. In this
connection I am authorized to state that my Government would be prepared,
after consultation with the other powers which are parties to the 1918
agreement, to examine the question of relieving the Government of Greece
from its present obligation to obtain the consent of the United States to the
pledging of any new security for external loans, if the Government of Greece
should make satisfactory arrangements for the funding of its debt to the
United States. I have also been instructed to point out that if the Government
of Greece will promptly initiate debt funding negotiations, the World War
Foreign Debt Commission would not be disposed to insist that the
indebtedness of Greece be repaid in full within fifteen years from November
contrary would be willing to recommend to Congress a funding agreement
such, for example, as that concluded with the Government of Great Britain
whereby the principal of the indebtedness would be payable within a period
of sixty-two years.
“In conclusion I have the honor to state that my Government would be
pleased to be informed how soon it may expect to receive proposals from the
Government of Greece looking to the funding of that Government’s
indebtedness to the United States, which amounted on May 16, 1925, to
$15,000,000 principal sum and $2,625,000 accrued and unpaid interest, a
total of $17,625,000, all of which is payable on demand.”
FRANK B. KELLOGG
44 Greek Debt Settlement: Hearings Before the Committee on Ways and Means, 70th
51.
Relations, 1924, vol. I, p. 141.

[Document 100]
The Chargé in Greece (Goold) to the Secretary of State
ATHENS, September 5, 1925.
[Received September 21.]
No. 406
state that this morning I was handed Foreign Office note No. 11193, dated August 30th
in reply to my note No. 109 of August 14th which I had been directed to transmit by
your instruction No. 237 of July 31st.
I have [etc.]
H. S. GOOLD
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Greek Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Hadjikyriacos) to the American Chargé (Goold)
ATHENS, August 30, 1925.
No. 11193
MR. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: In reply to the note of August 14th which you were good enough to
address me concerning the credits opened by the American Government in favor of
Greece, I have the honor to inform you that Mr. Simopoulos, Minister of Greece at
Washington, has been named as the representative of the Hellenic Government to take
up this question with the World War Foreign Debt Commission and clothed with the
necessary powers to make proposals on the subject.
Please accept [etc.]
A. HADJIKRIACOS
46 Not printed.

[Document 101]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Dulles)
[WASHINGTON,] November 12, 1925.
The Greek Minister called to see the Secretary this morning and, finding that he was at
the Treasury, came to the Near Eastern Division with the request that the Secretary be
advised that the Legation had been instructed by the Greek Government to
communicate to the Department that Mr. G. Cofinas, former Minister of Finance, and
M. Drosopoulos, Director of the Public Debt, of Greece, were shortly coming to the
United States to take up the funding of Greek indebtedness to this country.
In this connection the Minister referred to the recent conference he had had with the
Secretary, when the latter had inquired at what time the Greek Government intended to
take up the question of the funding of its debt, in view of the fact that our Legation at
Athens had been informed, some weeks ago, of the appointment of a Greek Debt
Funding Commission, composed of the Minister himself and Mr. Evlambios. Mr.
Simopoulos said that he hoped that the delay in taking up the negotiations which would
result from the sending of new negotiators from Greece would not inconvenience this
Government. He realized that the Debt Funding Commission was occupied at the
present time and had the Rumanian negotiations to take up when the Italian
negotiations were finished. In view of this, he trusted the slight delay in dealing with
Greece would be welcome rather than otherwise.
I told the Minister that I would pass on to the Secretary the information he had
communicated. The Minister then asked me (1) whether I would be able to let him
know personally whether the procedure contemplated by the Greek Government would
be agreeable to this Government and (2) whether formal notification of the designation
of Mr. Cofinas should be made.
I told the Minister that in my personal opinion any long delay on the part of the Greek
Government would be unfortunate and that I hoped that the newly appointed
representatives would proceed to this country at an early date. He said that he could
assure me that they would.
In reply to the Minister’s second inquiry, I stated that as we had been officially advised
of his own designation and that of Mr. Evlambios as negotiators with the Debt Funding
Commission I felt that it would be desirable to have a formal communication from the
Greek Legation indicating the change which the Greek Government was suggesting in
the personnel of its Mission and, also, as soon as possible, a definite statement as to the

time when the Mission would proceed to the United States. In this connection I pointed
out to the Minister that Congress would be assembling shortly, that several of the
members of the Debt Funding Commission were also members of Congress and that, in
addition, the Christmas and New Year holidays were not far distant. If the Mission did
not come to this country promptly there might be considerable delay in taking up the
matter, which would only react unfavorably to Greece, since, as the Minister
appreciated, the Department would not be disposed to view with favor Greek loan
flotations until the debt matter was settled. In this connection I referred to the fact that
the Greek indebtedness to the United States was relatively small and that the question
ought to be a very simple one to deal with. To this the Minister replied that, quite the
contrary, the Greek matter was by far the most difficult of all and, while he did not
explain—and I asked for no explanation—in his allusion to the difficulty he
undoubtedly had in mind the claims which Greece might set up under the 1918 Credit
Agreement with Greece.
I told the Minister that I would communicate with him in case the Debt Funding
Commission had any comment to make upon the informal communication which he
had made to the Department regarding the new negotiators.
A[LLEN] W. D[ULLES]

[Document 102]
The Greek Minister (Simopoulos) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, December 26, 1925.
The Minister of Greece presents his compliments to His Excellency the Secretary of
State and referring to his Note Verbale November 16,47 has the honor to inform him
that, a special mission, consisting of Mr. George Cofinas, former Minister of Finance,
and Mr. Michel Evlambios one of the Directors of the National Bank of Greece, will
arrive to [in] Washington, Monday, December the twenty eighth.48
47 Note verbale of the Greek Minister not printed.
48 For summary of the negotiations of the Greek mission, see Combined Annual
Reports of the World War Foreign Debt Commission., pp. 76–77.

Italy
[103] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[104] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
[105] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

[Document 103]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
34. Ambassador de Martino, who will sail for the United States on February 18, has
informed me that he will be in a position to explain the attitude of the Italian
Government on its war debt to the United States; Italy, he says, has no intention of
repudiating this debt. The Government hopes, however, that Italy’s resources and
capacity to pay will be taken into consideration. I gather that the Government is not yet
decided whether or not to negotiate for debt settlement with us at same time France
does, perhaps conjointly with her. I have discouraged this view and have suggested that
Italian Government negotiate without the interposition of third parties. It is my belief,
however, that they will try to wait in order to see what arrangement we make with
France.
FLETCHER

[Document 104]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
[Paraphrase]
53. In an interview with me yesterday the Italian Ambassador repeated what he had
informally stated previously to Mr. Castle,49 that his Government did not intend to do
anything about the funding of the Italian debt to the United States until the French
funding was arranged, and that whatever proposition his Government would make
would be based on the French settlement, consideration being given to the fact that
capacity of Italy to pay was not so great, even, as that of France. This was true, the
Ambassador said, despite fact that Italian budget was in better condition than that of
France by reason of imposition of taxes much higher than the taxes levied in France.
He added that while he did not wish to notify this Government that Italy would not
enter upon negotiations, he suggested that settlement with Italy should depend upon the
settlement with France but with a margin of difference in Italy’s favor.
I told the Ambassador that the United States could not recognize this attitude; that
question of settlement of the debts was one solely between the debtor governments and
the Government of the United States, and was not dependent upon what was done with
any other government; that the United States could not consent to have the Italian
Government wait until settlement had been made with France. I again called his
attention to the fact that settlement of the debts was solely in hands of the World War
Foreign Debt Commission, which had been appointed by Congress, and that the
Secretary of State had no authority to make terms but that whatever negotiations there
were should take place with the Commission or a representative of the Commission.
The Ambassador asked if I had any objection to his talking with the Secretary of the
Treasury (the chairman of the Commission) and I said that I had not, that I should be
very glad if he would talk with Mr. Mellon. I reminded the Ambassador of the fact that
in 1922 the Italian Government had informed the American Ambassador that it was
prepared to send a representative to the United States to negotiate with the Debt
Commission,50 and that I thought that the Italian Government should make this
pronouncement effective and take up the matter of settlement of the debts without
delay.
KELLOGG

49 Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs, Department of State.
Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 406.

[Document 105]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 4:22 p.m.]
134. Italian Foreign Office has announced composition of delegation who will go to
Washington in October to discuss debt settlement. It will be composed of Count
Giuseppe Volpi di Misurata, Minister of Finance, who will be chairman of the
delegation; Dino Grandi, Undersecretary of State for Foreign Affairs; Ambassador de
Martino; Count Lelio Bonin Longare, formerly Ambassador to France; the Honorable
Alberto Pirelli; and the Honorable Mario Alberti.51
The opinion continues to be maintained by the entire press that Italy is not able to pay
anything like sums expected from her, and will not undertake to do so; that not only
must principal be reduced but interest rate as well; and that rather than assume burden
which they cannot carry, they will not make any settlement whatever.
FLETCHER
Reports of the World War Foreign Debt Commission, pp. 217–241.

Latvia
[106] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania
(Coleman)
Washington, July 20, 1925.

[Document 106]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania
(Coleman)
WASHINGTON, July 20, 1925.
No. 273
SIR: With reference to previous correspondence regarding the indebtedness of Latvia to
the United States, you are informed that in a note dated June 26, 1925,52 the Latvian
Minister at Washington informed the Department of his instructions to negotiate the
debt funding agreement and stated that he desired to enter into immediate discussions
with the World War Foreign Debt Commission. This information was communicated to
the Secretary of the Treasury and on July 8, 1925, Mr. Seya was introduced to Mr.
Winston, the Acting Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of the World War
Foreign Debt Commission, with a view to the inauguration of the negotiations in
question.53
For the Secretary of State:
J. BUTLER WRIGHT
52 Not printed.
Reports of the World War Foreign Debt Commission, pp. 182–193.

Rumania
[107] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Rumania (Jay)
[108] The Minister in Rumania (Jay) to the Secretary of State
[109] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Rumania (Jay)
[110] The Minister in Rumania (Jay) to the Secretary of State
[111] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Rumania (Jay)
[112] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Rumania (Jay)

[113] The Minister in Rumania (Jay) to the Secretary of State
[114] The Minister in Rumania (Jay) to the Secretary of State
[115] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Rumania (Jay)
[116] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Rumania (Jay)
[117] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Rumania (Riggs)
[118] The Chargé in Rumania (Riggs) to the Secretary of State
[119] The Chargé in Rumania (Riggs) to the Secretary of State

[120] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Rumania (Riggs)
[121] The Chargé in Rumania (Riggs) to the Secretary of State

[Document 107]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Rumania (Jay)
6. London Embassy reports acceptance on January 19 by Australia, Denmark, France,
Great Britain, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland of Rumanian proposal of December 24
to refund her relief debt to them on a basis providing for the repayment of such debt in
30 years, interest during that period running at 5 per cent.
The Department is advising Treasury of the foregoing with a view to the consideration
of the question by the World War Foreign Debt Commission and will send you further
instructions. In the meantime Department desires your comments by telegraph
particularly with reference to the question whether in your opinion there is any reason
why this Government should not call upon the Rumanian Government to take prompt
measures looking to a similar settlement of the Rumanian debt to the United States.
HUGHES

[Document 108]
The Minister in Rumania (Jay) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 10:08 p.m.]
appear to take much interest in question, as it was British Government which not only
took the initiative but conducted the negotiations presumably because their claims
come to more than $11,000,000, as against a total of about $190,000 for all other
countries. Local press has published nothing on subject, and I have received impression
confirmed by commercial attaché’s unsuccessful efforts to obtain information that
British Legation is not anxious to enlighten us on the matter, but tomorrow I expect to
see British Minister personally. I have, however, seen copies of notes to the Rumanian
Government on the subject. The Swiss Minister stated that his Government took
comparatively little interest in matter from smallness of amount involved, and was
unaware that definite settlement had been reached until I informed him.
In an informal conversation this morning with Minister for Foreign Affairs he
professed unfamiliarity with the question. I expressed very frankly my fear that
unfortunate impression would be created in United States by this preferential treatment.
He seemed to realize this fully and said he would have matter looked into and would
give me full information in a very few days. As Finance Minister has undoubtedly
handled whole matter I presume he must be consulted.
I see no reason at present why the United States should not press vigorously for a
settlement but I prefer postponing a definite expression of opinion until I shall have
heard further from the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
JAY

[Document 109]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Rumania (Jay)
[Paraphrase]
funding agreements of Rumania with the Governments named in paragraph 1,
Department’s No. 6, and does not wish you to seek information nor to make
representations in regard to it at this time. … Department would prefer to have
Rumanian Government take the initiative in refunding matter; but in the absence of any
indication that such step will be taken, the Department would seriously consider taking
vigorous action.
HUGHES

[Document 110]
The Minister in Rumania (Jay) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 7:40 p.m.]
received information promised by Foreign Minister Duca, and shall not press for it.
It is my opinion that the Minister of Finance intends to wait until Mr. Kellogg assumes
office,54 in belief, apparently based on conversations with Mr. Kellogg in Paris,55 that
Department will be more amenable.
Minister Duca does not share Finance Minister’s optimism but he is powerless. There
were statements in the local press yesterday that Duca had offered his resignation
because of difficulties arising in foreign affairs through Ministry of Finance, but today
matter is reported to have been smoothed out by Prime Minister. I understand that
Rumanian Minister to the United States deferred his sailing so as to return same ship
with Mr. Kellogg.
Situation set forth above will probably hamper my efforts to bring about refunding. So
far I have elicited only vague promises and I cannot see that negotiations on any
pending question would be imperiled by taking most energetic action, but before
Department actually takes forceful steps I wish to inquire if it would be disposed to
allow me to forewarn Minister Duca in informal and friendly way that such action by it
is now definitely imminent.
JAY
54 Mr. Kellogg succeeded Mr. Hughes as Secretary of State on March 5.
55 At Finance Ministers Conference; see vol. II, pp. 133 ff.

[Document 111]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Rumania (Jay)
13. Please present textually the following note:
“In my note of October 21, 1924,56 I had the honor to state that I had been
instructed by my Government to refer to the assurances given by Mr.
Bratiano on behalf of the Rumanian Government in his letter of May 17,
1919,57 to a representative of the United States Treasury, and to point out that
in the light of these assurances, the Government of the United States was at a
loss to understand the reports which it had received regarding the payment by
Rumania of substantial sums to other governments on account of relief or
reconstruction loans similar to those extended to Rumania by the United
States, no corresponding payments having been made to the United States.
I have now been instructed to communicate to you the surprise and regret of
my government that the Government of Rumania has not seen fit to furnish
an adequate explanation of this apparent discrimination, although nearly five
months have elapsed since the matter was officially brought to its attention.
In the meantime, moreover, it appears that the Government of Rumania had
made a proposal, dated December 24, 1924, to the Governments of Australia,
Denmark, France, Great Britain, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland for the
repayment within twenty years with interest at 5 percent of the relief
indebtedness of Rumania to those Governments. According to the terms of
this proposal, which, my Government is informed,58 was accepted on January
19, 1925, by the several creditor governments named above, the principal and
interest of the bonds to be issued by the Government of Rumania in exchange
for the relief bonds heretofore held by the creditor governments in question
are a charge upon all the assets and revenues of Rumania, and Rumania
undertakes not only that the necessary sums will be included in the annual
budget law for each year but also that the payment of the bonds shall be a
first charge on receipts accruing to Rumania by way of compensation,
reparation or indemnity, other than receipts by way of restitution in kind,
from ex-enemy governments or any of them, subject to any charges already
created in respect of previous loans.

As of November 15, 1924, the principal amount of the indebtedness of the
Government of Rumania to the Government of the United States was
making the total indebtedness of Rumania to the United States on November
which are held by the Treasury of the United States are all overdue or
payable on demand.
I am instructed to state that the Government of the United States cannot agree
that Rumania should make no payments to the United States on account of
this indebtedness while making payments to other governments on account of
indebtedness to them incurred by Rumania for similar purposes.
Consequently, it will not acquiesce in any discrimination against the United
States in favor of other creditor governments either through agreements such
as those recently concluded or otherwise. My Government, therefore, expects
promptly to receive from the Government of Rumania an appropriate
proposal for the refunding of its indebtedness to the United States.”
Please reinforce note with vigorous oral representations.
Mail text of note to Amlegation, Belgrade for latter’s strictly confidential information.
KELLOGG
57 Not printed; see Roumanie, Ministère des Finances, Annexes: Documents
Concernant la Question des Réparations et des Dettes Interalliées de la Roumanie
printed.

[Document 112]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Rumania (Jay)
[Paraphrase]
Department on a proposed loan of £1,500,000 to City of Bucharest,59 answer has been
made that the Department of State would not view with favor any proposal for flotation
of a loan either to Government of Rumania or to any of its political subdivisions at
present time in view of unsatisfactory treatment accorded American interests. You are
at liberty at your discretion to use this information in your conversations with
appropriate officials of Rumanian Government.
If by April 3 you have received no suitable reply to note presented by you pursuant to
present the following note to the Foreign Office.60
“I have been instructed by my Government to refer to my note of March 20
regarding the indebtedness of Rumania to the United States and to inquire
Government of Rumania the proposal for the refunding of the latter’s
indebtedness to the United States which I had the honor to request in my
above-mentioned note of March 20.”
KELLOGG
printed.
60 Text of note not paraphrased.

[Document 113]
The Minister in Rumania (Jay) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
BUCHAREST, April 6, 1925—noon.
[Received 11:49 p.m.]
29.
It is my personal impression, which I should like to have officially confirmed as far as
possible through the Rumanian Legation in Washington, that the Rumanian
Government, in despair at failures in the European markets, is making a sincere bid for
American financial support, with corresponding advantages to us. For this reason I do
not recommend too vigorous action at present, as at last the Government seems to
realize absolute necessity of obtaining our good will.
JAY

[Document 114]
The Minister in Rumania (Jay) to the Secretary of State
BUCHAREST, April 9, 1925.
[Received April 25.]
No. 745
transmitting copy of the Note presented to the Rumanian Foreign Office on the basis of
failure of the Rumanian Government to take any measures to refund its debt to the
United States.
I am forwarding herewith enclosed in copy and translation the reply of the Rumanian
Foreign Office to the above-mentioned Note: a summary of this reply was transmitted
Copy of this reply is being forwarded to the Legation at Belgrade for its strictly
confidential information.
I have [etc.]
PETER A. JAY
[Enclosure—Translation62 ]
The Rumanian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Duca) to the American Minister (Jay)
BUCHAREST, March 30, 1925.
No. 16163
MR. MINISTER: We have not failed to examine with the greatest care your note No. 21 of
Above all, we are anxious to assure the Government of the United States of America
that it was never the intention of the Rumanian Government to take measures which
would tend to favor other countries to the detriment of American financial claims.

We could not forget the help that the United States of America gave us during the war
and along with this moral debt of gratitude we are fully conscious of the interest which
the eventual cooperation of a power like the United States of America presents in view
of our present economic development.
If we signed at London the arrangement relative to the “relief bonds,” it was not at our
request—as it would appear from your note of March 18th. On the contrary, in view of
our present difficulties, we would have wished to postpone this arrangement. But we
had finally to consent to it on account of its international character. Indeed, these “relief
bonds” represented essentially relief debts contracted under the auspices of an
international organization with Allied and neutral countries. (Denmark, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland.) Nevertheless, we did not accept it until it was established that it
did not imply any obligation concerning war debts.
For us, hostilities did not, unfortunately, end on November 11, 1918.
During the whole year of 1919 we had to defend our frontiers against the Hungarian
and Russian Bolshevists.
On the other hand, abandoned in the midst of the struggle by Russia, we found
ourselves completely isolated from our Allies, so that our real war debts to America
were only contracted during the year 1919.
Under these conditions we think that these debts should not be assimilated with the
“relief bonds,” which were made the object of the London arrangement.
Rumania, as she has already declared on many occasions, has no thought of evading
her obligations. She asks the Government of the United States of America simply not to
demand of her any arrangement entailing the settlement of her debts with all her Allies
—which would be, in the present circumstances, beyond her possibilities and forces.
Besides, the obligation to settle this question now by premature sacrifices, would
hinder to such a point our recovery that the very people who would have to suffer most
would be our creditors, whose best guarantee is our general financial and economic
consolidation.
For this reason we hope that, far from seeing in our attitude a lack of good intentions
toward the United States—a lack of good intentions which nothing would justify—the
Government of the United States of America will be good enough to see therein simply
a necessity imposed by our present situation.
With a view to the economic reconstruction of Europe, the United States of America
has lately given its help to various countries. We cannot believe that it will refuse to

Rumania the pursuit of its work of reconstruction to which she is consecrating all her
efforts for the very purpose of being able in the future to meet her obligations.
Besides, as he declared to Mr. Kellogg, Mr. Vintila Bratiano, our Minister of Finance,
or one of his authorized representatives, would like to go to the United States in order
to explain to the American Government our situation and to furnish it the reasons for
the requests above indicated.
Please accept [etc.]
I. G. DUCA
61 Not printed.
61 Not printed.
62 File translation revised.
63 Minister Jay presented the note on March 20.

[Document 115]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Rumania (Jay)
you totally unsatisfactory and you are instructed to present the following note to the
Foreign Office at the first suitable opportunity:
“I have the honor to inform you that I did not fail to communicate to my
Government your Excellency’s note of [March 30] and to state that I have
been instructed to make the following reply thereto:
‘The Government of the United States is pleased to note that the Government
of Rumania has had no intention of favoring other countries to the detriment
of the United States. It is, however, constrained to point out that the payments
made by the Government of Rumania to certain creditor Governments on
account of relief and reconstruction loans, to which reference was made in
the note of October 21, 1924, from the American Chargé d’Affaires at
Bucharest,65 and the payments to be made by the Government of Rumania
pursuant to the agreement recently concluded in London between that
Government and the Governments of Australia, Denmark, France, Great
Britain, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland, to which reference was made in
the note of March 20, 1925, from the American Minister at Bucharest, do in
fact constitute a serious discrimination against the interests of the
Government of the United States in favor of the other Governments in
question.
The Government of the United States is able to perceive no distinction
between the post-armistice loans which it made to the Government of
Rumania for relief and reconstruction purposes and the relief loans made by
those creditor Governments in respect of which the Government of Rumania
has made or is about to make payments, which might justify such payments
by Rumania while disregarding her obligation to make payments on account
of her indebtedness to the United States. It is true that the United States
advanced a larger sum to Rumania for relief and reconstruction purposes than
did any of the other creditor Governments concerned, but it cannot believe
that the Government of Rumania will maintain that no steps should now be
taken to adjust its indebtedness to the United States for the reason that it is

greater in amount than its corresponding indebtedness to the several
Governments concerned in the London arrangement. The Government of the
United States does not demand for itself treatment more favorable than that
which has been accorded by Rumania to its other creditors on account of
relief and reconstruction loans, but the loans made by the Government of the
United States are certainly no less entitled to repayment than the loans made
by the other Governments in question for similar purposes and the
Government of the United States feels constrained to repeat that it is unable
to agree that Rumania should make no payments on account of its relief and
reconstruction indebtedness to it, while making payments to other
Governments on account of an indebtedness toward them incurred for similar
purposes.
The principle at issue, in the opinion of the Government of the United States,
is one susceptible of satisfactory settlement without the delay and expense
incident to the visit to Washington of a Rumanian Debt Mission.
Furthermore, the Government of the United States feels that no useful
purpose could be served by the visit of such a mission if, as indicated in the
Rumanian Government’s note of [March 30] it should be authorized merely
to offer an explanation of the failure of the Rumanian Government to present
a debt funding proposal. The position of the Government of the United States
is clearly set forth in the concluding paragraph of the note of March 20, 1925,
from the American Minister at Bucharest, and as stated therein, the
Government of the United States expects promptly to receive from the
Government of Rumania an appropriate proposal for the funding of the
indebtedness of the latter to the United States.’”
[Paraphrase]
When you present the above note you should make as effective use as possible of the
pursuant to authorization contained in Department’s instruction of November 7, 1924,66
you have given Rumanian Government the impression that Department under certain
circumstances might consider leaving the Legation in charge of a Chargé d’Affaires,
you should at this time make similar intimation so that it will not appear that
Department has in any way receded from its former position.
In view of the importance of these negotiations, Department desires that for the present
you postpone your leave.
Your 29, April 6, noon, received, but Department does not see that it lessens the
necessity for the action outlined above.

KELLOGG
64 Not printed; see despatch No. 745 and its enclosure, supra.

[Document 116]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Rumania (Jay)
representations which you had been instructed to make to the Rumanian Government.
was later furnished him.
Bibesco was clearly informed of the great weight which this Government attached to
receiving early assurances from the Rumanian Government that appropriate action
would be taken in meeting the views of this Government with regard to the funding of
its indebtedness for advances made after the armistice for relief and reconstruction.
Bibesco indicated that he had received word from his Government with regard to the
proposed negotiations with the Standard Oil Company. In this connection Bibesco was
informed that the attitude of this Government in asserting its clear rights could not be
conditioned upon arrangements which might be reached with private American
companies but that if these arrangements were of a character to facilitate action toward
meeting its obligations to the United States, the Department would of course be glad to
see a solution reached which would tend toward the settlement of outstanding questions
both between the Rumanian Government and this Government and between the
Rumanian Government and private American interests and nationals.
GREW
67 Prince Antoine Bibesco, Rumanian Minister at Washington.

[Document 117]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Rumania (Riggs)
44. Bibesco informed Department July 15 that he was being called back to Bucharest
for consultation and that he could inform Department that Rumanian Government was
shortly to make proposals to this Government through you with respect to its
indebtedness to the United States.
Press July 17th states that problem of relief indebtedness will receive serious
consideration at Bucharest before arrival of new American Minister.69 According to
Associated Press despatch from Bucharest the Rumanian Government is preparing to
send a commission of experts to the United States for preliminary discussion of
arrangements for funding the war debt.
KELLOGG
69 William S. Culbertson had been appointed Minister to Rumania on April 28, to
succeed Peter A. Jay, who had been appointed Ambassador to Argentina on March 18.

[Document 118]
The Chargé in Rumania (Riggs) to the Secretary of State
and dictated to me following statement:
“In reply to the various notes addressed to us relative to our debts to the
United States I desire to communicate to you with the request kindly to notify
your Government that we have summoned our Minister Bibesco to furnish
certain complementary information on this matter but I am now directed to
inform you that the Roumanian Government has decided to send a
commission to Washington to examine with the American Government the
bases on which an arrangement might be reached regarding the debts of
Roumania to the United States.”
To my questions Minister for Foreign Affairs replied commission probably exclusively
technical experts and might possibly arrive at Washington beginning of September.
Advised date not officially decided and subject to change as Minister of Finance
leaving in a few days on vacation and may not return in time to make final
arrangements.
RIGGS

[Document 119]
The Chargé in Rumania (Riggs) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
Department:
Does the Department wish to press for definite proposal for funding of the
Rumanian relief debt in accordance with telegraphic instructions No. 13,
made to Mr. Riggs by the Rumanian Government reported in Legation’s
transferring the negotiations to Washington on the same basis as the war
debts of other nations? I should like to receive instructions whether I can
render Department any service by remaining in Bucharest until the King
returns or whether I should proceed to Geneva for conference with Minister
of Finance Bratiano. The King is not expected to return for four or five
weeks.
RIGGS
70 Because of the King’s absence, Mr. Culbertson was unable to present his letters of
credence and Mr. Riggs continued to act as Chargé.

[Document 120]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Rumania (Riggs)
[Paraphrase]
statement communicated to Mr. Riggs by Rumanian Minister for Foreign Affairs as
satisfactory reply to its several communications to the Government of Rumania on the
subject of that Government’s indebtedness to the United States, and the Department
would be glad to have you remain a few days in Bucharest if you think your influence
informally exerted would be effective in eliciting more satisfactory statement from
Government of Rumania.
You will appreciate that Department desires to have written reply to its notes that gives
definite information on date of departure of the debt mission and contains assurances
that mission will have sufficient authority to negotiate and agree upon suitable
arrangement of debt funding with the World War Foreign Debt Commission.
Department feels no useful purpose would be served by sending mission composed
exclusively of technical experts without authority to negotiate an agreement; this
information may be informally communicated to Rumanian Government.
Mr. Winston, Acting Secretary of the Treasury, informed Rumanian Chargé, in reply to
latter’s inquiry, that we would be prepared to receive the Rumanian debt mission in
September, if it were duly empowered to act, and that burden of showing incapacity to
pay in accordance with terms of British settlement is responsibility of the debtor. The
showing should be such as will be persuasive upon American Congress, since any
settlement must be approved by that body.
KELLOGG

[Document 121]
The Chargé in Rumania (Riggs) to the Secretary of State
Minister of Foreign Affairs, who leaves for Geneva September 1st, presented formal
written note signed by himself of which following is close translation:
“Following the declarations which I have already made to you, Roumanian
Government has decided to send during the course of this autumn, a
commission to the United States to examine with the American Government
the bases on which an arrangement might be reached as regards the debts of
Roumania to the United States.
This commission will have the right to treat and eventually to sign an
arrangement with the American Government.”72
Minister of Foreign Affairs stated commission will probably reach Washington around
October 1st and certainly by the 15th, but although pressed to do so declined to
embody any date specification in note.
King returns September 2d but Foreign Office states he will probably not be able to
receive Culbertson until week later.73
RIGGS
71 Not printed.
72 For negotiations with the World War Foreign Debt Commission and text of
agreement signed Dec. 4, 1925, see Combined Annual Reports of the World War
73 Mr. Culbertson presented his credentials on September 12.

Yugoslavia
[122] The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
[123] The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats
and Slovenes (Dodge)
[124] The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
[125] The Minister of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Pavichich)
to the Secretary of State
Washington , March 18, 1924.
[126] The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats
and Slovenes (Dodge)

[127] The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
[128] The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
[129] The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
[130] The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
[131] The Legation of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes to the
Department of State
Washington , December 29, 1925.

[Document 122]
The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
BELGRADE, February 12, 1923.
[Received March 9.]
No. 1795
certain credits contained in the Yugoslav Budget Law for the present fiscal year and
particularly upon credits therein provided for the payment of one year’s interest upon
the advances of $25,000,000 and $15,000,000 respectively made by the Government of
the United States to the Serbian Government. I observed that notwithstanding these
credits, I had been unable to find any credit provided for the payment of interest on the
$12,000,000 advance made by the Government of the United States to the Serbian
Government and I stated that for my information as to the reason for this I had
addressed an informal inquiry to the then Minister of Finance, Dr. Kumanudi.
communicated to the Yugoslav Government the ratification of a Resolution adopted by
the World War Foreign Debt Commission on April 18th last and had informed this
Government that this Commission desired to receive any proposals or representations
which the Yugoslav Government might wish to make for the settlement or refunding of
its obligations under the provisions of the Act of Congress approved February 9th
1922. Having received no reply to Mr. Boal’s communication, I addressed on October
3rd last an informal letter to Mr. Gavrilovitch, Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs,
inviting his attention to this fact and requesting that a reply might be sent to me.
As I received no replies to either of my letters mentioned in the foregoing paragraphs, I
invited Mr. Gavrilovitch’s attention to them on several occasions and I was finally led
to the opinion, corroborated by Mr. Gavrilovitch, that Dr. Kumanudi had no intention
of replying to either of them. On the coming into office of the new Minister of Finance,
Dr. Stojadinovitch, I invited his attention to my two letters in the course of a
conversation and he requested me to send him copies of them, assuring me that they
would have his immediate attention. Having done so I finally received on the 10th
instant a letter dated the 7th instant, from Mr. Gavrilovitch in which he communicated
to me the reply to both of my letters of the Minister of Finance. I enclose a copy and

translation of this reply,78 which will be observed to state that no credit for the payment
of interest on the $12,000,000 advance appears in the Budget Law because this advance
was a war loan and it did not appear to be desirable that such loans should appear in the
Budget as no definitive decision had yet been taken in regard to them and as interest on
them was not effectually paid. The letter further states that interest credits on the
$25,000,000 and $15,000,000 advances were entered in the Budget because these
advances had been concluded after the Armistice but it expresses the opinion that these
credits should also not have been entered as these two advances in reality belonged to
the same category of war loans. The letter adds however that the foregoing is without
prejudice to any decisions which may be taken with regard to the question of Inter-
Allied war debts which must be treated and resolved separately.
It will be observed that the letter then states that due note has been taken of my
communication to the effect that the $12,000,000 advance bears interest. This is in
reply to the Legation’s Note to this effect written in accordance with the Department’s
Kumanudi’s contrary opinion on this matter.
Finally the letter refers to my request for a reply to Mr. Boal’s Note communicating the
Department’s circular telegram of April 21, 12 noon, referred to in the second
paragraph of this Despatch, and states that this matter will be studied at once by the
Minister of Finance, of whose decision I will be informed.

Subsequently in conversation, Dr. Stojadinovitch has substantially repeated to me the
contents of this letter and regarding the reply to Mr. Boal’s Note has stated that this
matter was one of considerable difficulty and required more consideration. He
intimated that as the Yugoslav Government’s finances stood at present, any interest
payments would practically be impossible, but he intended, as already reported, to raise
the taxation of the peasants in his Budget for the next fiscal year which he would
present to the new Parliament which is to meet about April 18th. In regard to this plan,
however it should be noted that it depends upon whether Dr. Stojadinovitch then
remains in office which itself depends upon a Radical victory. It may nevertheless be
said that practically any Cabinet which may come into power after the elections, will
sooner or later find itself obliged to raise peasant taxation which without any undue
hardship should increase the Government revenues very substantially. At present, as
also reported, the taxation of the peasants, who form 85 percent of the population, is
almost nil.
page 2, I may report that Dr. Stojadinovitch informed me in conversation a few days
ago that as the amount of the Serbian war debt to France, amounting to about one

billion gold Francs, had now practically been determined, he was about to send to the
French Minister here a form of bond which he would be willing to sign in order thus to
fund the Government’s war debt to France. It will be remembered that the Government
owes no postwar debt to France. As to the war and post war debts to England, Dr.
Stojadinovitch stated that there was still too great a difference between the amount
claimed by that country and the amount which his Government had ascertained to be
due to allow of the funding of this debt at present by signing any bonds. The British
war debt he estimated also at about one billion gold Francs and the post war debt at
approximately 2,000,000 pounds Sterling. From Dr. Stojadinovitch’s statements I
understand that the difficulty in determining the amount of the British debt is still
chiefly the old one involving the amount and cost of various military supplies received
from the British authorities at Salonica. Dr. Stojadinovitch gave me to understand
however that the giving of bonds whether to France or to England involved no question
of paying interest on them, which was left for subsequent discussion.
I have [etc.]
H. PERCIVAL DODGE
74 Not printed.
75 Not printed; Pierre de L. Boal was then Chargé at Belgrade.
78 Not printed.
78 Not printed.
79 Not printed.

[Document 123]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats
and Slovenes (Dodge)
contained in Foreign Minister’s note February 7. As pointed out in previous
instructions all this indebtedness is on equal footing. This note, although ambiguous,
seems to recognize this.
Please informally endeavor in every proper way to impress upon appropriate officials
of the Yugoslav Government the particular importance to Yugoslavia of refunding its
obligations to the United States. Department informed by Yugoslav Minister October
former Minister Grouitch in the negotiations for the settlement or refunding of its
obligations” but neither former nor present Minister has made any proposition to World
War Foreign Debt Commission. It is very desirable that Yugoslav Government instruct
Minister to initiate definite negotiations. In this connection you may point out orally
and discreetly, if you deem it desirable, that such a step might favorably affect the
credit of Yugoslavia in the United States and the market for its securities.
You should keep Department closely informed of developments as to refunding
indebtedness to France and England, and satisfy yourself that no action is taken in this
connection in disregard of assurance of treatment on equal footing contained in
HUGHES
81 In April, May, and June of 1919 there was an exchange of letters in Paris between
Mr. Norman H. Davis, Finance Commissioner of the United States, and Mr. Pachitch,
Prime Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Vesnitch, Serbian Minister to France and Delegate to
the Peace Conference, in respect to advances and credits granted by the United States
to Serbia for relief and reconstruction purposes since Nov. 11, 1918. This
correspondence resulted in Mr. Vesniteh’s giving, on behalf of his Government, certain
assurances designed to have the effect of placing the United States on a plane of

equality with other lending governments in respect to advances and credits of a similar
nature granted by them to Serbia. (Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury to the

[Document 124]
The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
BELGRADE, May 11, 1923—noon.
6. In conferences with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Finance I
referred to a Cabinet council, and yesterday decision was taken to send a mission to
Washington in September or October next. The Minister of Finance has informed me
that unfortunately an earlier date is impossible as the Parliamentary session is
occupying all men suitable for the mission and also because of the holiday season.83
DODGE
83 The departure of the mission was postponed successively until February 1924.

[Document 125]
The Minister of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Pavichich)
to the Secretary of State
DEAR MR. SECRETARY: Dr. Milorad Nedelkovitch, Dean of the Faculty of Belgrade University,
Dr. George Djuritch, Professor of the University of Belgrade, and Dr. Michael Pupin,
Professor of Columbia University and honorary Consul-General of the Kingdom of the
Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, delegated by the Royal Government to discuss with the
Government of the United States the settlement of the debt due by the Kingdom of the
Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, will arrive in Washington of Friday next.
I will be greatly obliged if you could kindly indicate the day and hour when I may have
the honor of presenting these gentlemen to you.84
I take [etc.]
Dr. A. TRESICH PAVICHICH
WASHINGTON , March 18, 1924.
84 The Minister was informed that the Secretary of State would receive the members of
the Yugoslav mission on March 22 at 12 o’clock.
On April 7 the mission appeared before the World War Foreign Debt Commission.
Shortly after this one meeting, the Yugoslav mission left the United States. See
Combined Annual Reports of the World War Foreign Debt Commission, pp. 27–28.

[Document 126]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats
and Slovenes (Dodge)
the Yugoslav Foreign Office:
“The Government of the United States has been happy to receive the
representatives specially appointed by the Government of the Kingdom of the
Serbs, Croats and Slovenes to discuss with the World War Foreign Debt
Commission the indebtedness of that Government to the Government of the
United States, and has noted with satisfaction the assurances which it has
received from Dr. Diouritch, Dr. Nedelkovitch and Mr. Pupin on the occasion
of their conference with the World War Foreign Debt Commission to the
effect that their Government regards its indebtedness to the United States as a
financial obligation which will be honored in every respect and intends and
desires to present a plan for refunding this indebtedness. It is, however, a
matter of regret to the Government of the United States that the
representatives of the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes should have found themselves unable to make any definite
proposals looking to the refunding of the indebtedness in question at the
present time. The desire of the Government of the United States to reach a
refunding agreement at the earliest possible moment was expressed by the
World War Foreign Debt Commission to the representatives of the
Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes. They were
also informed that the Government of the United States desired to be assured
that no step would be taken by the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs,
Croats and Slovenes prior to the refunding or discharge of the latter’s
indebtedness to the United States, with respect to any other indebtedness
heretofore or hereafter contracted which should result in placing the United
States in a less favorable position as a creditor than that which it occupies at
the present time. In reply the Commission was informed that the Government
of the United States could consider that it already had the desired assurance,
which could readily be confirmed, to the effect that no step whatsoever was
contemplated by the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes which would affect the United States in the manner suggested.

I should, therefore, be glad if Your Excellency would be good enough to
confirm my Government’s understanding that, pending the refunding or
satisfaction of the indebtedness in question, no action will be taken by the
Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes with respect
to any of its indebtedness heretofore or hereafter incurred which will result in
placing the United States in a less favorable position as a creditor than that
which it now occupies.”
HUGHES
85 Not printed.

[Document 127]
The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
BELGRADE, February 11, 1925.
[Received March 7.]
No. 2572
his further efforts to obtain the confirmation desired by the World War Foreign Debt
Commission of certain assurances given by the Yugoslav Debt Mission to the effect
that no action would be taken by the Yugoslav Government with respect to any of its
indebtedness heretofore or hereafter incurred which would result in placing the United
States in a less favorable position as a creditor than that which it now occupies, I have
the honor to inform you that I have not failed to keep this matter in mind and to inquire
from time to time about it in my conversations with the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
and of Finance.
To-day in the course of a conversation with Dr. Stojadinovitch, the Minister of Finance,
I again drew his attention to my note of May 15th last, which embodied your telegram
and his predecessor, Dr. Mehmed Spaho, as well as from Dr. Nintchitch, the Foreign
Minister, and his predecessor, Mr. Voja Marinkovitch. Dr. Stojadinovitch excused
himself for not having replied sooner, referring to his numerous absences and to the
recent elections, and stated that he had lately been considering his reply. He would now
immediately study the question with Dr. Nedelkovitch, the former member of the
Yugoslav Debt Mission who was now in Belgrade, and would send me a reply within a
few days.
I then inquired as to whether his Government might be expected soon to make some
definite proposals to my Government looking to the refunding of the indebtedness of
the Yugoslav Government to the Government of the United States. In this connection I
referred to the statements made to me by Mr. Marinkovitch, the Foreign Minister in the
proposals would soon be presented. Dr. Stojadinovitch replied that he had also given
attention to this matter and that his Government desired to make a definite proposal as
soon as possible and that he expected to do so during May or June next. I then inquired
why his Government required so long a time in view of the long delay which had

already elapsed since Mr. Marinkovitch’s promise. Dr. Stojadinovitch replied that the
British Government were pressing him to propose some plan for the payment of the
September 26, 1924) and that he had promised to make such a proposal during May or
June. He thought it only proper that the two proposals should be made about the same
time. There was however another reason for his wishing to delay somewhat and this
was because he considered that as France was a much wealthier and larger nation than
Yugoslavia, the latter should not submit its proposal first but wait until France had done
so. However this view would not cause any real delay since he understood that the
French Government had already made some tentative proposals.87
I then inquired whether he could give me any idea of the proposals which he would
make and he replied that they would probably be substantially similar to those
proposed by the French Finance Minister, M. Clémentel, with whom he had lately
talked in Paris, and would include a moratorium, say of ten years, and then payments
extending over a considerable number of years at a very low rate of interest. Dr.
Stojadinovitch did not consider that it would be necessary to send another debt mission
to Washington, except possibly to settle the final details. Negotiations could be
conducted through this Legation or the Yugoslav Legation in Washington. In this
connection I may refer to the views of Mr. Marinkovitch regarding a funding plan,
described in my Despatch No. 2463, above referred to.
While adding that I shall continue to keep the matters above reported in mind and
report any further developments, I have [etc.]
H. PERCIVAL DODGE
86 Not printed.
86 Not printed.

[Document 128]
The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State88
[Paraphrase]
9. I have received advance information from the Minister of Finance that British
Government, in order to guarantee the British share of the Blair loan under the Trade
Facilities Act, have demanded that the Yugoslav Government agree to a plan for
refunding its post-war advances for relief in kind and for reconstruction which amount
to about £300,000. The plan suggested provides for refunding in 15 years.
The Minister of Finance expressed the belief that if the British proposal were accepted,
the Government of the United States would demand adoption of a similar
reimbursement plan and he declared that the resources of the Yugoslav Government
would render the reimbursement of American advances in 15 years impossible.
DODGE
88 Sent via the Embassy at Paris.

[Document 129]
The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
11. The Minister of Finance has requested me verbally to ascertain whether, if he
accedes to the British refunding demand in connection with new issue of Blair loan, the
Government of the United States will demand a similar reimbursement plan. Minister
of Finance tells me that the new issue is to be used wholly for railroad construction
beneficial economically to Yugoslavia, thereby increasing the security for American
advances and that the British Government by offering to guarantee the British portion
of the issue are offering a quid pro quo for the refunding plan. The Minister declares
that if the Government of the United States insists upon similar reimbursement plan the
new loan issue may be imperiled. In conversation he now appears to be indisposed to
submit refunding proposal mentioned in my despatch No. 2572 of February 11,
alleging as a reason lack of financial resources and that Yugoslav Government should
not submit proposals before France. The present occasion may offer a favorable
opportunity for pressing the Yugoslav Government to submit a moderate refunding plan
for the post-war debt, if not of the entire debt, to the United States; without some such
occasion as the present the Yugoslav Government will probably put off indefinitely
submission of a plan.89
DODGE
informally in writing that the Government of the United States is entitled to be treated
on an equal footing with other governments with respect to its advances to the
Yugoslav Government, and that the United States will insist that if any settlement is
made by Yugoslavia with another creditor nation there shall simultaneously be made a
suitable settlement with the United States of the indebtedness due it (file No.

[Document 130]
The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
BELGRADE, May 17, 1925.
[Received June 9.]
No. 2680
which I stated that as a result of my continuing to press Dr. Stojadinovitch, the Minister
of Finance, for the assurances regarding the Yugoslav debt to the Government of the
United States, requested by my Note of May 15th, 1924, which embodied your
received a Note from the Foreign Office containing these assurances on the 16th
instant. I enclose a copy and translation of this Note herewith.
The second sentence of the third paragraph of this Note read when I received it: “Il ne
placera, par des arrangements spéciaux les Etats-Unis d’Amérique ni dans une situation
moins favorable …” (“It will not by special arrangements place the United States of
America in a less favorable situation …”). I availed of a call upon Dr. Stojadinovitch to
invite his attention to this sentence and to inquire as to its exact meaning. Dr.
Stojadinovitch informed me that the “special arrangements” referred to were intended
to mean special arrangements for refunding debts such for example as the arrangement
now being negotiated with the British Government for the refunding of its post-war
relief and reconstruction advances (Despatch No. 2627 of March 26th last) but that if I
preferred some modification of this phrase, he was prepared to make it. I thereupon
suggested that some such phrase as “Il ne placera d’aucune maniére” (“It will not in
any manner place”) would appear to include all possible acts on the part of the
Yugoslav Government and seem to be more satisfactory. Dr. Stojadinovitch agreed to
this modification and accordingly struck out the words “par des arrangements
spéciaux” and interlined the words “d’aucune maniére”. The copies and translations
enclosed are similarly obliterated and interlined so as to correspond with the original
Note.
I expressed my regret that the Note was not more directly responsive in its form to the
Department’s telegram embodied in my Note. Dr. Stojadinovitch replied that he
regretted that he had not had it written using the same terms but that I might be assured

that its meaning was intended to be exactly responsive to my Note. I then said that I
would communicate it to my Government.

The paragraphs in the Note enclosed regarding the financial operations and foreign
loans of the Yugoslav Government will be observed and are evidently intended as a
further reply to the phrase in the Department’s telegram requesting confirmation to the
effect that “no action will be taken by the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs,
Croats and Slovenes prior to the refunding or discharge of the latter’s indebtedness to
the United States with respect to any other indebtedness heretofore or hereafter
contracted which would result in placing the United States in a less favorable position
as a creditor than that which it occupies at the present time.” In connection with such
Department’s point of view regarding the relations between the assurances asked by the
World War Debt Commission and further financial obligations which the Yugoslav
Government might desire to incur.
I have [etc.]
H. PERCIVAL DODGE
[Enclosure—Translation92 ]
The Yugoslav Minister for Foreign Affairs (Nintchitch) to the American Minister (Dodge)
MR. MINISTER: By your letter No. 755 dated May 5th last you were good enough to ask me
to confirm the assurances made by the delegates of the Royal Government especially
appointed to discuss its debt to the United States of America before the Committee on
Foreign Debts of the World War.
In confirmation of the assurances of the Delegates of the Royal Government I have the
honour to make the following statement to you: The Royal Government considers its
debt to the United States of America as a financial obligation which has to be fully
respected and it has the intention and the desire to pay it when the economic and
financial recovery of the country will permit of it. It will not in any manner place the
United States of America either in a less favorable position than another creditor of the
Kingdom for the period from 1914 to 1920 or in a less favourable position than their
present position as creditor.
By its financial operations and by its foreign loans since the conclusion of peace up to
the present the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes has had

as its objective the economic recovery of its country devastated by war, the
improvement of its financial position and the balancing of its budget.
The Royal Government hopes that the results obtained and to be obtained in this
manner in the administration of public finances will permit of the economic recovery of
the country necessary for its normal life and for the liquidation of the war debts.
The Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes ventures to express
its profound conviction that the Government of the United States of America will
recognize the justness of the principle in virtue of which the Kingdom of the Serbs,
Croats and Slovenes deserves to obtain facilities for the liquidation of its war debts as
well as those which may be accorded to other allied and associated states.
Accept [etc.]
M. NINTCHITCH
BELGRADE, May 14, 1925.
90 Not printed.
91 Neither printed.
92 Revised translation supplied by the Yugoslav Government; filed separately under file
No. 026 Foreign Relations/1449.

[Document 131]
The Legation of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes to the
Department of State
AIDE-MÉMOIRE
The Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes has appointed a
Commission to come to Washington and arrange for the settlement of the Kingdom’s
war debt to the United States. The Commission consists of Dr. Milan Stoyadinovitch,
Minister of Finance and chairman of the Commission; Mr. George Djuritch, Minister in
London; Mr. Milan Radosavljevitch, Director of the Ministry of Commerce; Mr.
Ranislav Avramovitch, former Assistant Minister of Communications; Mr. Ivan Svegel
and Mr. Rudolph Stajmec. Dr. Pavle Karovitch is General Secretary of the
Commission; Mr. Jovan Novakovitch, Secretary and Mr. D. Stoshovitch, Secretary.
Prof. M. I. Pupin will be the adviser of the Commission, and Dr. A. Tresich Pavichich,
the Minister in Washington, will assist the Commission in all questions related to the
debt.
The Commission will depart for the United States from Cherbourg on January 6th
aboard SS Majestic.93
WASHINGTON , December 29, 1925.
93 For negotiations and relevant documents, see Combined Annual Reports of the World

Interest of the United States in the
disposition of the proposed liberation bonds
of the Austro-Hungarian succession states94
[132] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[133] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[134] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[135] The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
[136] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Whitehouse)

[137] The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
[138] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[139] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[140] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[141] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[142] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[143] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

[144] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[145] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[146] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[147] The Unofficial Representative on the Reparation Commission (Hill) to the
Secretary of State
[148] The Unofficial Representative on the Reparation Commission (Hill) to the
Secretary of State

[Document 132]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
75. Sargent96 has just sent me memorandum which British Embassy has been
instructed to send in to the Ambassadors Conference:
“The Reparation Commission recently fixed the contributions towards the
cost of liberation referred to in the St. Germain Agreement of the 10th
follows: Poland 225,495,000, gold; Roumania 235,140,000 gold francs;
Serb-Croat-Slovene
State
178,035,000
gold
francs;
Czechoslovakia
gold francs.98
This re-partition does not take into account any questions which may
subsequently arise in regard to the territory of Fiume.
In deciding to communicate the result of this re-partition and the above
observation regarding the Fiume territory to the British, French and Italian
Governments the Commission also decided to request these Governments to
make known their opinion on the following points: (a) As to whether the
United States of America should be consulted; (b) whether a formal request
should be made for the issue of the bonds referred to in the agreements of
1919 in respect of the liberation debt; (c) if so to whom these bonds should
be delivered.
In the opinion of His Majesty’s Government the most convenient procedure
would be for a decision on all these points to be reached by the Ambassadors
Conference on behalf of the Governments concerned. If the Conference
approves this course the British Embassy would propose that it reply to the
inquiries of the Reparation Commission as follows: (a) That the United
States [observer] on the Conference should be asked to express his views but
that by mutual agreement the decision [on?] question whether the United
States Government is being consulted as a matter of courtesy or as a matter
of right should be left in abeyance; (b) that the Ambassadors Conference
acting in the name of the Governments concerned should make a formal

request for the issue of the bonds; (c) that the bonds should be delivered to
the Reparation Commission as mandatory of the Governments concerned. It
is to be noted that the Reparation Commission decision does not take into
account any questions which may subsequently arise with respect to the
territory of Fiume.
His Majesty’s Government understood from information received from the
British representative on the Reparation Commission that that body has no
official cognizance of the annexation of the territory of the Free City by Italy
and that it was accordingly thought best to leave the matter open by making a
reservation of a general nature about this territory. In these circumstances the
British Embassy would propose that when notifying the Reparation
Commission in the sense of (a), (b) and (c) the Ambassadors Conference
should at the same time inform them officially of the annexation of Fiume to
Italy under the provisions of the Italo-Yugoslav agreement of January 27,
In his letter Sargent stated that he wanted us to see this memorandum, which is dated
January 8, 1925, before receiving it in the ordinary course from the Secretariat General
and added that the procedure proposed is somewhat curious but that he hoped we
would see no objection to it. Please instruct.
HERRICK
95 Telegram in three sections.
96 Orme Garton Sargent, first secretary in the British diplomatic service, attached to the
British Embassy at Paris for the work of the Conference of Ambassadors.
98 For agreement with regard to the Italian reparation payments, and declaration
modifying that agreement, see ibid., pp. 3301 and 3305.
99 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XXIV, p. 37.

[Document 133]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
comment to the Department with particular reference to any right or interest which he
may feel the United States has under present circumstances in the bonds in question.
HUGHES
1 Col. James A. Logan, Jr., American unofficial representative on the Reparation
Commission.

[Document 134]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
1. Problem presented indirectly raises question of method of our participation in
reparation payments made by or on behalf of Austria and Hungary. Consider it
desirable that we take a definite stand on subject and for that reason following
considerations are offered.
2. Informally understand that there will be a mixed claims commission to adjudicate
American [claims] against Austria and Hungary.4 Whatever be the amount of awards it
shall be seen that to collect them we shall have to reach an agreement with the Allies as
in the case of Germany5 unless we employ sequestrated Austrian and Hungarian
property.
This latter method probably difficult in view of likelihood of the return of German
property. It would seem that our treaty right[s] with respect to Austria and Hungary are
identical with our treaty rights vis-à-vis Germany and that the arguments employed in
the recent exchange of notes with England relative to Germany, apply with equal force
to Austria and Hungary.
Granting then that we have claims against Austria and Hungary and enforceable
right[s], the question of the method of exercising them arises.
3. As Department is aware Allied Powers in granting priority to Austrian reconstruction
loan postponed their reparation claims for 20 years and we postponed maturity of our
relief bonds.6 In the case of Hungary, Allies while granting a priority to its
reconstruction loan, nevertheless insisted on certain considerable annual payments as
[Paraphrase]
In consequence of the foregoing it now seems improbable that Austria will make direct
payments for a long period and that, unless new arrangements prove to be possible,
Hungary will not pay anything in addition to sums already allocated to Allies. There

appears to be no substantial source, therefore, from which the United States could
satisfy its claims in absence of special arrangement with Austria or Hungary, which
might meet with objection from Allied Powers, except from proceeds of the liberation
bonds. Value of these bonds is to be credited on Austro-Hungarian reparation account,
and if distributed among powers the receiving powers will be debited on reparation

4. Czechoslovakia’s liberation bonds have value as to same degree, as have also bonds
of Poland. Probable that other states will have reparation claims so large as to outweigh
their liberation bond issue.
5. I think that we have an interest in the distribution of these liberation bonds on
account of our claims. I suggest that we take no action in the Conference of
Ambassadors until March and then request that delivery of bonds should be made to
Reparation Commission as trustee with instructions to it to make no disposition of the
said bonds or of their proceeds except in agreement with the United States. In
Conference of Ambassadors we could indicate that we had unsatisfied claims against
Austria and Hungary and in consequence could claim share in amounts distributed.
6. In past negotiations on participation in German reparation payments we were
criticized for delay in not advising the Allies that we intended to collect damages from
Germany. I think it good tactics, therefore, in present matter to state our position in
advance. As far as I am able to gather from present conditions apart from use of
Austrian-Hungarian property in the United States and possible separate financial
arrangements with Austria and Hungary, I am inclined to believe that the proceeds of
the reparation [liberation?] bonds offer the most promising outlook for some payment
in near future. It is desirable, therefore, to make statement.
Logan
HERRICK
3 Telegram in two sections.
Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, p. 152.
7 Neither printed.

[Document 135]
The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
this morning, subject to my reservation that I had as yet received no instructions.
WHITEHOUSE

[Document 136]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Whitehouse)
States may be interested in the liberation bonds, and his suggestion in
paragraph 5 that action of the Conference of Ambassadors be deferred until
March, Department regrets that the matter was permitted to be acted upon by
the Conference pending instructions from the Department.
(2) Is the Department to understand that Conference of Ambassadors will not
reply to Reparation Commission along lines proposed in British
memorandum until you have received instructions respecting the views of
this Government regarding the British proposal?
Please cable reply, and give Logan copy of this message and your reply.
HUGHES

[Document 137]
The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 6:50 p.m.]
the Reparation Commission until I have received your instructions.
From Department’s previous telegrams, I have understood that this decision is more or
less in accordance with our interests, except for wording of answer to question (c),
which Department may desire be modified along lines of Logan’s telegram L–336
(January 27), paragraph 5, by adding statement that any financial arrangement of bonds
is to be made only in agreement with United States.
It seems to me that, in view of answer to question (a) that United States should be
consulted, it will be difficult for Allies to refuse to accept modification along that line.
If this prove to be so, I suggest that it would be better to wait until the Reparation
Commission has received this official communication before any statement is made
about our general attitude on this question. Should Conference raise difficulties,
however, it might be advisable to have statement ready to present, thus immediately
throwing question wide open and causing the Ambassadors to say that they would have
to refer the matter to their Governments.
I have consulted Mr. Hill,10 and he concurs with this view.
WHITEHOUSE
10 Ralph Waldo Snowden Hill, of the Office of the Solicitor for the Department of
State, had been sent to Paris to assist Colonel Logan.

[Document 138]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
“The British, French, and Italian Governments in view of the resolution of
to the remarks which may be later presented by the Government of the
United States of America and it being understood that this reservation leaves
open the question as to whether the Government of the United States of
America was consulted by courtesy or by virtue of the rights which it holds
under the treaties,
1. To request the Reparation Commission: (a) To invite the Polish,
Roumanian, Serb, Croat and Slovene and Czechoslovak
Governments to issue the bonds provided for by article 4 of the
arrangement of September [10], 1919, as modified by the
declaration of December 8, 1919; (b) to have the said bonds
delivered; (c) to hold them as trustee of the British, French, and
Italian Governments.
2. To notify officially to the Reparation Commission the annexation
of Fiume to Italy according to the terms of the Italo-Serb agreement
of January 27th, 1924.”
Hill informed.
HERRICK
11 Not printed.

[Document 139]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Conference of Ambassadors that the Government of the United States is of the opinion
that it is entitled to be consulted as to the disposition of the bonds to be issued by the
Governments of Poland, Rumania, the Serb, Croat and Slovene State and
Czechoslovakia under the provisions of the agreement of September 10, 1919, as
modified by the declaration of December 8, 1919, and that in the exercise of such right
it declares that it offers no objection to the delivery of these bonds when issued to the
Reparation Commission. You should add that in view of the claims which the United
States has against the Governments of Austria and Hungary and which are the subject
of a tri-partite claims agreement signed in Washington, November 26, 1924,12 the
Government of the United States cannot concur in an instruction to the Reparation
Commission to hold these bonds as trustee for the British, French and Italian
Governments alone. It suggests therefore that the Commission be instructed to hold the
bonds as trustee for the American, British, French, and Italian Governments with the
understanding that any final disposition or distribution of the bonds or their proceeds
shall be made only in agreement with the United States.
Please give copy of this telegram to Logan as Department’s L–220.
HUGHES

[Document 140]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
No. 99, this date, to Embassy, which will be L–220 in your series.
The Department is not clear in regard to the procedure to be followed, especially
whether provisions of Finance Ministers Agreement of March 11, 1922, and annex, on
use of series C bonds in part settlement of obligations Poland, Rumania,
Czechoslovakia, Italy, and Yugoslavia are still in force, or whether liberation bonds for
full amount of liberation quotas are to be issued by the Governments named, and
delivered to Reparation Commission.
Purpose of telegram No. 99 to Embassy is to protect position of this Government in
regard to the liberation bonds, but instruction does not cover matter of C bonds on
which Conference of Ambassadors is taking no action; Department would be glad to
have your comment on desirability of claiming share in any C bonds delivered by
cessionary states on account of liberation debt or in any of same bonds distributed
under plan outlined article XI, Finance Ministers Agreement, March 11, 1922, on
account American claims against Governments Austria and Hungary.
Consult with Embassy and report any information that is discreetly available on what
may be intended in regard to C bonds or liberation bonds.
HUGHES

[Document 141]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, March 3, 1925—noon.
Ambassadors at its 275th meeting this morning. No comment was made but it was
reserved for future discussion.
HERRICK

[Document 142]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 5:05 p.m.]
been distributed. Only one certificate for entire amount (82 milliards) has been issued
and this is held by the Reparation Commission. I understand that distribution is not
now contemplated.
Bearing in mind that the total of A, B, and C represents total Allied reparation claim of
130 [132] milliards against all Central Powers, for the full amount of which Germany is
held liable under the reparation part of Treaty of Versailles, any payment on reparation
account of Germany’s allies should be credited on the total sum for which Germany is
held liable. For this reason article XI of Finance Ministers Agreement of March 11,
1922, looked to distribution among claimant powers of C bonds to extent of the
reparation claims determined to be due from Germany’s allies, and provided that the
powers receiving payments in cash or in kind from Austria-Hungary and Bulgaria
should return to the Reparation Commission “for cancelation” C bonds to the value of
these payments. Had C bonds been distributed therefore, payments on account of
reparation obligations of latter states would have involved a cancelation of the C bonds.
The only information I have about possible distribution of liberation bonds is article 2
of the Spa Agreement. Logan.
HERRICK

[Document 143]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Received May 4—4 p.m.]
sent me copy of a memorandum which it is presenting to the Conference of
Ambassadors which after referring to our memorandum of March 3 states that
“The British Embassy is now instructed to inform the Conference that His
Majesty’s Government would prefer, at this stage, not to raise at all the
question of the governments which might be entitled to share in payments
made in respect of these bonds. In the opinion of His Majesty’s Government,
it would be preferable merely to deliver the bonds to the Reparation
Commission without requesting it to hold the bonds as trustee for any
particular governments and the British Embassy accordingly has the honor to
propose that the memorandum which it communicated to the Conference on
January 8th should be modified accordingly. The British Embassy has also
the honor to suggest that the Conference should give an assurance to the
representative of the United States of America that, should a decision be
taken in this sense, it would in no way prejudice any claim which the United
States Government might desire hereafter to make, to share in the payments
made under these bonds., The Conference would merely defer any expression
of opinion in regard to any such claim until it was actually raised and the
grounds on which it might be made were more fully stated.[”]
[Paraphrase.] Both Hill and I think this unsatisfactory and Hill is of the opinion that we
should not agree to the British proposal but that we should insist upon a decision
whereby the Reparation Commission would be instructed to hold the bonds as trustee
for the Governments of the United States, Great Britain, France, and Italy. Hill points
no provision for ratification and that its ratification by the United States is not in fact
necessary; that the Governments of the United States, Great Britain, France, and Italy
are accorded alike precisely the same rights under the agreement, and that no one of
those states can be deprived of them without its consent.
Respectfully request instructions. [End paraphrase.]
HERRICK

[Document 144]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
memorandum is unsatisfactory and that when question again is brought up before the
Conference of Ambassadors you should insist that, as set forth in Department’s
liberation bonds as trustee for Governments of United States, Great Britain, France, and
Italy with the understanding that any final distribution or disposition of bonds or of
their proceeds shall be made only in agreement with the Government of the United
States. You will inform Hill. Logan concurs in position taken by Department.13
KELLOGG
13 Logan had returned to the United States; he resigned from the Commission in May
1925, and was succeeded by Hill in June 1925.

[Document 145]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
281st meeting of the Conference of Ambassadors held this morning. I stated that my
Government regretted that it was unable to accept the British proposal and maintained
the point of view set forth in the memorandum that I presented at the 275th meeting of
the Conference on March 3rd. British Ambassador on being asked his opinion by
Cambon14 said that as it seemed unlikely that the American Government would modify
its point of view he would suggest that the Conference adopt his proposal subject to the
reserve of the United States Government. At this point the Italian Ambassador
interrupted to say that he was expecting instructions from his Government on this
matter which had not yet arrived and he therefore requested a postponement.
As my role is that of an observer and I do not vote, rule of unanimity will not come into
play and it will be difficult to prevent the Conference, if it wishes to, from adopting the
British Ambassador’s proposal.
HERRICK
14 Roger Paul Jules Cambon, counselor of the French Embassy in Great Britain,
representing France in the Conference of Ambassadors.

[Document 146]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
liberation bonds is one between the Governments of the United States of America, the
British Empire, France, and Italy, named in agreements of September 10 and December
8, 1919; these agreements are separate and distinct from the treaties of peace both in
purpose and in subject matter, and, unlike the treaties, they do not require ratification.
They impose certain duties and confer certain rights upon the Government of the
United States, and the latter can neither be relieved of its duties nor deprived of its
rights without its consent.
Question at issue is not one to be determined among Allied Governments alone. It is
specifically one for determination between Governments named in articles 4 and 5 of
the agreements. Conference of Ambassadors as such has no competency to deal with
question unless specifically authorized by the interested Governments, of which the
Government of the United States is one. In event that Conference of Ambassadors
should be so authorized, it may be looked upon as a Conference ad hoc of
representatives of the Governments concerned. Moreover, as the decision rests with the
four Governments named in the agreements, the Government of Japan, although it has
a permanent representation on the Conference of Ambassadors, has no voice in the
decision.
The fact that you sit as an observer on the Conference and do not vote on matters which
are of no direct interest to this Government is wholly immaterial. When questions such
as the present one arise in which the Government of the United States has a definite
and direct interest, you, as the representative of this Government, have every right to be
heard, to record views of your Government, and, if necessary, to vote.
You may make use of the foregoing statements when question of liberation bonds again
is brought before Conference, and you should repeat with emphasis statement
be reached by you with representatives of the British, French, and Italian Governments
in Paris, the Government of the United States requests that any further discussion of
matter be deferred until it has had opportunity to take up question directly with
Governments of France, Great Britain, and Italy.

While the Department does not believe that there is any occasion for you to embark
upon any discussion of scope of authority accorded Conference of Ambassadors as
such, you will observe from minutes of various discussions in Supreme Council which
finally resulted in setting up of Conference of Ambassadors that Conference is one of
representatives of Governments sitting in interim between meetings of Supreme
Council; that Governments concerned are left entirely free to determine who shall
represent them on the Conference; and that authority of the Conference extends only so
far as those Governments shall specifically authorize.
Since the Government of the United States: in this matter enjoys certain rights
irrespective of its ratification or nonratification of the treaties of peace, the decision is
one to be determined solely by the four Governments concerned. Form and manner of
reaching decision is for them alone to decide; and while this Government may not have
any objection; if matter is discussed between representatives of the four Governments
who sit on Conference of Ambassadors, it must be understood clearly that it is not
Conference of Ambassadors as such which takes decision but Governments concerned
acting through their duly authorized representatives.
You will also recall that the Government of the United States in May 1921 was invited
to be represented on Supreme Council, and accepted the invitation; and that Mr.
Harvey, the American Ambassador in Great Britain, was designated to represent this
Government on Supreme Council whenever questions in which the Government of the
United States was directly concerned should arise for discussion.16 Inasmuch as
Conference of Ambassadors is dependent upon Supreme Council and holds its
authority from the Governments, the right of Government of the United States to
participate fully whenever a matter should come up for discussion in which this
Government has a direct interest is not open to question.
KELLOGG

[Document 147]
The Unofficial Representative on the Reparation Commission (Hill) to the
Secretary of State
PARIS, 30 October, 1925.
[Received November 7.]
American Embassy at Paris, and to other correspondence concerning the question of
Liberation Bonds, I have the honor to enclose for the Department’s information, two
copies of a communication dated October 27, 1925, just received from the Finance
Section,17 together with two copies of the letter transmitted therewith from the French
Delegation to the Reparation Commission, dated October 26, 1925,17 in which it is
stated that the French Government considers it preferable in the present circumstances
not to provoke any demand for the issue of bonds referred to in the agreement of 1919
with respect to the Liberation Debt.
A copy of these documents has been transmitted to the Embassy here for its
information.
RALPH W. S. HILL
17 Not printed.
17 Not printed.

[Document 148]
The Unofficial Representative on the Reparation Commission (Hill) to the
Secretary of State
PARIS, 7 December, 1925.
[Received December 16.]
SIR: Supplementing my letter to the Department of October 30th last concerning the
question of Liberation Bonds, (share of the cessionary States of the former Austro-
Hungarian Monarchy), I have the honor to enclose for the Department’s information,
two copies of a communication! dated December 5, 1925,17 transmitting a letter from
the British Delegation to the Reparation Commission, dated December 3, 1925,17 in
which it is stated that the British Government takes the view that it would be preferable
not to call for the issue of the bonds in the present circumstances (F. S. Document 60–
a).
A copy of these documents has been transmitted to the Embassy here for its
information.
RALPH W. S. HILL
17 Not printed.
17 Not printed.

Refusal by the United States to consent to
the adherence of the Soviet Union to the
Spitzbergen treaty of February 9, 192018
18 For previous correspondence concerning the adherence of the Soviet Union to the
treaty, see Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 1 ff.
[149] The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
Washington, April 7, 1925.
[150] The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Daeschner)
Washington, May 12, 1925.
[151] The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
Washington, June 16, 1925.
[152] The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Daeschner)
Washington, July 3, 1925.
[153] The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
Washington, July 13, 1925.

[154] The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
Washington, August 17, 1925.
[155] The French Chargé (Sartiges) to the Secretary of State
Washington, January 7, 1926.
[156] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Bérenger)
Washington, February 2, 1925.

[Document 149]
The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
[Translation19 ]
WASHINGTON, April 7, 1925.
makes it a condition for the adherence of Russia that a Russian Government shall be
recognized by the High Contracting Parties: “Until the recognition by the High
Contracting Parties of a Russian Government shall permit Russia to adhere to the
present Treaty, Russian nationals and companies shall enjoy the same rights as
nationals of the High Contracting Parties.”
The Soviet Government having since informed the Norwegian Government that it
acknowledged the sovereignty of Norway in Spitzbergen and made no objection to the
treaty of February 9, 1920, being put into operation, it seemed to the French
Government that it would be advantageous to secure the formal adherence of the Soviet
Government without giving the said Government any ground upon which to claim
recognition by all the signatory powers on the strength of article 10.
To that end under instructions from the French Government my predecessor laid before
the American Secretary of State a draft protocol stating that the powers signatory to the
treaty of February 9, 1920, had agreed that “notwithstanding the stipulation in article
10, Russia be permitted to give its adherence even though all the High Contracting
Parties have not yet recognized the existence of a Russian Government.”
While concurring in the French Government’s suggestion to let Russia adhere to the
treaty concerning Spitzbergen without waiting for the recognition of the Government of
the Union by all the signatory powers, the Honorable Mr. Hughes asked Mr. Jusserand
in behalf of the American Government that instead of the protocol originally
contemplated there be substituted an agreement calling for ratification. He also
expressed a desire that it be clearly specified that the signature of the United States, if
eventually placed on that agreement, could in no wise be regarded as implying its
recognition of the Soviet Government.
I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that my Government, so far as it is
concerned, sees no objection to concurring in the views of the American Government.

Nevertheless the language of the draft agreement handed by Mr. Grew to Mr. de
Laboulaye on July 15 last,21 and forwarded to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, calls in
its turn for a reservation which is considered to be essential. It bears on the style of
designation of the Government of the Union. The American draft speaks of the regime
“now functioning in Russia and known as the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics”.
This designation is open to two objections:
1. One of a judicial nature: A regime cannot be party to a treaty;
2. A more serious objection of political character: The American designation
carries a somewhat disparaging sense, and it is to be feared that under those
conditions some of the signatory powers that have recognized the
Government of the Union may hesitate to affix their signatures to a document
which they might believe likely to wound the susceptibilities of the Soviets.
The French Government therefore suggests, subject to any other minor change without,
however, bearing on the substance, that there be substituted for the sentence “that some
of them recognize the regime now functioning in Russia and known as the Union of the
Soviet Socialist Republics” the sentence “now acknowledging the existence in Russia
of the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics”.
I therefore have the honor to submit to Your Excellency the enclosed draft
arrangement22 which takes into account as far as possible the wishes of the
Government of the United States and seems to my Government to contain a formula
that will be acceptable to all the powers.
Be pleased [etc.]
E. DAESCHNER
19 File translation revised.
22 Not printed
[Document 150]
The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Daeschner)
WASHINGTON, May 12, 1925.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of April 7, 1925, in
further relation to the question of the adherence of Russia to the Treaty of February 9,
1920, concerning Spitzbergen.
You state that your Government concurs in the views of this Government that the
adherence of Russia to the Treaty should be effected through an agreement calling for
ratification, but that it perceives objection to the designation “the regime now
functioning in Russia and known as the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics” which
is used in the draft agreement handed to Mr. de Laboulaye by Mr. Grew on July 15,
1924.
This Government has given careful consideration to the views of the French
Government in the matter as expressed in your note of April 7, 1925, and I now enclose
a draft of the proposed agreement which it is believed is in harmony with the views of
the French Government as set forth in your note.
Accept [etc.]
JOSEPH C. GREW

[Enclosure]
Proposed Draft of Agreement Relative to the Adhesion of Russia to the Spitzbergen Treaty
The United States of America, the British Empire, Denmark, France, Italy, Japan,
Norway, the Netherlands, and Sweden, signatories to the Treaty concluded in Paris on
February 9, 1920, concerning Spitzbergen, having found that some of them have
recognized what is known as the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics, as the
Government of Russia, and that those who do not so recognize that Union are, under
the following conditions, not opposed to the adherence of Russia to the Treaty through
that agency: Have agreed, notwithstanding the stipulation in the first paragraph of
Article 10 of the Treaty, to permit Russia to adhere to the said Treaty even though all of
the High Contracting Parties have not at this time recognized what is known as the
Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics, on condition and with the definite
understanding that the absence of objection to such adherence of Russia on the part of
any of the High Contracting Parties, shall not be interpreted in any way as implying
any recognition whatsoever of that Union as the Government of Russia, by any High
Contracting Party which has not recognized it as the Government of Russia.
The present agreement shall be ratified by all of the High Contracting Parties. Each
High Contracting Party shall in the shortest possible time send its ratification to the
French Government which will see to its being notified to His Majesty the King of
Norway and to the other High Contracting Parties. The ratifications shall remain on

deposit in the Archives of the French Government. The present Agreement shall go into
effect for each High Contracting Party on the date of the deposit of its instrument of
ratification.
Done at Paris . . . . . . . . . . 1925, in duplicate originals, one of which will be transmitted
to the Government of His Majesty the King of Norway, and the other deposited in the
Archives of the Government of the French Republic, by which Government an,
authenticated copy thereof will be delivered to each of the other High Contracting
Parties signatory to the said Treaty of February 9, 1920, or an adherent thereto.

[Document 151]
The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
[Translation23 ]
WASHINGTON, June 16, 1925.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: Referring to Your Excellency’s letter of May 12, last, I did not fail to
forward to my Government the American draft for the wording of the clause relative to
the adherence of Russia to the treaty of February 9, 1920, concerning Spitzbergen.
In place of the formula “some of them at present recognize the existence in Russia of
the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics”, the Government of the United States
would like to substitute the phrase “some of them have recognized ‘what is known’ as
the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics”.
My Government observes that this last wording takes into account the objection of a
judicial nature raised by it. From a political standpoint, however, it does not believe it
would meet the objections which I had brought to Your Excellency’s notice in my note
of April 7, last, and in my Government’s opinion, there is reason to fear that the powers
that have recognized the Government of the Union may not be in a position to accept it.
For that reason, I have been instructed to seek, together with Your Excellency, some
designation that would bring about an agreement among all the signatory powers
parties to the agreement of February 9, 1920, whether or not they have recognized the
Government of the Union. A phrase juridically adequate appears to be rather difficult to
find, since it is about a designation that would equally take into consideration the
position of the Governments that have and those that have not recognized the
Government of the Union.
To that end the Minister of Foreign Affairs has just forwarded to me another draft of a
text which I have the honor to append to this note,24 and in which the formula “what is
known as the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics” is superseded by the phrase
“Federation designated by the name of the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics”. I
should be much obliged to Your Excellency if you would kindly let me know whether
this draft is such as to win the approval of the Government of the United States.
If not, I shall endeavor to join Your Excellency in seeking the wording of a final text
which will be such as to satisfy all the contracting parties.

Be pleased [etc.]

E. Dagscuner

23 File translation revised.
“4 Not printed.

[Document 152]
The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Daeschner)
WASHINGTON, July 3, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of June 16, 1925, in
which you state that you forwarded to your Government the proposed draft of
agreement relative to the adhesion of Russia to the Spitzbergen treaty which was
transmitted to you in the Department’s note of May 12 last.
You state that your Government believes that the clause “what is known as the Union
of the Soviet Socialist Republics” used in the American draft agreement may not be
acceptable to all the Powers, and that it accordingly suggests that there be substituted in
place thereof the clause “Federation designated by the name of the Union of the Soviet
Socialist Republics”. You transmit with your note a draft of the proposed agreement
which embodies the change suggested by you and inquire whether this draft meets with
the approval of the Government of the United States.
My Government feels that it can not accept in its entirety the substitute clause proposed
by you and suggests that the word “Federation” as used therein be replaced by the word
“entity”. I accordingly have the honor to transmit to you herewith a redraft of the
proposed agreement25 in which the clause “entity designated by the name of the Union
of the Soviet Socialist Republics” is substituted in place of the clause “what is known
as the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics” as used in the draft agreement
transmitted with my note of May 12, 1925.
I trust that the agreement as now drafted will meet the objection set forth in your note
of June 16 and prove acceptable to all the Contracting Parties.
Accept [etc.]
JOSEPH C. GREW
25 Not printed.

[Document 153]
The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
[Translation26 ]
WASHINGTON, July 13, 1925.
Referring to the letter of His Excellency, the Secretary of State, dated July 3, 1925, the
Ambassador of the French Republic to the United States has the honor to inform him
that he referred to the Government of the Republic the draft for the wording of the
clause relative to the adherence of Russia to the Spitzbergen Treaty, in which the
American Government suggested that the word “entity” be used instead of
“federation.”
Mr. Daeschner has the honor to inform the Honorable Frank B. Kellogg that the French
Government does not believe it possible to retain the term “entity.” As a matter of fact,
it has in the French language a purely abstract meaning which would preclude its being
used in this circumstance.
The Government of the Republic, therefore, suggests the phrase “political organism”,
the rather broad meaning of which appears to it to meet the legitimate scruples of the
Government of the United States.
Mr. Daeschner is glad to take this opportunity to renew to the Honorable Frank B.
Kellogg the assurances of his high consideration.
26 File translation revised
[Document 154]
The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
[Translation27 ]
WASHINGTON, August 17, 1925.

MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: By a note dated July 13, I had the honor to inform Your Excellency
that the French Government could not retain the word “entity” in the draft for the
wording of the clause relative to the adherence of Russia to the treaty concerning
Spitzbergen, and suggested that the phrase “political organism” be put in its place.
Since then, informal conversations between Mr. Haupt and one of the members of the
Embassy have brought out the fact that the Federal Government would prefer the
phrase “political organization.”
My Government, to which I reported that wish, sees no objection to that suggestion.
Under those conditions I should be thankful to Your Excellency if you would kindly let
me know whether the United States Government accepts the draft with that change
therein that was enclosed in my note of April 7 last.
Be pleased [etc.]
E. DAESCHNER
27 File translation revised.

[Document 155]
The French Chargé (Sartiges) to the Secretary of State
[Translation28 ]
WASHINGTON, January 7, 1926.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: In a letter dated October 20, last,29 Your Excellency was pleased to
inform the Embassy that all due attention had been given by the Department of State to
the communications from the French Embassy concerning the adherence of the
American [Russian] Government to the Spitzbergen Treaty and that an early answer
might be expected from the Department of State on that point.
My Government has just reminded me once more of the urgency of the case and I have
the honor to bring it again to Your Excellency’s attention while venturing to remark that
it was upon the informal request of the Federal Government that the term “political
organization” as designating Russia was accepted by my Government and that the
Department of State was so advised by the Embassy’s note of August 17 last. No
further objection having been offered since then, the French Government is at a loss to
understand why it has received no communication from the American Government on
the question and I should be very thankful to Your Excellency if you would kindly
enable me to send a reply as early as you may find it possible.
Be pleased [etc.]
SARTIGES
28 File translation revised.
29 Not printed.

[Document 156]
The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Bérenger)
WASHINGTON, February 2, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to refer to your predecessor’s notes of July 13, August 17,
proposed adhesion by Russia to the Treaty signed at Paris February 9, 1920, relating to
Spitsbergen.
The Department has given most careful consideration to this question, particularly in
connection with the provisions of the first paragraph of Article 10 of the Treaty, which
reads as follows:
“Until the recognition by the High Contracting Parties of a Russian
Government shall permit Russia to adhere to the present Treaty, Russian
nationals and companies shall enjoy the same rights as nationals of the High
Contracting Parties.”

The above-quoted paragraph clearly accords to Russian nationals and companies the
same rights as nationals of the High Contracting Parties, such preferential treatment to
be enjoyed by them until the recognition of a Russian Government shall permit Russia
to adhere to the Treaty.
As Your Excellency’s Government is aware, the Government of the United States has
not recognized the regime now functioning in Russia, and in these circumstances the
Government of the United States regrets that it cannot see its way, in view of the
express terms of the Treaty, to consent to the adherence thereto by the regime now
functioning in Russia.
Moreover, since the rights of Russian nationals and companies in Spitsbergen are
expressly safeguarded under the provisions of the present Treaty, the Government of
the United States fails to find that it is necessary or desirable to consider at this time the
modification of the existing Treaty with a view to permitting the adherence thereto by
the regime now functioning in Russia.
Accept [etc.]

Fran B. Keroce
2° Note of October 5 Not printed.

Assent by President Coolidge to provisions
in the Polish-Swiss arbitration treaty for
invoking the assistance of the President of
the
United
States
under
certain
contingencies
[157] The Polish Minister (Wróblewski) to the Secretary of State
Washington, April 15, 1925.
[158] The Acting Secretary of State to the Polish Minister (Wróblewski)
Washington, April 18, 1925.

[Document 157]
The Polish Minister (Wróblewski) to the Secretary of State31
WASHINGTON, April 15, 1925.
SIR: The Government of the Republic of Poland and the Government of the Swiss
of which provide for invoking the assistance of the President of the United States under
circumstances stated therein.
A translation of the text of Articles 3 and 14 of the Treaty follows:
ARTICLE 3
Within six months after the exchange of ratifications of the present Treaty the
Contracting Parties shall establish a Permanent Conciliation Commission
composed of five members.
Each of the Parties shall appoint one member of its own choice and the three
other members shall be selected! by agreement. These three members shall
not be nationals of the Contracting Parties nor have their domicile on their
territory nor be employed in their service.
The Chairman of the Commission shall be selected by agreement from
among the members appointed in common. In case of failure of the Parties to
agree, the Chairman shall be designated, at the request of the Parties, by the
President of the United States of America if he so consents.
The members of the Commission shall be appointed for three years. Unless
the Parties agree to the contrary the members designated in common shall not
be removed during the period for which they were appointed.
ARTICLE 14
When, by virtue of the terms of Article 1 of the present Treaty, a difference
shall be submitted for arbitration the arbitral tribunal shall be established by
agreement between the Parties.
If the Parties should be unable to agree on the constitution of the tribunal
within a period of three months from the day when one of the Parties shall

have addressed to the other a request for arbitration, the following procedure
shall be followed:
Each Party shall name two arbitrators of which one must be taken from the
list of members of the Permanent Court of Arbitration and chosen to the
exclusion of its own nationals. The arbitrators so designated shall together
choose the Chairman of the tribunal. In case of an equal division of votes the
selection of the Chairman shall be entrusted to the President of the United
States, if he so consents.
Acting on instructions from my Government, I beg to inquire if it is agreeable in
principle to the President of the United States that the Parties should so provide for
invoking the assistance of the President in the circumstances described in Articles 3 and
14.
It is understood that an identic note is being presented by the Swiss Minister on behalf
of his Government.
Accept [etc.]
W. WRÓBLEWSKI
31 An identic note dated April 16 was received from the Swiss Minister.
32 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. L, p. 261.

[Document 158]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Polish Minister (Wróblewski)33
WASHINGTON, April 18, 1925.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication of April 15,
1925, in which you inform me that the Government of the Republic of Poland and the
Government of the Swiss Republic signed in Bern on March 7, 1925, a Treaty of
Arbitration, Articles 3 and 14 of which provide for invoking the assistance of the
President of the United States under circumstances stated therein. Your note embraces a
translation of the text of Articles 3 and 14 of that treaty.

You inform me that, acting under instructions from your Government, you inquire if it
is agreeable in principle to the President of the United States that the parties should so
provide for invoking the assistance of the President in the circumstances described in
Articles 3 and 14.
It appears therefrom that, under a certain contingency, the Chairman of the Permanent
Conciliation Commission shall be designated, at the request of the parties, by the
President of the United States of America if he so consents; and also that, under a
certain contingency, the selection of the Chairman of the Tribunal of Arbitration which
may be established pursuant to the Convention shall be entrusted to the President of the
United States, if he so consents.
I have to inform you that the President desires me to thank the Government of Poland,
through your good offices, for the courtesy and compliment implied in your inquiry,
and to assure you that it is entirely agreeable in principle to him that the parties to the
treaty should so provide for invoking the assistance of the President in the
circumstances described in Articles 3 and 14.
An identic note is being transmitted to the Swiss Minister at this capital for the
information of his Government.
Accept [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY

33 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Swiss Minister.

Unsuccessful efforts to have American
customs attachés accorded diplomatic status
[159] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
[160] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Officers
Washington, April 2, 1925.
[161] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[162] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
Washington, April 21, 1925.
[163] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Washington, April 21, 1925.
[164] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Bliss)
Washington, April 21, 1925.

[165] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
Washington, May 4, 1925.
[166] The Ambassador in Spain (Moore) to the Secretary of State
[167] The Chargé in Rumania (Riggs) to the Secretary of State
[168] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[169] The Chargé in Italy (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[170] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[171] The Minister in the Netherlands (Tobin) to the Secretary of State

[172] The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
[173] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
Washington, July 10, 1925.
[174] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
[175] The Minister in Hungary (Brentano) to the Secretary of State
[176] The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
[177] The Chargé in Sweden (Magruder) to the Secretary of State

[178] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[179] The Chargé in Italy (Robbins) to the Secretary of State
[180] The Minister in Denmark (Prince) to the Secretary of State
[181] The Minister in Norway (Swenson) to the Secretary of State
[182] The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[183] The Consul General at Hongkong (Tredwell) to the Secretary of State
[184] The Minister in Poland (Stetson) to the Secretary of State

[185] The Minister in Greece (Laughlin) to the Secretary of State
[186] The Minister in Portugal (Dearing) to the Secretary of State
[187] The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[188] The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Officers
Washington, December 24, 1925.
[189] The Minister in Finland (Pearson) to the Secretary of State

[Document 159]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 31, 1925.
[Received April 2.]
No. 329
MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: With reference to our conversation of the 28th instant respecting the
appointment of Treasury or Customs Attachés to United States Embassies abroad,34 I
have the honour to enclose herewith, as you requested, a memorandum on the subject
which explains the views of His Majesty’s Government and the objections they
entertain to such officers having diplomatic status and privileges.
Believe me [etc.]
ESME HOWARD

[Enclosure]
The British Embassy to the Department of State
AIDE-MÉMOIRE
9076, providing for the organization of the United States Customs Service was
approved.35 Amongst other things, the Act authorizes the Secretary of the Treasury to
appoint such number of “Customs Attachés” for duty in foreign countries and of
Customs agents as he may deem necessary, all of whom shall perform their duties as
defined by existing law or prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury, under the
immediate supervision of the director, special agency service of the Customs:
“Provided, that any officer of the Customs Service designated by the Secretary of the
Treasury for foreign service shall, through the Department of State, be regularly and
officially attached to the diplomatic mission of the United States in the countries in
which they are to be stationed.”
His Britannic Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has taken note
of the provisions of this law. He understands that, so far as the Act relates to United
States Customs agents stationed abroad, its purpose is to regulate their selection and to

bring their activities and methods under closer and more responsible control. Mr.
Chamberlain assumes, however, that it is not intended by the United States
Government to give to these officers a diplomatic status or to ask foreign Governments
to afford recognition to them as diplomatic officers. From recent conversations and
correspondence in London and in Washington, Mr. Kellogg will be aware that His
Majesty’s Government felt obliged, as long ago as June, 1923, to raise objections to the
activities of these officers in British territory in so far as those activities involved
enquiries into costs of production. Mr. Chamberlain feels confident that the Secretary
of State will agree with him that the activities of Customs or other revenue
investigators cannot be regarded as falling within the scope of diplomatic duties.

[Document 160]
The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Officers36
WASHINGTON, April 2, 1925.
SIRS: There have arisen from time to time in certain foreign countries misunderstandings
concerning the purpose and the nature of the activities abroad of Customs Attachés
(formerly called Customs representatives) of the United States Treasury and of
representatives and investigators of the United States Tariff Commission. The
following data are presented for your more complete information and for your guidance
in this matter and in order that you may communicate this information to the
government to which you are accredited in case the activities of these agents are
questioned by it and the Department specifically instructs you to take up the matter.
CUSTOMS ATTACHÉS
You will observe by reference to Section 402 (a) of the Tariff Act of 192237 that the
value of merchandise imported into the United States is defined as:
(1) The foreign value or the export value, whichever is higher;
(2) If neither the foreign value nor the export value can be ascertained to the
satisfaction of the appraising officers, then the United States value;
(3) If neither the foreign value, the export value, nor the United States value
can be ascertained to the satisfaction of the appraising officers, then the cost
of production.
In the ordinary course, the declaration of value made by the importer for purposes of
entering goods at the customs, together with the consular invoice of the shipment and
comparative values of such or similar merchandise, affords sufficient information to
enable the appraiser to make a satisfactory valuation of the goods. However, it
sometimes occurs that the appraiser has reason to believe that the valuation at which
the goods are entered is less than the current foreign value or export value of the goods
as defined in the Tariff Act. In this connection it is important to observe that the
dutiable value of a particular consignment of goods is not necessarily the price at which
they were bought abroad for importation into the United States, but is the current
foreign value or export value of such or similar goods at the time of exportation.

In cases where the customs appraiser is not satisfied as to the valuation entered and has
not available data upon which he can base a valuation, he will find it necessary to cause
an investigation to be made abroad to ascertain these data. For the purpose of this
instruction, these will be divided into ordinary “market value” and “cost-of-production”
investigations, numbered 1 and 2 herein. To make such investigations, the United
States Treasury Department has assigned a number of customs attachés to foreign
posts. These customs attachés in the foreign field are the authorized representatives of
the Secretary of the Treasury and function as instrumentalities of the appraising
operation, and make particular investigations upon the request of the customs
authorities of the United States Treasury and in connection with the admission of goods
which have been entered at the United States customs. These officials also make
original investigations of “market” value when they have any reason to believe, from
information lodged with them or from their own observations, that undervaluation
exists in any particular instance or industry. If such an inquiry should extend to cost of
production, it will be governed by the special instructions from the Treasury
Department referred to herein.
An extract from a memorandum submitted by the Treasury Department on this subject
follows: “In making these investigations, the customs attachés of the United States
Treasury Department abroad are always disposed to give to manufacturers and shippers
the fullest information as to correct invoicing of their merchandise or anything else
about which they may make inquiry or request assistance.”
1. The customs attachés abroad, when it is necessary to investigate the foreign value or
export value of certain goods, customarily call upon the firm which has made the
shipment and request data as to sales price for home consumption and/or exportation to
the United States. In the course of this investigation it is usually necessary to request
the shipper to exhibit his records of other sales of the same or similar goods on
approximately the date when the consignment in question was exported. Such records
tend to establish the actual foreign value or export value at the time of exportation,
which is the valuation prescribed by the Tariff Act of 1922 as the valuation to be
considered in the application of the tariff. (Sec. 402–b and c).
A foreign shipper presumably would not refuse to make available to the customs
attaché the above-mentioned information unless he misunderstood the terms of the
Tariff Act of 1922. It may be emphasized here that in the “market value” investigation
the Customs Attaché does not usually request data as to the cost of production; he
merely requests the exhibition of documentary evidence that the valuation declared in a
particular consular invoice upon a shipment of goods to the United States is not lower
than upon sales in the exporting country for home consumption or for export to the
United States. In case the valuation declared by the shipper with respect to the
shipment to the United States has been made in good faith, there would seem to be no

valid reason for the shipper’s refusing to demonstrate the existence of such good faith
by exhibiting a record of sales in his home market.
If, however, the shipper refuses to make such documentary proof available to the
Customs Attaché there are only two courses open to the appraiser at the port of entry.
He may resort to the United States value, which in almost every case, will be higher
than the export or the foreign value, and, in some cases, will be difficult of
ascertainment. In case there were an appeal from the appraiser’s valuation, the case
would come before the Board of General Appraisers for review. This Board sits as a
court and its records and proceedings are public. This court would normally require
affirmative proof of the foreign value or export value, which would necessitate the
production of the exporter’s books and records or of extracts therefrom in court. In
such a case the data to which the shipper had denied the Customs Attaché confidential
access would be made available to the public and would lose their confidential
character.
The other alternative, in case of a refusal or failure of a shipper to allow an examination
of his books to determine the foreign value or export value, is for the Secretary of the
Treasury to prohibit the importation into the United States of merchandise
manufactured, produced, sold, shipped or consigned by the foreign shipper.
Section 510 of the Tariff Act of 1922 is as follows:
INSPECTION OF EXPORTER’S BOOKS.—
“If any person manufacturing, producing, selling, shipping, or consigning
merchandise exported to the United States fails, at the request of the
Secretary of the Treasury, or an appraiser, or person acting as appraiser, or a
collector, or a general appraiser, or the Board of General Appraisers, as the
case may be, to permit a duly accredited officer of the United States to
inspect his books, papers, records, accounts, documents, or correspondence,
pertaining to the market value or classification of such merchandise, then
while such failure continues the Secretary of the Treasury, under regulations
prescribed by him, (1) shall prohibit the importation into the United States of
merchandise manufactured, produced, sold, shipped or consigned by such
person, and (2) may instruct the collectors to withhold delivery of
merchandise manufactured, produced, sold, shipped or consigned by such
person. If such failure continues for a period of one year from the date of
such instructions the collector shall cause the merchandise, unless previously
exported, to be sold at public auction as in the case of forfeited merchandise.”
Under an opinion of the Attorney General of the United States the Treasury Department
considers that the provisions of this section of the Tariff Act of 1922 are mandatory

upon the Secretary of the Treasury and the prohibition of further importation has been
to put it into effect after the Customs Attaché has reported a refusal on the part of the
foreign shipper to make the necessary data available.
In addition to the above specific provision of law, there is a general principle that, if,
for any reason, a legal basis for the appraisement of imported merchandise can not be
ascertained to the satisfaction of the appraising officers, such merchandise shall not be
appraised and delivered until a legal basis of appraisement can be ascertained.
2. There sometimes arise, however, cases in which it is impossible for either the foreign
value, the export value, or the United States value of goods to be ascertained,
notwithstanding the apparent good faith of the shipper in attempting to furnish data to
substantiate the value as declared for United States customs entry. Such cases usually
involve goods which are shipped in a partly manufactured state to the United States for
further manufacture and incorporation into a finished machine or product in this
country, and which are not sold for home consumption in the country of exportation.
United States customs authorities to endeavor to obtain information regarding the cost
of production of the goods in question in order that a valuation for customs purposes
may be arrived at. The Customs Attaché stationed abroad is in such an event instructed
to make an investigation in this sense. Section 402 (e) defines the cost of production as
follows:
(1) The cost of materials of, and of fabrication, manipulation, or other
process employed in manufacturing or producing such or similar
merchandise, at a time preceding the date of exportation of the particular
merchandise under consideration which would ordinarily permit the
manufacture or production of the particular merchandise under consideration
in the usual course of business;
(2) The usual general expenses (not less than 10 per centum of such cost) in
the case of such or similar merchandise;
(3) The cost of all containers and coverings of whatever nature, and all other
costs, charges, and expenses incident to placing the particular merchandise
under consideration in condition, packed ready for shipment to the United
States; and
(4) An addition for profit (not less than 8 per centum of the sum of the
amounts found under paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subdivision) equal to the
profit which ordinarily is added, in the case of merchandise of the same
general character as the particular merchandise under consideration, by
manufacturers or producers in the country of manufacture or production who

are engaged in the production or manufacture of merchandise of the same
class or kind.
A number of foreign governments have formally and informally intimated that the
investigations carried on by Customs Attachés into the cost of production of foreign
merchandise constitute an invasion of the sovereignty of the country in which they are
attempted, unless prior permission has been accorded for such an investigation by the
government concerned. The Department is not prepared to insist as a matter of right
that the United States Customs Attachés be accorded facilities for such investigations
into the cost of production. However, it is believed that foreign governments will
appreciate the practical advisability of furthering the proper activities of Customs
Attachés in this connection in view of the clear provisions of Section 510 of the Tariff
Act of 1922 which, as has been noted before, are considered to be mandatory upon the
Secretary of the Treasury. In other words, if it is impossible for the appraising officers
of the United States Customs Service to arrive at one of the four kinds of valuation
enumerated in Section 402 (a), it becomes necessary for the Secretary of the Treasury
to exclude the goods in question. However, in order that no misunderstanding may
arise on the part of any foreign government to the effect that an American Customs
Attaché is attempting to carry out provisions of American law on the territory of a
foreign state without the permission of the government thereof, it has been arranged
that in future no Customs Attaché will undertake to approach a foreign shipper or
manufacturer in regard to the cost of production of his goods without the prior general
permission of the appropriate authorities of the government in whose territory such
shipper or manufacturer is located. This general permission would appear to be implied
from the recognition by a foreign government of the Customs Attachés at the time that
the notification of their status and the statement of their duties are made by the
diplomatic mission.
In the event that, in reply to the notification by the diplomatic mission of the status and
duties of the Customs Attachés, any foreign government signifies its refusal to permit
these officials to carry out investigations into the cost of production, the chief of the
mission will notify the Customs Attaché to that effect and will inform the Department
transmitting copies of the correspondence containing such refusal. Under such
circumstances, Customs Attachés are instructed not to attempt cost-of-production
investigations in the country in question.
In countries where Customs Attachés have been recognized by the local government, in
each specific case where the ascertainment of the cost of production is necessary, the
Customs Attaché will inform the Chief of the American Diplomatic Mission thereof
and the latter is hereby instructed to notify the government to which he is accredited
that the Customs Attaché will approach the firm in question with a view to ascertaining
the cost of production.

The Customs Attaché will simultaneously call upon the firm in question and request
facilities for making the necessary investigation. In case the firm refuses to permit the
Attaché to carry out such an investigation, the latter will inform the Chief of the
American Diplomatic Mission, who, in turn, will take up the question with the
government, pointing out again the purpose for which the investigation is to be made,
and that exclusion from the United States of the firm’s goods under Section 510 may
result as a consequence of the refusal.
In the event that representations to the foreign government do not result in overcoming
any firm’s objections to the investigation by the Customs Attaché, it will not be
attempted further and the Customs Attaché will refer the case back to the American
Customs authorities with an appropriate notation of the refusal.
It is believed that no fixed procedure can advantageously be outlined by the
Department for the guidance of American diplomatic missions in bringing such
requests to the notice of foreign governments. It would appear that in each country
there might be worked out by the Mission and the appropriate foreign government a
procedure that would satisfy the requirements of that government without necessitating
the active intervention of the Mission in each individual case. It is left to the discretion
of the individual Chiefs of Mission, after consultation with the Customs Attaché, and to
the exigencies of situations in particular countries to determine the procedure to be
followed. It is the Department’s object to ensure that no investigation into the cost of
production will be undertaken by Customs Attachés of the Treasury without the prior
general permission of the foreign government concerned, and, in certain countries
where the activities of Customs Attachés have been or may be questioned by the
governments thereof, without prior notification to the foreign government of each
specific cost of production investigation.
The general plan outlined above, providing for notification to the foreign government
of each cost-of-production investigation that it is planned to undertake, is subject to
modification or suppression by the Chief of the Diplomatic Mission, in his discretion,
in those countries where the Customs Attachés’ activities have not been questioned. In
such countries, it may appear to the Chief of Mission not to be desirable to raise any
question in the minds of the authorities of the country to which he is accredited. Under
these circumstances, no action in regard to this instruction need be taken, aside from
the general notification of the status and duties of the Customs Attachés, unless some
subsequent question as to their activities is raised by the government.
It is fully realized that there may be objection on the part of certain foreign
governments and by certain foreign manufacturers to disclosing one or another element
of the cost-of-production investigation. For instance, it has been felt by foreign
manufacturers that valuable trade secrets were being requested by Customs Attachés
which, if they became known to the competitors of the firm, might well prove

disastrous to the latter’s prosperity. In regard to this quite natural fear, it may be said
that the Customs Attachés stationed abroad are men of long service and proved
reliability in the United States Customs Service. Their reports are strictly confidential
and are never accessible to any American or foreign individual or firm, nor are they
even available to other departments of the United States Government or to bureaus of
the United States Treasury Department other than the Customs Division thereof. Under
article 1323 of the Customs Regulations of 1923 the divulgence of information of this
character subjects the guilty party to dismissal or criminal prosecution or both. The
record of the United States Customs Service for preserving the confidentiality of data
given to it in confidence has been excellent and it may be safely assumed that cases of
the betrayal of such confidence, should any such case unfortunately occur, will be
punished with the utmost severity.
In making investigations into the cost of production abroad, where such investigations
have been permitted by the government concerned, the Customs Attachés have been
given specific written instructions, a copy of which is transmitted herewith.38 It will be
observed that these instructions make it possible for the Customs Attachés’ reports to
contain the data necessary for valuation purposes without disclosing all the individual
items which go to make up such cost. Thus, it is contemplated that only the Customs
Attaché himself will have information as to labor cost, finishing cost, etc., which the
manufacturer may be hesitant to divulge.
It has been alleged in certain foreign countries that the Customs Attachés, in requesting
data from foreign shippers, have threatened the exclusion of their goods from the
United States unless such data were furnished. In this connection it may be pointed out
that Customs Attachés are under strict instructions to make no such threats. They are
authorized, however, to explain the provisions of Section 510 of the United States
Tariff Act, in order that the foreign shippers may understand the possible result of their
refusal or the inability of the customs appraiser to obtain a legal basis for the
appraisement of the merchandise.
It is pertinent to call attention to the fact that the methods of valuation established by
the Tariff Act of 1922,—including the provision for the cost of production—were
arrived at after the most careful study by the Congress of the United States as
alternatives to the “American Valuation” of goods for customs purposes. As has been
explained above, the United States Treasury must enforce the existing tariff law, and as
a practical matter, it does not appear probable that an amendment of Section 510 of that
law will be seriously considered in the near future. Consequently, it should be made
clear to foreign officials, who question the propriety of investigations abroad by United
States Customs Attachés, that a failure on their part to cooperate with these Attachés in
their duties under the Tariff Act will in some cases operate to preclude shipments to the
United States.

Under the Canadian tariff regulations, Canadian investigators have conducted
investigations into the books and records of American manufacturers. This Government
has not objected to such investigations, since it has appeared to it only fair that
American exporters, desiring to enter a foreign market, should comply with the tariff
and other regulations of that market. For this Government to prohibit proper activities
of Canadian investigators would be to injure American exporters by depriving them of
their trade with Canada in those cases where investigation of books is demanded by the
Canadian Customs authorities.
TARIFF COMMISSION REPRESENTATIVES
Your attention is especially directed to the fact that the United States Tariff
Commission is entirely separate from the United States Treasury Department. It was
department
of
this
Government.
Its
duties
consist
of
investigation
and
recommendations to the President and to the Congress of the United States, as a result
of such investigations. You are referred to the statement of the Commission’s duties
which appears on page 393 of the Congressional Directory dated January, 1925.
the Tariff Act of 1922. The most frequent investigations abroad are to ascertain costs of
production under Section 315. Section 315 provides as follows: (a) That in order to
regulate the foreign commerce of the United States and to put into force and effect the
policy of the Congress by this Act intended, whenever the President, upon investigation
of the differences in costs of production of articles wholly or in part the growth or
product of the United States and of like or similar articles wholly or in part the growth
or product of competing foreign countries, shall find it thereby shown that the duties
fixed in this Act do not equalize the said differences in cost of production in the United
States and the principal competing country he shall, by such investigation, ascertain
said differences and determine and proclaim the changes in classifications or increases
or decreases in any rate of duty provided in this Act shown by said ascertained
differences in such costs of production necessary to equalize the same. Thirty days after
the date of such proclamation or proclamations such changes in classification shall take
effect, and such increased or decreased duties shall be levied, collected, and paid on
such articles when imported from any foreign country into the United States or into any
of its possessions (except the Philippine Islands, the Virgin Islands, and the Islands of
Guam and Tutuila): Provided, That the total increase or decrease of such rates of duty
shall not exceed 50 per centum of the rates specified in Title I of this Act, or in any
amendatory Act.
(b) That in order to regulate the foreign commerce of the United States and to put into
force and effect the policy of the Congress by this Act intended, whenever the
President, upon investigation of the differences in costs of production of articles

provided for in Title I of this Act, wholly or in part the growth or product of the United
States and of like or similar articles wholly or in part the growth or product of
competing foreign countries, shall find it thereby shown that the duties prescribed in
this Act do not equalize said differences, and shall further find it thereby shown that the
said differences in cost of production in the United States and the principal competing
country can not be equalized by proceeding under the provisions of subdivision (a) of
this section, he shall make such findings public, together with a description of the
articles to which they apply, in such detail as may be necessary for the guidance of
appraising officers. In such cases and upon the proclamation by the President becoming
effective the ad valorem duty or duty based in whole or in part upon the value of the
imported article in the country of exportation shall thereafter be based upon the
American selling price, as defined in subdivision (f) of section 402 of this Act, of any
similar competitive article manufactured or produced in the United States embraced
within the class or kind of imported articles upon which the President has made a
proclamation under subdivision (b) of this section.
The ad valorem rate or rates of duty based upon such American selling price shall be
the rate found, upon said investigation by the President, to be shown by the said
differences in costs of production necessary to equalize such differences, but no such
rate shall be decreased more than 50 per centum of the rate specified in Title I of this
Act upon such articles, nor shall any such rate be increased. Such rate or rates of duty
shall become effective fifteen days after the date of the said proclamation of the
President, whereupon the duties so estimated and provided shall be levied, collected,
and paid on such articles when imported from any foreign country into the United
States or into any of its possessions (except the Philippine Islands, the Virgin Islands,
and the islands of Guam and Tutuila). If there is any imported article within the class or
kind of articles, upon which the President has made public a finding, for which there is
no similar competitive article manufactured or produced in the United States, the value
of such imported article shall be determined under the provisions of paragraphs (1), (2),
and (3) of subdivision (a) of section 402 of this Act.
(c) That in ascertaining the differences in costs of production under the provisions of
subdivisions (a) and (b) of this section, the President, in so far as he finds it practicable,
shall take into consideration (1) the differences in conditions in production, including
wages, costs of material, and other items in costs of production of such or similar
articles in the United States and in competing foreign countries; (2) the differences in
the wholesale selling prices of domestic and foreign articles in the principal markets of
the United States; (3) advantages granted to a foreign producer by a foreign
government, or by a person, partnership, corporation, or association in a foreign
country; and (4) any other advantages or disadvantages in competition.
Investigations to assist the President in ascertaining differences in costs of production
under this section shall be made by the United States Tariff Commission, and no

proclamation shall be issued under this section until such investigation shall have been
made. The commission shall give reasonable public notice of its hearings and shall give
reasonable opportunity to parties interested to be present, to produce evidence, and to
be heard. The commission is authorized to adopt such reasonable procedure, rules, and
regulations as it may deem necessary.
The President, proceeding as hereinbefore provided for in proclaiming rates of duty,
shall, when he determines that it is shown that the differences in costs of production
have changed or no longer exist which led to such proclamation, accordingly as so
shown, modify or terminate the same. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
authorize a transfer of an article from the dutiable list to the free list or from the free
list to the dutiable list, nor a change in form of duty. Whenever it is provided in any
paragraph of Title I of this Act, that the duty or duties shall not exceed a specified ad
valorem rate upon the articles provided for in such paragraph, no rate determined under
the provision of this section upon such articles shall exceed the maximum ad valorem
rate so specified.
(d) For the purposes of this section any coal-tar product provided for in paragraphs 27
or 28 of Title I of this Act shall be considered similar to or competitive with any
imported coal-tar product which accomplishes results substantially equal to those
accomplished by the domestic product when used in substantially the same manner.
(e) The President is authorized to make all needful rules and regulations for carrying
out the provisions of this section.
(f) The Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to make such rules and regulations as he
may deem necessary for the entry and declaration of imported articles of the class or
kind of articles upon which the President has made a proclamation under the provisions
of subdivision (b) of this section and for the form of invoice required at time of entry.
The investigations authorized above are in their nature statistical inquiries directed to
the ascertainment of the differences between costs of production in the United States
and in foreign countries, the purpose being to enable the President to put into effect
changes in classification of articles or in rates of duty under the United States Tariff Act
of 1922.
The investigations are not concerned with individual importations, and they do not
involve the imposition of any penalties under the Tariff Act for refusal to disclose
information. Foreign manufacturers, so far as the Tariff Act is concerned, may or may
not disclose their costs of production to Tariff Commission investigators, as they may
see fit.

However, in view of the fact that the findings of the Tariff Commission as to foreign
costs of production may lead to a recommendation to the President that the United
States Customs duty on certain classes of foreign goods be raised or lowered under
authority of Section 315, foreign manufacturers may consider it advantageous to
cooperate with these investigators.
The confidentiality of information concerning individual costs of production and trade
secrets of any foreign producer or merchant is protected by Section 708 of the Act of
September 8, 1916, which makes it a crime, punishable by fine or imprisonment, or
both, for any member of the Tariff Commission, or for any employee, agent, or clerk
thereof, or for any other officer or employee of the United States to divulge, or to make
known in any manner whatever not provided for by law, to any person, the trade secrets
or processes of any person, firm, copartnership, corporation or association embraced in
any examination or investigation conducted by the commission.
Representatives of the Tariff Commission do not enjoy the status of attachés of
American diplomatic missions. American diplomatic and consular officers are directed,
however, in compliance with the Executive Order of April 4, 1924, to cooperate in all
proper ways with these officials, and, upon request, to introduce them to the
appropriate foreign authorities.
GENERAL
Chiefs of Diplomatic Missions and Consuls General who receive this instruction are
directed to advise the American consular officers in their territory of the duties and
status of the Customs Attachés and of the Tariff Commission representatives. American
consular officers will be expected to give full cooperation to these officials in the
performance of their duties.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
36 i. e., those in countries in Europe with which the United States maintained
diplomatic relations, and in China and Japan.
38 Not printed.

[Document 161]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, April 2, 1925.
[Received April 13.]
No. 5038
have the honor to report that the February meeting of the Board of Governors of the
International Chamber of Commerce decided to drop, for the time being, the matter of
a protest against the examination of foreign manufacturers’ books by representatives of
the United States Tariff Commission.
I desire to invite the Department’s attention, however, to the fact that such
examinations continually cause misunderstandings and bad feeling. The French
Government itself would not dare to make a law forcing their manufacturers to show
their books to French agents and it is obvious that such demands on the part of foreign
agents are badly received. I recommend a change in Section 510 of the Tariff Law
which deals with this subject.
I am enclosing herewith a copy of a memorandum, prepared by a member of my staff,
which presents in detail the arguments against the advisability of the making of such
demands.
I have [etc.]
MYRON T. HERRICK
[Enclosure]
Statement Prepared by Mr. Chester Lloyd Jones, Commercial Attaché, Embassy in France
I. FRENCH CRITICISM OF COST OF PRODUCTION INVESTIGATIONS
I summarize below the French criticisms met in conversation with French business
interests and in the press, without passing on their solidity:
(1) Our government should confine the effect of its laws to its own territories.
It is indefensible to try to give them effect within the borders of a friendly

neighbor state. If the propriety of such extraterritorial extension of law is
admitted, it is obvious that international trade might be subject to intolerable
interference even before it crosses the border of the state where it originates.
(2) The cost of production investigations are an inquisition into the affairs of
French manufacturers contrary to all precedent. No French Parliament could
stand which passed a law authorising French tax officials to inquire into the
books of French citizens to the degree to which American agents are
authorized to do so not in their own but in a foreign country.
(3) Is it to be supposed that United States citizens would submit to similar
inquisitorial legislation passed by France? Investigations of this sort are
authorised in American law in connection with income tax and other
legislation, but such inquiries are within the national territory, and have not
even there been extended to cost of production. An attempt to enforce a
foreign law in France as a condition for the right to sell in the United States is
indefensible.
(4) It is useless to try to differentiate between the actions of one set of
American officials and another. The representatives of the Treasury
Department demand the opening of books and the disclosures of production
costs because they say they want to assure honest valuations for goods
imported into the United States. If this were the only use which would be
made of the information, the inquiries might be less objectionable. But the
representatives of the Tariff Commission are in Europe to get information as
to the cost of production in different countries in order that the American
tariff can be adjusted in such a way that any advantage reaped by a foreign
producer through cheaper labor, cheaper raw materials, or cheaper methods
of manufacture may be counterbalanced by the tariff rate adopted in the
United States. The information they want they try to secure through threat
that if not given, the tariff will go up. The information they seek, if given,
will be used to check the import trade which they are investigating.
Is it to be supposed that the information given one set of officers for one
purpose will not find its way into the hands of the other set of officers and be
used by them for another purpose?
(5) The investigations are, in addition, objectionable because they
discriminate between French producers. If all the information asked were
given, an efficient plant manufacturing at low cost would find itself at a
disadvantage in American trade as compared to a less efficient plant.
II. FRENCH ACTION PROPOSED

The cotton and woolen associations, and perhaps others, have counselled their
members to report any attempt to force the giving of information to the associations,
which will take the matter up with the French Government. They encourage non-
compliance with the demands made. The “Conseillers du Commerce Extérieur” have at
a number of meetings discussed the character of the investigations carried on. Protests
have reached them from a number of trade syndicates, some of which have proposed
that, at least, the application of the American law be made less brusk by agreement to
allow the trade syndicates to report on the cost of production, their conclusions being
accepted, and the individual merchant being freed from interference. (This does not
seem to be a satisfactory way out. CLLJ.) III. ESTIMATE OF THE EFFECT OF THE LEGISLATION
Obviously, the American officers sent to enforce the laws to which the French take
exception have no option. It may also be urged that this is a “good law”, in that it
protects the income of the United States.

The legislation certainly does not promote friendly international relations. The
opposition aroused seems to be addressed primarily against the activities of the agents
of the Tariff Commission and incidentally against the representatives of the Treasury.
Perhaps the activities of the latter might have been accepted if there had been no
feeling aroused that the information given was to be used to the disadvantage of French
exports in the fixing of future tariff rates—but even that is doubtful. French exporters
and French Government officials question the propriety of the action taken by certain
of the representatives of the Tariff Commission, and have protested against them. The
criticism which some of these representatives have aroused comes not only from
individual firms, but from the trade syndicates.
It is a fair question whether legislation by France attempting to do the same thing in
America which our officials have attempted to do in France would be accepted without
vigorous protest by the American business public.
Take an example: There is now a fairly large export of aluminium ingots from the
United States to France. There is also an important French aluminium industry.
Suppose a French official attempted to get from the American Aluminum Company
their costs of production, assuming that he acted under French law. What would his
reception be? This is an extreme example, since the American Aluminum Company has
refused to give any information on this subject even to the United States Government.
But the reaction toward the inquiry would be the same even in branches of industry
where control is not so completely in the hands of a small group.
The practical effect of the activities under the existing American legislation is to dry up
sources of commercial information formerly open to the representatives of the United

States Government in this country. Trade syndicates whose members have been
affected by the investigations now refuse cooperation, alleging that the reason for doing
so is that they feel that any information given may be used to their disadvantage.
Cotton, wool and silk manufacturers and the electrical equipment interests are
examples of groups which have been less communicative through the bad feeling
aroused.
But aside from details, it can generally be assumed in human relations that a certain
standard of action is “good” if one would welcome the application of that standard to
himself. I doubt whether French legislation of this sort would receive a cordial
reception in the United States.
40 Not printed.

[Document 162]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)41
WASHINGTON, April 21, 1925.
No. 731
SIR: By an Act of Congress approved January 13, 1925,42 it was provided that agents of
the Customs Division of the United States Treasury stationed abroad and hitherto
entitled Customs Representatives should be regularly and officially attached to
American Diplomatic Missions. The title of Customs Attaché has been provided for
them and the Secretary of the Treasury has now transmitted to the Department a list of
Customs Attachés and Assistant Customs Attachés whom it is desired to have attached
to the appropriate American Diplomatic Missions.
There is transmitted herewith a copy of the Act of January 13, 1925. The following
officials have been assigned to duty in the territory which includes Austria. You are
hereby notified that there have been attached to your Legation, as well as to certain
other Missions:43
James F. O’Neill, Customs Attaché.
George R. Coxe, Assistant Customs Attaché.
John P. Griebel, Assistant Customs Attaché.
Lucien Picard, Customs Clerk.
You are directed to inform the Austrian Government of the appointment of these
Customs Attachés and Assistant Customs Attachés and that their customary
headquarters will be at 14 Kappelergasse, Zurich 1, Switzerland. You will further
inform the Austrian Government that these officials have been attached to your
Legation and you will request their recognition in their respective capacities by the
appropriate authorities.
In making this notification, you are directed to state that the duties of these Attachés
will be in general the following: Under Section 402 of the United States Tariff Act of
1922 they ascertain the facts relative to the “market value” of merchandise exported to
the United States from the countries to which they are assigned; the conditions of sale
and shipment thereof; the correctness of invoices executed by shippers; and any other

facts deemed necessary to a proper appraisement, examination and classification of the
merchandise. This information is embodied in reports submitted to the Secretary of the
Treasury for reference to appraising and other customs officers at ports of importation
in the United States. They advise foreign exporters and shippers as to the United States
Tariff Law and invoice requirements. By direction of the Secretary of the Treasury,
upon request from appraising officers, or upon their own motion when they have
reason to believe that fraud or undervaluation exists, they make special investigations
in the above subjects as well as other violations of the Customs Revenue Laws and
improper invoicing of merchandise, and, when necessary, inquire into the cost of
production of merchandise. The facts ascertained and reported by them are also used in
connection with the enforcement of the statutes of the United States intended to prevent
dumping of foreign merchandise into the United States at less than a fair value.
In case you deem it advisable you may furnish to the appropriate authorities the more
comprehensive and detailed description of the activities of Customs Attachés that is
contained in the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, 1925, with reference to
this subject. In any event, you will point out that no inquiry into cost of production will
be undertaken by Customs Attachés without the prior general or specific permission of
the interested government.
In view of the considerable number of these Attachés assigned to a district comprising
several countries and the consequent necessity of attaching the whole number of such
Attachés to the Diplomatic Mission in each country in this district, it is not believed to
be necessary that these officials be carried on the diplomatic lists of each country in
which they may occasionally perform duties. Although these officials will be provided
with American Diplomatic Passports and will hold the status of Attachés of the
American Diplomatic Mission, their duties, as noted above, do not normally bring them
into contact with foreign governments, but rather with foreign individuals and business
firms. Consequently, it would appear to be sufficient if the principal Customs Attachés
only were placed on the diplomatic lists of foreign governments, provided that such
governments recognize for practical purposes the official status of the Assistant
Customs Attachés who are on the staff of the principal Customs Attaché. If, however,
any foreign government should prefer to place both the Customs Attaché and the
Assistant Customs Attachés on its diplomatic list, there would appear to be no
objection thereto. In the event that, due to the exigencies of the Customs Service, a
Customs Attaché who has not been regularly assigned to Austria should be assigned
there for temporary duty, he will not begin to perform such duty pending notification to
you and by you to the Austrian Government of his presence and official status.
Instructions in this sense will be issued by the Secretary of the Treasury.
For your information, it is pointed out that the legislation directing that these Customs
officials be attached to American Diplomatic Missions came about through the
difficulties which they have hitherto experienced on account of a lack of understanding

on the part of foreign governments of their status and duties under the American laws
under which they are operating. There is quoted in this connection a portion of a letter
from the Treasury Department:
“The purpose of this proposed amendment is to give the Customs
representatives abroad a privileged official status which will enable them to
obtain information now denied to them, facilitate their travelling throughout
the countries to which they are assigned, and also to escape the burdens of
foreign taxation that are now so great as to threaten the continuance of this
work in foreign countries. …44 It is not intended to seek diplomatic or social
preferment for these representatives.”
Your best efforts are desired in explaining to the appropriate Austrian authorities the
duties of the Customs Attachés. To this end, you are authorized to make full use of the
information contained in the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, 1925. You
will take all appropriate means to remove misunderstandings that may arise and to
cooperate in all proper ways to make the work of the Customs Attachés both useful to
this Government, and unobjectionable to the Austrian Government. It is suggested that
you keep in close and constant touch with the Customs Attachés and with their
activities, and that you take all appropriate means to insure that their duties are
performed in a manner consistent with their status as attachés of your Legation.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
41 The same instruction, mutatis mutandis, was sent on April 21 to the Embassies in
Rumania (No. 371), and the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (No. 563); and
Embassy in Japan was informed that if a customs attaché were appointed for duty in
Japan the Embassy would be instructed later to make appropriate notification to the
Japanese Government (file No. 121.5794/–).

43 Bulgaria, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Rumania, Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes, and Switzerland.
The instructions to the Missions in Belgium, France, Portugal, and Spain stated that
Messrs. S. E. Armstrong, customs attaché, and Edgar M. Barber, Henry M. Clapp, and
Paul H. Watson, assistant customs attachés, would be attached to them with
headquarters at 55 Rue de Rivoli, Paris; the Legation in China was informed that
Messrs. Martin B. Nicholson, customs attaché, and Martin G. Scott, assistant customs
attaché, would be attached to it with headquarters at Shanghai; the instructions to the
Missions in Denmark, Finland, Germany, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, and Sweden
informed them that Messrs. F. X. A. Eble, customs attaché, and Charles H. Aschenbach,
John Cameron, Paul Hermes, Max Richert, Charles S. Turrill, and Max Teuscher,
assistant customs attachés, were attached to them with headquarters at 17, von der
Heydt Strasse, Berlin; Messrs. George R. Coxe and John P. Griebel, assistant customs
attachés, and Lucien Picard, customs clerk, were also attached to the Embassy in
Germany for duty in Bavaria, Baden, and Württemburg.
44 Omission indicated in the original instruction.

[Document 163]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
WASHINGTON, April 21, 1925.
No. 1475
SIR:
[Here follow, mutatis mutandis, the first five paragraphs of the instruction to Austria,
printed supra. To the fifth paragraph of that instruction is added the following:] At the
time that you make the above notification to the French Government, you are instructed
to furnish to the Foreign Office a Memorandum containing the more comprehensive
and detailed description of the activities of Customs Attachés that is contained in the
Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, 1925, with reference to this subject.
At this time you will explain to the French Government that the procedure which is
outlined in the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2 is the result of a
painstaking effort on the part of the Treasury and of this Department to meet the views
of the French Government, expressed in the note, dated May 26, 1924, addressed to the
Department by the French Chargé d’Affaires at Washington,45 a translation of which is
transmitted herewith, and at the same time to carry out the mandatory provisions of the
Tariff Act of 1922. You may express the hope that the full explanation of the American
law and of the duties which the Customs Attachés are directed to perform under it, as
well as the procedure established for these Attachés, in the Department’s Circular
Instruction of April 2, 1925, will remove any misunderstanding on the part of the
French Government.
[The next three paragraphs, which have been omitted, are the same, mutatis mutandis,
as the last three paragraphs of the instruction to Austria.]
memorandum by a member of your staff outlining the French objections to the
activities of Customs and Tariff Commission representatives, and recommending that
Section 510 of the Tariff Act of 1922 be amended. With regard to your
recommendation, it may be observed that the Congress will in all probability not be in
session again until December. The Department understands, informally, from the
Treasury that there is little practical probability of amendments to the Tariff Act being
acted upon favorably by Congress in the near future.

The following brief comment is made upon the Memorandum transmitted with your
despatch No. 5038.
(1) Is sufficiently covered in the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2,
which points out that Customs Attachés make investigations only in
connection with goods which have actually been entered at the American
customs. Their activities are in no sense designed to elicit economic or other
information which is not directly connected with the verification of
valuations of dutiable goods which have been declared to the American
Government.
(2) The infrequency and the purpose of the cost of production investigations
made by Customs Attachés are fully explained in the Circular Instruction of
April 2.
With reference to the question of principle raised in point three, your attention is drawn
to the fact that this Government has not objected to investigations by Canadian
Customs officers in the United States.
With regard to point four, the distinction between Customs Attachés and Tariff
Commission representatives is clearly drawn in the Department’s circular instruction of
April 2, and should be emphasized to the French Government.
With regard to Section II of the Memorandum, relating to the action proposed by
France, it may be observed that the Treasury has ruled that affidavits and certificates by
trade associations, etc., as to market value or cost of production do not satisfy the
requirements of American law, and that, therefore, the Secretary of the Treasury has no
legal authority to accept such substitutes for examination of records by accredited
representatives of this Government.
In view of the interest that has been taken in this matter by the International Chamber
of Commerce, it is suggested that you make available to Mr. Basil Miles46 the
substance of the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, and the pertinent parts of
this instruction in order that the American representatives at future meetings of the
International Chamber of Commerce may be fully advised as to the provisions of the
Tariff Act of 1922 affecting Customs Attachés and Tariff Commission representatives,
and of the policy of this Government of putting these provisions into effect. You are
authorized to cooperate with Mr. Miles in all proper ways to impress the International
Chamber of Commerce with the sincere efforts which have been made by this
Government to remove, as far as possible, the causes of the misunderstandings which
have arisen abroad on account of this law.

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Enclosure—Translation]
The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State47
WASHINGTON, May 26, 1924.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: I had the honor to draw Your Excellency’s attention in my note of
February 11, 1922,48 to the objectionable features of the activities of a representative of
the Treasury Department, Mr. F. W. McReynolds, who conducted in France financial
inquiries and would inspect the books of business firms.
In a communication dated March 2348 of the same year, Your Excellency was pleased
to let me know that Mr. McReynolds had been asked to stop his work and that this
procedure would be discontinued.
In spite of this further inquiries have been made in France by representatives of the
United States Tariff Commission, Messrs. Ernster, Hermes and Simpson in particular,
and my Government found itself constrained to bring to the notice of the American
Embassy at Paris in a note dated September 19, 1923,48 the objectionable features of
inquiries conducted apart from the official channels by officials whose mission was not
even made known to the French Government.
The representatives of the Treasury Department are nevertheless carrying on their
inquiries and even would, as they did before, claim the right to examine the accounts of
our commercial firms.
In compliance with instructions just received from my Government and referring to the
previous correspondence on the same subject, I have the honor to draw Your
Excellency’s attention to the difficulties which such proceedings are likely to arouse.
Not to enforce our laws on our own territory is impossible. Now, with a view to
protecting the merchants and avoiding any possible disclosure which in some cases
might bring ruin upon him, the law of France only permits of books being examined in
judicial and revenue cases. And so the French Government cannot possibly grant to
foreign officials powers that it cannot itself claim.
Be pleased [etc.]
JUSSERAND
45 The note was signed by the French Ambassador.

46 American administrator at the Paris headquarters of the International Chamber of
Commerce.
48 Not printed.
48 Not printed.
48 Not printed.

[Document 164]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Bliss)49
WASHINGTON, April 21, 1925.
No. 123
SIR:
[Here follow, mutatis mutandis, the first five paragraphs of the instruction to Austria,
At the time that you make the above notification to the Swedish Government, you are
instructed to furnish to the Foreign Office a Memorandum containing the more
comprehensive and detailed description of the activities of the Customs Attachés that is
contained in the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, 1925, with reference to
this subject.
At this time you will explain to the Swedish Government that the procedure which is
outlined in the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, is the result of a
painstaking effort on the part of the Treasury and of this Department to meet the wishes
of the Swedish Government as expressed in recent representations made to you by the
Foreign Office and to the Department by the Swedish Legation,50 and at the same time
to carry out the mandatory provisions of the Tariff Act of 1922. You may express the
hope that the full explanation of the American law and of the duties which the Customs
Attachés are directed to perform under it, which is contained in tin Department’s
Circular Instruction of April 2, 1925, will remove any misunderstandings on the part of
the Swedish Government.
[The remainder of the instruction is the same, mutatis mutandis, as the last three
paragraphs of the instruction to Austria.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
49 The same instruction, mutatis mutandis, was sent on April 18 to the Legation in
Switzerland as No. 206.

50 Protests against certain activities of Treasury representatives; see under Sweden, vol.
II, p. 725, and under Switzerland, vol. II, p. 731.

[Document 165]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, May 4, 1925.
Memorandum setting forth the views of the British Government in regard to the Act of
Congress, approved January 13, 1925, providing that Customs Attachés shall be
regularly and officially attached to American Diplomatic Missions.
With reference to the objections taken by the British Government to the activities of
representatives of the United States Treasury in conducting investigations into foreign
costs of production, mentioned in your Memorandum, I may say that the American
Ambassador at London has been sent very full instructions outlining a method of
procedure in these cases in the future, and explaining in detail the purposes for which
these representatives of the United States Customs Service are stationed abroad. I am
hopeful that, upon the receipt of the information which the Ambassador has been
requested to convey to him on this subject, Mr. Austen Chamberlain will consider that
the apprehensions felt by the British Government and by British business interests will
have been removed.
With regard to the Act of January 13, 1925, I may say that pursuant to its provisions,
diplomatic passports are being issued to Customs Attachés and to Assistant Customs
Attachés. These officials have been regularly attached to the staff of the American
Diplomatic Missions. The American Ambassador at London has been instructed to
advise Mr. Austen Chamberlain in this sense, and to request, through him, recognition
of these officials in their respective capacities by the appropriate British authorities.51 It
is hoped that, in the light of more complete information, the British Government may
deem it possible to modify its tentative position as to these officials outlined in your
Memorandum.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
51 On May 16 the Ambassador was informed that Russell L. Rice had been appointed
assistant customs attaché, with headquarters in London, for duty in the British Isles

[Document 166]
The Ambassador in Spain (Moore) to the Secretary of State
MADRID, June 6, 1925.
[Received June 22.]
No. 595
SIR: I have the honor to report that, in compliance with the Department’s Instruction No.
the Acting Foreign Minister of the appointment of a Customs Attaché and three
Assistants to this Embassy, and requested recognition of them in their respective
capacities by the Spanish Government.
A copy and translation of the Note of reply of the Foreign Office are transmitted
herewith.53 In it I am advised that the Spanish Government, while not according to the
officials in reference the status of attachés to this Embassy, is willing to grant to them,
upon request, such customs facilities as are usually extended to members of diplomatic
missions, if in the discharge of their duties they are required to visit Spain.
I have [etc.]
ALEXANDER P. MOORE
53 Not printed.
53 Not printed.

[Document 167]
The Chargé in Rumania (Riggs) to the Secretary of State
BUCHAREST, June 16, 1925.
[Received July 7.]
No. 799
Attachés to this and other American Diplomatic Missions, I now have the honor to
enclose in copy and translation a Note received today from the Rumanian Foreign
Office55 in which it is stated that the Ministry of Finance has taken due note of the
assignment of Customs Attachés to the Diplomatic Missions of the United States and
that “the Rumanian Government has no objections to advance in connection with this
novel institution”.
Notification in the above sense has been transmitted to the Customs Attaché in Zürich.
I have [etc.]
B. REATH RIGGS
55 Not printed.
55 Not printed.

[Document 168]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
BRUSSELS, June 17, 1925.
[Received June 29.]
No. 240
me to inform the Foreign Office that certain Customs Attachés had been attached to
American Diplomatic Missions. Pursuant to this Instruction, by note dated May 12, I
informed the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the appointment of Mr. S. E. Armstrong as
Customs Attaché, and of Mr. Edgar M. Barber, Mr. Henry M. Clapp and Mr. Paul H.
Watson as Assistant Customs Attachés in Brussels. I requested the Belgian Government
to grant recognition to these officials in their respective capacities, and in my note to
the Foreign Office I set forth the duties of these attachés in general as indicated in the
Department’s Instruction No. 128.

I have now received a reply to my representation, dated June 15, 1925, a copy and
translation of which I am transmitting herewith.57 The Minister of Foreign Affairs
informs me in his reply that, although the Belgian Government is animated by a most
sincere desire to facilitate as much as possible the application of the provisions of the
American law, and that a better knowledge of the provisions of the American customs
regulations could only exercise a favorable influence on the development of the
economic relations between the two countries, it does not find that the activity of the
Customs Attachés comes within the limits defined by international practice as to the
role of the personnel of Embassies and Legations. The Minister indicates that these
customs officials might more appropriately be attached to the Consulate, as the work
they carry on would seem to come under the sphere of the Consulate. The Minister
further points out in his note that the Belgian Government itself has not the power by
law to direct investigations of cost of production in enterprise, and therefore is unable
to grant permission, either general or specific, with regard to such investigations by
American officials.

I have [etc.]
WILLIAM PHILLIPS
57 Not printed.

[Document 169]
The Chargé in Italy (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
ROME, June 23, 1925.
[Received July 8.]
No. 485
regard to the designation of Customs Attachés and Assistant Customs Attachés to
appropriate American Diplomatic Missions abroad, and to the Embassy’s despatch No.
translation of a Note Verbale received from the Foreign Office57 in reply to the
Department under cover of my despatch above referred to.
The Department will note that the Italian Government finds it impossible to accede to
the request, in view of the fact that it would require granting to the officials in question
authorization to perform duties in the Kingdom which the Italian laws do not require of
its own officials.
I have [etc.]
GEORGE T. SUMMERLIN
57 Not printed.
57 Not printed.
57 Not printed.

[Document 170]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[Paraphrase]
199. The Department has received information from several reliable sources indicating
that British Government is likely to refuse diplomatic status to customs attachés, that it
will raise no objection to market-value and export-value investigations and, while as
matter of principle it will not admit right of this Government to make cost-of-
production investigations, it will permit such investigations in practise if individual
firm concerned does not voice objections to British Government.
The Department deems it most important that no absolute prohibition be raised against
cost-of-production investigations by customs attachés. For this reason Department
suggests that you point out to Chamberlain either formally or informally, as you think
expedient, the following specific considerations which the British commercial
counselor here believes may influence the Foreign Office to waive objections as
practical matter for time being: In the past, cost-of-production investigations have been
very few; Treasury will seek to minimize necessity for them in the future; no request
for cost-of-production investigations will be sent to London until they are reviewed by
responsible officials of the Treasury in Washington and until these officials are
convinced that cost of production is absolutely necessary for legal valuation of goods
for customs purposes. Cost-of-production investigations will, when ordered, be made in
England only by the principal customs attaché and not by his assistants.
Department understands informally that British objection to allowing cost-of-
production investigations rests partly on fear that such permission would be admission
as matter of principle of right of foreign government to make detailed investigations
and that an admission of that sort would be embarrassing were Russian or German
Governments to make similar requests. At your discretion you may point out that
Government of the United States does not request permission desired as matter of right,
and that if permission is accorded it can be withdrawn at any time by British
Government at its discretion; no embarrassing precedent, therefore, need be feared.
GREW

[Document 171]
The Minister in the Netherlands (Tobin) to the Secretary of State
THE HAGUE, June 30, 1925.
[Received July 14.]
No. 473
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s Instruction No.
appointment of certain Customs Attachés and Assistant Customs Attachés to this
Legation and to request their recognition in their respective capacities by the
appropriate authorities. In making this notification, I was directed to state the general
duties of these Attachés and my best efforts were desired in explaining their duties to
the Netherlands authorities.
I did not fail to carry out your instructions to the fullest extent but regret to inform you
that, in answer to my representations, I have been informed by a communication from
the Netherlands Foreign Office copies and translations of which are enclosed
herewith,61 that it seems difficult to the Netherlands Government to bring the duties
incumbent upon the “Customs Attaché” and his assistants within the compass of the
functions of diplomatic agents. The Netherlands Government furthermore believes that
considerations of a general nature seem to be opposed to granting an extension of the
functions recognized by International Law as those belonging to members of the
Diplomatic Corps, and regrets that it finds it impossible to accede to my request that
these officials be attached to this Legation.
I have [etc.]
RICHARD M. TOBIN
61 Not printed.

[Document 172]
The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
BELGRADE, July 2, 1925.
[Received July 22.]
No. 2733
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt on May 7th last of your Instruction No.
O’Neill, had been attached to this Legation, as well as to certain other Missions, as
Customs Attaché and that Messrs. George R. Coxe, John P. Griebel and Lucien Picard
had also similarly been attached, the first two as Assistant Customs Attachés and the
last as Customs Clerk. According to your directions, I immediately addressed an
official communication to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, advising him of these
appointments and conveying to him the information regarding them which is contained
in your Instruction. I also took advantage of a conversation soon thereafter with the
Foreign Minister, Dr. Nintchitch, to draw his attention to my communication and to
explain to him the duties of these Attachés. Dr. Nintchitch informed me that the matter
would have his full attention.
Having had no reply to my communication, I availed of a recent conversation with Dr.
Nintchitch again to invite his attention to this subject and he replied that he had not
failed to give his consideration to my communication but that he had heard that a
number of Governments had signified objection to the recognition of representatives of
the American Customs as Customs Attachés and that accordingly his Government had
decided to await until at least one or more of these Governments had decided to
recognize these Attachés before finally deciding whether or not to recognize them
itself. He then asked me for certain further explanations regarding their duties which I
was able to furnish him from the information in your Instruction and in your Circular
Instruction of April 2nd 1925. I then stated that I hoped that the reason for their desired
recognition was clear to him and also the benefits which these Attachés would render to
commercial exchanges between the United States and Yugoslavia. Dr. Nintchitch
replied that these reasons were clear to him but that in view of the objections which he
had heard had been raised by other Governments, he considered that his Government
should not be the first to give recognition.

The attitude thus taken by the Yugoslav Government in this matter is one, as has
already been reported in a number of other matters, which is often taken by it. Although
it may not see anything objectionable in the recognition of these Attachés, it is as usual
suspicious, realizing that it is not well versed in such matters, and it sees no reason why
it should act before its great Allies have acted.
I shall continue to bring Dr. Nintchitch’s attention to this matter from time to time and I
shall continue to do everything possible to accelerate his favorable decision. I beg to
request that I may be informed of any favorable decisions of other Governments which
would undoubtedly have a very favorable influence upon the decision of the Yugoslav
Government.
I have [etc.]
H. PERCIVAL DODGE

[Document 173]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
WASHINGTON, July 10, 1925.
No. 324
enclosures, stating that the Italian Government cannot accord diplomatic status to
Customs Attachés because the recognition of such status would require the Italian
Government to grant to the officials in question authorization to perform duties in Italy
which Italian laws do not require of Italian officials.
The Department interprets the Italian note to mean merely that diplomatic status for
these officials is refused and not that they are in future prohibited from performing in
Italy their duties under the Tariff Act of 1922.
In order that there may be no misunderstanding, you are requested to make informal
inquiries on this subject and satisfy yourself that the Department’s understanding is
correct, and that the Customs Officials may properly continue to perform the functions
which they have heretofore performed in Italy.
In case the Italian Government intends to prohibit their further activities in Italy, you
are instructed to point out again the considerations advanced in the Department’s
circular instruction of April 2, 1925, emphasizing the difficulties which would
inevitably arise for Italian exporters in case investigations in Italy were not permitted.
JOSEPH C. GREW

[Document 174]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
213. Have received two official and one unofficial notes from the Foreign Office64
regarding customs attachés which will be forwarded by Monday’s pouch. The first
refuses diplomatic status to attachés; the second maintains British Government’s
objection in principle to inquiry as to cost of production with its element of compulsion
and suggests that for the purpose an expert [chartered?] accountant, approved by the
United States Government and the firm in question, should be appointed to examine
books and give certificate. The informal communication explains that, while
maintaining the question of principle, it is hoped in practice the customs attachés will
be able to carry out their functions in such a way as not to cause complaints arising out
of the question of principle.
HOUGHTON
64 None printed.

[Document 175]
The Minister in Hungary (Brentano) to the Secretary of State
BUDAPEST, July 18, 1925.
[Received August 3.]
No. 680
concerning agents of the Customs Division of the United States Treasury stationed
abroad being regularly and officially attached to American Diplomatic Missions, I have
received yesterday, stating that Mr. James F. O’Neill, Customs Attaché, is placed on the
Hungarian diplomatic list. Mr. O’Neill has been informed of this action.
I have [etc.]
THEODORE BRENTANO
66 Not printed.

[Document 176]
The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
Foreign Office stating that it cannot grant diplomatic status to customs attachés. Copy
of the note going forward by next pouch.66
WHITEHOUSE
66 Not printed.

[Document 177]
The Chargé in Sweden (Magruder) to the Secretary of State
STOCKHOLM, July 23, 1925.
[Received August 13.]
No. 529
No.), respecting the appointment of Customs Attachés, and to the Legation’s reply
of a note from the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, a copy and translation of which
are herewith enclosed, to the effect that the Swedish Government regrets that it is not in
a position to give a favorable reply to the request that customs attachés be recognized
as members of the Legation.
I have [etc.]
ALEXANDER R. MAGRUDER
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Swedish Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Nothin) to the American Chargé (Magruder)
STOCKHOLM, July 21, 1925.
MR. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: In a letter dated May 20th last you were good enough to inform me of
the appointment of Mr. F. X. A. Eble in the capacity of Customs Attaché and of that of
Mr. C. S. Turrill in the capacity of Assistant Customs Attaché to the Legation of the
United States of America, as well as to ask that the Government of the King be good
enough to recognize these officials in their respective capacities.
After having given a detailed explanation of the duties devolving on customs attachés,
you were good enough to show in your letter that the more precise manner, in which it
is proposed to regulate the organization of their activity, is the result of earnest efforts
which have been made by the American authorities in order’ to conform to the desires
of the Government of the King, as expressed in the observations which were recently
made on this subject by this Ministry to Mr. Bliss and by the Minister of the King at
Washington to the State Department.

The Government of the King, which is aware that this passage in your letter refers to
the protest by which it took exception, a short time ago, to a decision of the Treasury
Department not to authorize the importation into the United States of products of two
Swedish enterprises, owing to the fact that these enterprises had declared that they
could not permit a representative of the said Department to examine their books and
commercial documents, appreciates thoroughly the good will shown by your
Government in order to reach an agreement in the question at issue. It seems, however,
to the Government of the King that the proposed arrangement is not of such a nature as
to weaken the objections which it has formulated on this subject.
According to the opinion of the Government of the King, the duties which would
devolve on customs attachés, namely those which would consist in making
investigations of private enterprises abroad, are hardly of a nature to be classed among
those which, according to established usages, can be recognized as of a diplomatic
character. The extension of diplomatic immunities in favor of the officials in question
would have an effect the more grave inasmuch as the Government of the King, in
acquiescing to the request of the Government of the United States of America, might be
considered as having indirectly authorized foreign officials to examine the commercial
books of Swedish houses and as tending to release on Swedish territory an activity
which is not even recognized as pertaining to the authorities of the country.
Under these conditions the Government of the King regrets that it is not in a position to
give a favorable reply to the desire expressed by the Government of the United States
of America to see its officials in question recognized as members of your Legation.
Accept [etc.]
TORSTEN NOTHIN
67 No. 479 not printed.

[Document 178]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
VIENNA, July 31, 1925.
[Received August 17.]
No. 775
relation to the diplomatic recognition of Customs Representatives or Attachés, and my
following report: The above-mentioned Department instruction was received at this
Legation on May 6. I made oral representations to the Foreign Minister, Dr. Mataja, on
May 8. At that time, he gave me the oral assurances upon which my telegram was
based in almost these precise words: “I know the story, we are not delighted at the
prospect. (Wir sind gar nicht entzückt davon.) But it does not seem to me that the
matter is of great importance to us. I am willing, in view of what you say, that
diplomatic recognition should be accorded. We will do it quietly, and the less we say
about it the better.” The following day, May 9, I addressed a confirmatory note to Dr.
Mataja in which I took occasion to outline the duties of the Attachés in accordance with
the hereinbefore-mentioned Department instruction No. 731. A copy of this note is
enclosed herewith marked Annex 1.69 It will be observed that I distinctly stated therein
that the Foreign Minister had been “good enough to say that it was agreeable to the
Austrian Government to recognize such agents”. There is no controversy about this, but
I emphasize it in order that the Department may fully understand my telegram No. 25.
Some time later in the month of May, in talking with Sektionschef Dr. Wildner to
whom, as I knew, the matter had been referred, I became aware of some hitch, and it
presently developed that the under-officials of the Foreign Office had taken the stand
that official courtesy and procedure required that the interested departments of the
Government, viz., the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Commerce, should be
invited to express their opinions. The Chamber of Commerce had, I learned, in turn
communicated with various Austrian Chambers of Commerce, and it was evident that
some protest rumblings had been heard, especially from a Vienna firm the importation
of whose goods into the United States had under the law been prohibited. Nevertheless,
Dr. Wildner did not seem to me to be inherently hostile, and I argued the matter with
him at some length. He finally said to me, “If you will embody what you have said to
me in a note which I can use with the Ministry of Commerce, I think it quite possible
that the explanations you have made will overcome the existing objections.” He gave

me the impression that he felt that the matter could be adjusted with a little patience. A
copy of the note dispatched in accordance with this interview, dated May 28, is
herewith enclosed marked Annex 2.70 It incorporates, as will be perceived, statements
contained in Department circular instruction of April 2, 1925.
I have recently—a formal reply from the Foreign Office being still outstanding,—taken
occasion to bring up the matter again orally. The official with whom I talked after a
little hesitation told me in confidence that while it was true that the formal replies from
the Departments of Finance and Commerce had not been received, the greatest obstacle
now was a political one. It had been brought to the attention of the Austrian
Government that other nations were raising serious objections to the diplomatic
recognition of American Customs Representatives. England, Italy, Switzerland, Spain,
and the Scan-dinavian States, I recall among others whom he specifically mentioned in
this connection. Germany, he said, was hesitating and uncertain as to what answer it
would return. He gave me the distinct impression that some of the resident Chiefs of
Missions, at least here in Vienna, had discussed the matter at the Austrian Foreign
Office, probably in the interest of uniformity of action. As a case in point, Italy was
mentioned, where it was said that it was found impossible to invest American Treasury
representatives with powers and functions which, it was alleged, no corresponding
Italian official had. It was of course recognized that an American Treasury official or
Customs Representative would have no power to enforce his requests, but the mere fact
that he was dignified with diplomatic status would put him in a place of vantage and be
misunderstood by Italian manufacturers, who in many cases would assume that they
must comply with requests made under such circumstances. I mention this merely as an
illustration to show that some communication has passed between Vienna and Rome,
whether the intermediary was the resident Italian Minister or the Austrian Minister at
Rome I do not, of course, know. Austria, my informant said, was a small country, and
wished to avoid being put in the position of being perhaps the only country to accord
such recognition. He particularly inquired whether any other country had acted
favorably upon a similar request. I assume that I might have mentioned Canada, but it
did not seem to me, under the circumstances, that such an example would especially
help. Finally, I was begged to regard the information given me as strictly confidential.
The official with whom I talked has the rank of Minister Plenipotentiary. I took
occasion to allude casually to the fact that in Vienna and Berlin, as well as in Paris and
London, many obscure Soviet commercial representatives were carried on the
diplomatic list. The force of this was frankly recognized. Apart from the fact that it
might be conspicuous as presenting an isolated instance, the Minister thought that the
diplomatic recognition of American Customs Representatives was not, in and of itself,
so objectionable. Their functions and duties under diplomatic protection presented,
however, a more serious question. So long as these Representatives acted without
formal recognition, here at least their presence would be winked at and ignored. To
accord them formal recognition might be embarrassing.

I shall not fail, of course, to keep this matter to the fore. There is no real hostility here,
at least in the Foreign Office. On the other hand, up to a certain point a spirit of
accommodation is evident. If any other nation, especially any European nation, has
taken favorable action, I trust the Department will notify me,—preferably by cable.71
To cite a concrete case, or concrete cases, will greatly help. If I cannot do so, I despair
of the final outcome.
I have [etc.]
ALBERT H. WASHBURN
69 Not printed.
69 Not printed.
70 Not printed.
71 On August 20 the Minister was informed that Hungary and Rumania had accorded
diplomatic status to customs attachés. On December 23 the Minister was instructed that
the Department was “inclined to consider the informal statements by officials of the
[Austrian] Ministry for Foreign Affairs, reported in your despatch No. 775, as
equivalent to a refusal of diplomatic status” (instruction No. 407, not printed; file No.

[Document 179]
The Chargé in Italy (Robbins) to the Secretary of State
ROME, August 8, 1925.
[Received August 27.]
No. 551
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the Department’s Instruction No. 324 of
July 10, 1925, with reference to the statement of the Italian Government to the effect
that it cannot afford diplomatic status to Customs Attachés because the recognition of
such status would require the Italian Government to grant to the officials in question
authorization to perform duties in Italy which Italian laws do not require of Italian
officials.
I note that the Department interprets this Note as meaning that the diplomatic status for
these officials is refused, and not that they are in future prohibited from performing in
Italy their duties under the Tariff Act of 1922, and, furthermore, that the Department
desires me to make informal inquiries on this subject.
A member of the Embassy, therefore, called at the Foreign Office and was informed by
the Chief of the section interested in this matter that the Customs Officials referred to
would not be prohibited from carrying out their duties any more than they had been in
the past. Attention was called, however, as in the Note, to the fact that neither the
officials of a foreign government nor even of the Italian Government were permitted by
law to inspect business concerns providing such concerns were in good standing, and
that, therefore, any inspections made by the Customs Attachés would depend upon the
acquiescence of the owners of the factories and business concerns.
It, therefore, appears that the usefulness of the Customs Attachés in Italy will depend
entirely on the tact and ability they may use in securing permission to make their
inspections.
I have [etc.]
WARREN D. ROBBINS

[Document 180]
The Minister in Denmark (Prince) to the Secretary of State
COPENHAGEN, August 11, 1925.
[Received August 29.]
No. 936
recognition by the Danish Government of certain Customs Attachés and assistant
Customs Attachés in their respective official capacities, I have the honor to enclose,
herewith, a copy and translation of a Note from the Danish Foreign Office, dated
August 7th, 1925,73 regretting that the Government of Denmark is unable to conform to
the wishes expressed on this subject by the Government of the United States.
As I have already pointed out in the Despatch above-mentioned, the Danish
Government has delayed its reply in order to act in concert with certain other
Scandinavian countries, and it may be of interest to note in this respect, that the reasons
given for refusing the request of the United States Government are identical with those
given by the Government of Sweden.74
In a conversation with Count Reventlow on this subject, I was confidentially informed
that, apart from the attitude of the Danish Government as expressed in its Note, the
Foreign Office was averse at the present time to the granting of diplomatic status to
other Government officials beyond those at present recognized, because of the
probability of similar requests from the Soviet Legation for the various Attachés
assigned to that mission.
I have [etc.]
JOHN DYNELEY PRINCE
73 Not printed.
73 Not printed.
74 See note of July 21 from the Swedish Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs to the

[Document 181]
The Minister in Norway (Swenson) to the Secretary of State
OSLO, August 19, 1925.
[Received September 8.]
No. 659
15th instant, the Norwegian Government has declined to accede to the Department’s
request for recognition of Mr. F. X. A. Eble and Mr. Charles L. Turrill, as Customs
Attachés to this Legation. I enclose herewith a copy of the above-mentioned note from
the Foreign Office, together with a translation thereof.73 You will also find enclosed
herewith a copy of my note of May 14th last, to the Minister of Foreign Affairs.73
I have [etc.]
LAURITS S. SWENSON
75 None printed.
73 Not printed.
73 Not printed.

[Document 182]
The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
BERLIN, August 20, 1925.
[Received September 3.]
No. 198
SIR: I have the honor to report that, in compliance with the Department’s instruction No.
Customs Division of the United States Treasury had been attached to the Embassy and
requested recognition of them in their respective capacities by the German
Government.
The Embassy is now in receipt of a Foreign Office Note Verbale, No. Ill A 1977, of the
seventeenth instant in reply, a copy and translation of which are transmitted herewith,78
in which the Foreign Office states that the German Government is not in a position to
accord the recognition requested, since, in the opinion of the Foreign Office, the duties
which the “contemplated American officials” are to perform in Germany are not duties
which should, according to international regulations or international usage, be
performed by officials of a diplomatic career. The Foreign Office adds that for this
reason, the German Government has misgivings of a fundamental nature against having
officials who have to perform the contemplated duties attached to a diplomatic mission
in Berlin.
I have [etc.]
JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN
78 Not printed.

[Document 183]
The Consul General at Hongkong (Tredwell) to the Secretary of State
HONGKONG, September 22, 1925.
[Received October 26.]
No. 24
SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of a communication received to-day
from the Colonial Secretary of the Colonial Government of Hongkong,78 in which I am
informed that His Excellency the Governor has withdrawn the provisional recognition
which was accorded to Mr. H. C. Anderson, Assistant Customs Attaché, at this port.79
I have [etc.]
ROGER CULVER TREDWELL
78 Not printed.
79 The consul in charge at Hongkong had been instructed on May 5 to notify the local
authorities of the appointment of Mr. Anderson as assistant customs attaché at
Hongkong (file No. 121.5793/a).

[Document 184]
The Minister in Poland (Stetson) to the Secretary of State
[Received 2 p.m.]
has made negative answer.
STETSON

[Document 185]
The Minister in Greece (Laughlin) to the Secretary of State
ATHENS, October 6, 1925.
[Received November 3.]
No. 428
Mr. James F. O’Neill had been attached to this Legation as Customs Attaché and in
which you directed me to request his recognition and those of his subordinates in their
respective capacities by the proper authorities, I have the honor to report that I am to-
day in receipt of an undated note from the Foreign Office in which the Hellenic
Government expresses its regret at not being able to accord the recognition desired to
these officials. A copy and translation of the note will be found enclosed herewith.81
I have [etc.]
IRWIN LAUGHLIN
81 Not printed.

[Document 186]
The Minister in Portugal (Dearing) to the Secretary of State
LISBON, October 7, 1925.
[Received October 19.]
No. 1208
appointment of Customs Attachés to this Legation,80 I now have the honor to transmit
herewith copy and translation of a note from the Portuguese Minister for Foreign
In view of the fact that the Portuguese Government has now expressed its inability to
accept the proposal for the appointment of Customs Attachés to this Legation, I have
the honor to request that the Department be so good as to issue to the Legation such
instructions as it deems necessary under the circumstances.86
I have [etc.]
FRED MORRIS DEARING
82 None printed.

[Document 187]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, November 4, 1925.
[Received November 30.]
No. 597
SIR: I have the honor to report that on October 18th I received the Department’s
Government to the request that our Customs Representatives in Switzerland be granted
diplomatic status and recognized as Customs Attachés. I immediately sought an
interview with Monsieur Motta, Federal Councillor, Chief of the Political Department
but, in view of the number of his previous engagements Monsieur Motta could not
receive me until the morning of October 22nd.
I explained the situation to Monsieur Motta and said that my Government would
greatly appreciate an early reply to the request submitted by Mr. Boal88 on May 29th
a note on the subject in the course of a few days, as soon as its text was formally
approved by the Federal Council. He added, however, that he could tell me informally
the nature of the reply, which was to be an expression of regret at the inability of the
Federal Government to accord diplomatic status to the Customs Representatives.
Monsieur Motta went on to say that he had felt grave doubts from the beginning as to
the possibility of acceding to our request, but as Mr. Boal had set forth our point of
view so earnestly and convincingly, he felt the whole question deserved a careful
examination before a decision was reached. The Federal Council had expressed its
reluctance to refuse a request from us if any proper way could be found to meet our
wishes and he had gone into the question thoroughly with the help of the Department of
Public Economy. Monsieur Motta said that he had allowed the study of the question to
pursue a leisurely course for two reasons, first, in order that the matter might be given
careful consideration, and second, in the belief that most other Governments would
probably give unfavorable answers and that if a Swiss refusal became inevitable it
would make a less painful impression if it came after refusals had been received from
more important governments.
He then stated that the decision of the Federal Council was based chiefly on two
grounds; first that these agents are not engaged on work which entitles them to

diplomatic status,—they have no dealings with Swiss authorities and their activities are
confined entirely to private inquiries and dealings with private individuals; second, that
if recognition were accorded to the Customs Attachés a precedent would be created
under which it would be difficult to refuse diplomatic status to officials of other
governments, no matter how far fetched their claims might be. He said that the Federal
Council had in the past repeatedly refused to recognize as members of foreign legations
officials engaged on special work bearing on education, agriculture, labor problems,
etc.; that if our request were to be complied with the Swiss Government would be
deluged with similar requests from other governments, and that although it was very
distasteful to them to refuse our request it was considered wiser to do so in the hope of
avoiding future difficulties.
Monsieur Motta stated that he and his colleagues on the Federal Council had been
much impressed by Mr. Boal’s presentation of the subject, that it was clearly
understood that it was our intention to create a helpful agency to facilitate business
transactions and that there had never been any intention of setting up an inquisitorial
agency. He added, however, that Swiss business houses were under a definite
impression that our Customs Representatives were intent on intolerable interference in
their affairs and that he feared this impression could not be eradicated so long as the
present procedure was maintained. He expressed the hope that some other method
might be found which would maintain the advantages which we desired to grant while
avoiding the objections which he had pointed out.
The written reply promised by Monsieur Motta was delayed for some time because of
minor changes in the text which were desired by the Federal Council, but it has now
been received and is forwarded in copy and translation herewith.89
It will be observed that the reasons given in the note are not identical with those given
me verbally by Monsieur Motta. They are, first, that the functions of these agents have
no bearing upon the relations between our two governments; and second, that the
desired recognition would vest them with powers which, under Swiss law, are not
enjoyed even by Swiss officials.
I have [etc.]
HUGH GIBSON
87 Not printed.
88 Second secretary of legation in Switzerland.
87 Not printed.
89 Not printed.

[Document 188]
The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular
Officers90
WASHINGTON, December 24, 1925.
SIRS: Reference is made to previous instructions relative to the Act of Congress,
approved January 13, 1925, providing, inter alia, that officials of the Treasury should
be regularly and officially attached to American Diplomatic Missions abroad in the
capacity of “Customs Attachés.”
Pursuant to this Act, the Department instructed the Chiefs of the appropriate
Diplomatic Missions to request recognition for the “Customs Attachés” assigned to
duty at their Missions. These requests for recognition have been almost universally
refused by the governments concerned, and it is obviously inadvisable for further
efforts to be made by this Government to bring about recognition of a diplomatic status
for “Customs Attachés.”
It may be pointed out here that no foreign government has refused to permit the
“Customs Attachés” to reside at their posts of duty and to carry out their duties under
the Tariff Act of 1922. Therefore, the “Customs Attachés” are, from the point of view
of their duties under that Act, unaffected by the refusals of foreign governments to
accord them diplomatic status.
According to the opinion of the Treasury, the officials in question possess the legal title
of “Customs Attaché”, and their reports to the Treasury, as well as their vouchers and
other official documents, must bear this title. However, in view of the refusal of foreign
governments to accord them diplomatic status, the Treasury has agreed that the further
public use of the title “Customs Attaché” in foreign countries would be inadvisable.
Therefore, instructions have been transmitted to all “Customs Attachés” directing them
to avoid the use of their legal title on letterheads, correspondence, or business cards,
and to adopt for these purposes the former title of “Customs Representative”. A copy of
the Treasury’s instructions, dated December 10, 1925, is transmitted herewith for your
information.91
You will also observe that these officials will hereafter be furnished Special Passports
in which they are described as: “. . . . Name . . . . an Official of the United States
Treasury Department, Customs Service, travelling abroad on Official Business of the
United States Government.”

You will further note that the Treasury will request the Congress to repeal the
provisions of the Act of January 13, 1925, which, for practical purposes, have been
nullified by the refusal of foreign governments to accord diplomatic status to “Customs
Attachés”.
The Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, 1925, remains in effect, and it is
expected that the cooperation described therein, between Diplomatic Missions and
representatives of the Customs Service will continue. You are directed to give all
proper assistance to these officials, bearing in mind that their obligation to carry out the
provisions of the Tariff Act of 1922 is in no way impaired by the refusal of any foreign
government to accord to them diplomatic status. You will take every appropriate
occasion to explain to the appropriate foreign officials the duties of the Customs
officials, as described in the Tariff Act, and the Department’s Instruction of April 2,
1925, and to remove any misunderstandings that may exist.
In reply to a request of the Treasury Department that instructions be issued to American
Diplomatic Missions directing them to obtain for “Customs Attachés” laissez passer,
etc., as well as to endeavor to arrange exemption from police registration requirements
and income taxation, the Department said: “The Department deems it inadvisable to
issue specific instructions to its Diplomatic Missions directing them to request ‘laissez
passer’, etc., for your officials, since these special customs facilities are given by
foreign governments only as special courtesies. The Department prefers to leave this
matter to the discretion of the Diplomatic Missions concerned. It is suggested that each
of your representatives take up this question with the American Diplomatic Mission
with which he is in closest touch.
“The question of the liability of your representatives to police registration regulations
and to income taxation abroad is dependent upon the domestic laws of individual
countries. The Department, and American Diplomatic Missions, will continue to make
every effort to obtain for your representatives such exemption as may properly be
requested in specific cases as they arise.”
This instruction is for your information only. The status of “Customs Attachés”, from
the point of view of American law, has not been changed. In those countries where they
have been recognized as members of the Diplomatic Mission, they will continue to be
so regarded pending a modification of the Act of January 13, 1925.
JOSEPH C. GREW

90 i. e., those in countries in Europe with which the United States maintained
diplomatic relations, and in China and Japan.
91 Not printed.

[Document 189]
The Minister in Finland (Pearson) to the Secretary of State
HELSINGFORS, February 27, 1926.
[Received March 26.]
No. 149
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s circular instruction dated April 2,
1925, regarding the appointment of Customs Attachés.92
This matter was taken up with the Finnish Government upon receipt of the
Department’s instruction but only a few days ago was a definite reply received to the
Legation’s notes. A copy of the reply from the Finnish Foreign Office is enclosed
herewith.93 While the name of Eble alone is mentioned in the reply it is evident that the
refusal to accord diplomatic status is intended to include all the Customs Attachés.
I have [etc.]
ALFRED J. PEARSON
is part of Doc. 162]), which dealt with the appointment of customs attachés.
93 Not printed.

International convention for the unification
of certain rules relating to bills of lading
[190] International Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules Relating to
Bills of Lading, Concluded at Brussels, August 25, 1924
Done at Brussels, in a single copy, August 25, 1924.
Treaty Series No. 931

Treaty Series No. 931
[Document 190]
International Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules Relating to
Bills of Lading, Concluded at Brussels, August 25, 192494
[Translation]
The President of the German Republic, the President of the Argentine Republic, His
Majesty the King of the Belgians, the President of the Republic of Chile, the President
of the Republic of Cuba, His Majesty the King of Denmark and Iceland, His Majesty
the King of Spain, the Chief of the Estonian State, the President of the United States of
America, the President of the Republic of Finland, the President of the French
Republic, His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
and of the British Possessions Beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, His Serene Highness
the Regent of the Kingdom of Hungary, His Majesty the King of Italy, His Majesty the
Emperor of Japan, the President of the Republic of Latvia, the President of the
Republic of Mexico, His Majesty the King of Norway, Her Majesty the Queen of the
Netherlands, the President of the Republic of Peru, the President of the Republic of
Poland, the President of the Portuguese Republic, His Majesty the King of Rumania,
His Majesty the King of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, His Majesty the King of
Sweden and the President of the Republic of Uruguay, Having recognized the utility of
laying down in common accord certain uniform rules relating to bills of lading, have
decided to conclude a Convention to that effect and have designated as their
Plenipotentiaries, namely:
The President of the German Republic:
His Excellency Mr. von Keller, Minister of Germany at Brussels.
The President of the Argentine Republic:
His Majesty the King of the Belgians:
Mr. L. Franck, Minister of Colonies, President of the International
Maritime Committee;
Mr. A. Le Jeune, Senator, Vice President of the International
Maritime Committee;

Mr. F. Sohr, Doctor of Law, Secretary General of the International
Maritime Committee; Professor at the University of Brussels.
The President of the Republic of Chile:
His Excellency Mr. Armando Quezada, Minister of Chile at
Brussels.
The President of the Republic of Cuba:
His Majesty the King of Denmark and Iceland:
His Majesty the King of Spain:
His Excellency the Marquis of Villalobar and Guimarey,
Ambassador of Spain at Brussels.
Chief of the Estonian State:
His Excellency Mr. Pusta, Minister of Estonia at Brussels.
The President of the United States of America:
His Excellency Mr. William Phillips, Ambassador of the United
States of America at Brussels.
The President of the Republic of Finland:
The President of the French Republic:
His Excellency Mr. M. Herbette, Ambassador of France at
Brussels.
His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
and of the British Possessions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India:
His Excellency the Right Honorable Sir George Grahame, G. C. V.
O., K. C. M. G., Ambassador of His Britannic Majesty at Brussels.
His Serene Highness the Regent of the Kingdom of Hungary:
Count Olivier Woracziczky, Baron of Pabienitz, Chargé d’Affaires
of Hungary at Brussels.
His Majesty the King of Italy:

Mr. J. Daneo, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Italy at Brussels.
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan:
His Excellency Mr. M. Adatci, Ambassador of Japan at Brussels.
The President of the Republic of Latvia:
The President of the Republic of Mexico:
His Majesty the King of Norway:
Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands:
The President of the Republic of Peru:
The President of the Republic of Poland and the Free City of Danzig:
His Excellency Count Jean Szembek, Minister of Poland at
Brussels.
The President of the Portuguese Republic:
His Majesty the King of Rumania:
His Excellency Mr. Henri Catargi, Minister of Rumania at
Brussels.
His Majesty the King of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes:
Messrs. Straznicky and Verona.
His Majesty the King of Sweden:
The President of the Republic of Uruguay:
Who, duly authorized therefor, have agreed on the following:
ARTICLE 1
In this convention the following words are employed with the meanings set out below:
(a) “Carrier” includes the owner of the vessel or the charterer who enters into
a contract of carriage with a shipper.

(b) “Contract of carriage” applies only to contracts of carriage covered by a
bill of lading or any similar document of title, insofar as such document
relates to the carriage of goods by sea; it also applies to any bill of lading or
any similar document as aforesaid issued under or pursuant to a charter party
from the moment at which such instrument regulates the relations between a
carrier and a holder of the same.
(c) “Goods” includes goods, wares, merchandise, and articles of every kind
whatsoever except live animals and cargo which by the contract of carriage is
stated as being carried on deck and is so carried.
(d) “Ship” means any vessel used for the carriage of goods by sea.
(e) “Carriage of goods” covers the period from the time when the goods are
loaded on to the time they are discharged from the ship.
ARTICLE 2
Subject to the provisions of Article 6 under every contract of carriage of goods by sea
the carrier, in relation to the loading, handling, stowage, carriage, custody, care, and
discharge of such goods shall be subject to the responsibilities and liabilities, and
entitled to the rights and immunities hereinafter set forth.
ARTICLE 3
1. The carrier shall be bound before and at the beginning of the voyage to exercise due
diligence to:—
(a) Make the ship seaworthy;
(b) Properly man, equip, and supply the ship;
(c) Make the holds, refrigerating and cool chambers, and all other parts of the
ship in which goods are carried, fit and safe for their reception, carriage, and
preservation.
2. Subject to the provisions of Article 4 the carrier shall properly and carefully load,
handle, stow, carry, keep, care for, and discharge the goods carried.
3. After receiving the goods into his charge the carrier orthe master or agent of the
carrier shall, on demand of the shipper, issue to the shipper a bill of lading showing
among other things:

(a) The leading marks necessary for identification of the goods as the same
are furnished in writing by the shipper before the loading of such goods
starts, provided such marks are stamped or otherwise shown clearly upon the
goods if uncovered, or on the cases or coverings in which such goods are
contained, in such a manner as should ordinarily remain legible until the end
of the voyage;
(b) Either the number of packages or pieces, or the quantity, or weight, as the
case may be, as furnished in writing by the shipper;
(c) The apparent order and condition of the goods;
Provided that no carrier, master, or agent of the carrier shall be bound to state or show
in the bill of lading any marks, number, quantity, or weight which he has reasonable
grounds for suspecting not accurately to represent the goods actually received or which
he has had no reasonable means of checking.
4. Such a bill of lading shall be prima facie evidence of the receipt by the carrier of the
goods as therein described in accordance with paragraph 3 (a), (b), and (c).
5. The shipper shall be deemed to have guaranteed to the carrier the accuracy at the
time of shipment of the marks, number, quantity, and weight, as furnished by him, and
the shipper shall indemnify the carrier against all loss, damages, and expenses arising
or resulting from inaccuracies in such particulars. The right of the carrier to such
indemnity shall in no way limit his responsibility and liability under the contract of
carriage to any person other than the shipper.
6. Unless notice of loss or damage and the general nature of such loss or damage be
given in writing to the carrier or his agent at the port of discharge before or at the time
of the removal of the goods into the custody of the person entitled to delivery thereof
under the contract of carriage, such removal shall be prima facie evidence of the
delivery by the carrier of the goods as described in the bill of lading.
If the loss or damage is not apparent, the notice must be given within three days of the
delivery.
The notice in writing need not be given if the state of the goods has at the time of their
receipt been the subject of joint survey or inspection.
In any event the carrier and the ship shall be discharged from all liability in respect of
loss or damage unless suit is brought within one year after delivery of the goods or the
date when the goods should have been delivered.

In the case of any actual or apprehended loss or damage the carrier and the receiver
shall give all reasonable facilities to each other for inspecting and tallying the goods.
7. After the goods are loaded the bill of lading to be issued by the carrier, master, or
agent of the carrier to the shipper shall, if the shipper so demands, be a “shipped” bill
of lading, provided that if the shipper shall have previously taken up any document of
title to such goods, he shall surrender the same as against the issue of the “shipped” bill
of lading. At the option of the carrier such document of title may be noted at the port of
shipment by the carrier, master, or agent with the name or names of the ship or ships
upon which the goods have been shipped and the date or dates of shipment, and when
so noted, if it shows the particulars mentioned in paragraph 3 of Article 3, it shall for
the purpose of this article be deemed to constitute a “shipped” bill of lading.
8. Any clause, covenant, or agreement in a contract of carriage relieving the carrier or
the ship from liability for loss or damage to or in connection with goods arising from
negligence, fault, or failure in the duties and obligations provided in this article, or
lessening such liability otherwise than as provided in this convention, shall be null and
void and of no effect. A benefit of insurance in favor of the carrier or similar clause
shall be deemed to be a clause relieving the carrier from liability.
ARTICLE 4
1. Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be liable for loss or damage arising or resulting
from unseaworthiness unless caused by want of due diligence on the part of the carrier
to make the ship seaworthy and to secure that the ship is properly manned, equipped,
and supplied and to make the holds, refrigerating and cool chambers, and all other parts
of the ship in which goods are carried fit and safe for their reception, carriage, and
preservation in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 3. Whenever
loss or damage has resulted from unseaworthiness, the burden of proving the exercise
of due diligence shall be on the carrier or other person claiming exemption under this
article.
2. Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be responsible for loss or damage arising or
resulting from:
(a) Act, neglect, or default of the master, mariner, pilot, or the servants of the
carrier in the navigation or in the management of the ship;
(b) Fire, unless caused by the actual fault or privity of the carrier;
(c) Perils, dangers, and accidents of the sea or other navigable waters;
(d) Act of God;

(e) Act of war;
(f) Act of public enemies;
(g) Arrest or restraint of princes, rulers, or people or seizure under legal
process;
(h) Quarantine restrictions;
(i) Act or omission of the shipper or owner of the goods, his agent, or
representative;
(j) Strikes or lockouts or stoppage or restraint of labor from whatever cause,
whether partial or general;
(k) Riots and civil commotions;
(l) Saving or attempting to save life or property at sea;
(m) Wastage in bulk or weight or any other loss or damage arising from
inherent defect, quality, or vice of the goods;
(n) Insufficiency of packing;
(o) Insufficiency or inadequacy of marks;
(p) Latent defects not discoverable by due diligence;
(q) Any other cause arising without the actual fault or privity of the carrier, or
without the fault or neglect of the agents or servants of the carrier, but the
burden of proof shall be on the person claiming the benefit of this exception
to show that neither the actual fault or privity of the carrier nor the fault or
neglect of the agents or servants of the carrier contributed to the loss or
damage.
3. The shipper shall not be responsible for loss or damage sustained by the carrier or
the ship arising or resulting from any cause without the act, fault, or neglect of the
shipper, his agents, or his servants.
4. Any deviation in saving or attempting to save life or property at sea or any
reasonable deviation shall not be deemed to be an infringement or breach of this
convention or of the contract of carriage, and the carrier shall not be liable for any loss
or damage resulting therefrom.

5. Neither the carrier nor the ship shall in any event be or become liable for any loss or
damage to or in connection with goods in an amount exceeding 100 pounds sterling per
package or unit or the equivalent of that sum in other currency unless the nature and
value of such goods have been declared by the shipper before shipment and inserted in
the bill of lading.
This declaration if embodied in the bill of lading shall be prima facie evidence but shall
not be binding or conclusive on the carrier.
By agreement between the carrier, master, or agent of the carrier and the shipper
another maximum amount than that mentioned in this paragraph may be fixed,
provided that such maximum shall not be less than the figure above named.
Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be responsible in any event for loss or damage to,
or in connection with, goods if the nature or value thereof has been knowingly
misstated by the shipper in the bill of lading.
6. Goods of an inflammable, explosive, or dangerous nature to the shipment whereof
the carrier, master, or agent of the carrier has not consented with knowledge of their
nature and character may at any time before discharge be landed at any place or
destroyed or rendered innocuous by the carrier without compensation, and the shipper
of such goods shall be liable for all damages and expenses directly or indirectly arising
out of or resulting from such shipment. If any such goods shipped with such knowledge
and consent shall become a danger to the ship or cargo, they may in like manner be
landed at any place or destroyed or rendered innocuous by the carrier without liability
on the part of the carrier except to general average, if any.
ARTICLE 5
A carrier shall be at liberty to surrender in whole or in part all or any of his rights and
immunities, or to increase any of his responsibilities and liabilities under this
convention provided such surrender or increase shall be embodied in the bill of lading
issued to the shipper.
The provisions of this convention shall not be applicable to charter parties, but if bills
of lading are issued in the case of a ship under a charter-party they shall comply with
the terms of this convention. Nothing in these rules shall be held to prevent the
insertion in a bill of lading of any lawful provision regarding general average.
ARTICLE 6
Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding articles, a carrier, master, or agent of
the carrier and a shipper shall in regard to any particular goods be at liberty to enter
into any agreement in any terms as to the responsibility and liability of the carrier for

such goods, and as to the rights and immunities of the carrier in respect of such goods,
or concerning his obligation as to seaworthiness so far as this stipulation is not contrary
to public policy, or concerning the care or diligence of his servants or agents in regard
to the loading, handling, stowage, carriage, custody, care, and discharge of the goods
carried by sea, provided that in this case no bill of lading has been or shall be issued
and that the terms agreed shall be embodied in a receipt which shall be a nonnegotiable
document and shall be marked as such.
Any agreement so entered into shall have full legal effect: Provided that this article
shall not apply to ordinary commercial shipments made in the ordinary course of trade,
but only to other shipments where the character or condition of the property to be
carried or the circumstances, terms, and conditions under which the carriage is to be
performed are such as reasonably to justify a special agreement.
ARTICLE 7
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a carrier or a shipper from entering into any
agreement, stipulation, condition, reservation, or exemption as to the responsibility and
liability of the carrier or the ship for the loss or damage to, or in connection with, the
custody and care and handling of goods prior to the loading on, and subsequent to the
discharge from, the ship on which the goods are carried by sea.

ARTICLE 8
The provisions of this convention shall not affect the rights and obligations of the
carrier under any statute for the time being in force relating to the limitation of the
liability of owners of seagoing vessels.
ARTICLE 9
The monetary units mentioned in this convention are to be taken to be gold value.
Those contracting states in which the pound sterling is not a monetary unit reserve to
themselves the right of translating the sums indicated in this convention in terms of
pound sterling into terms of their own monetary system in round figures.
The national laws may reserve to the debtor the right of discharging his debt in national
currency according to the rate of exchange prevailing on the day of the arrival of the
ship at the port of discharge of the goods concerned.
ARTICLE 10

The provisions of this convention shall apply to all bills of lading issued in any of the
contracting States.
ARTICLE 11
After an interval of not more than two years from the day on which the convention is
signed, the Belgian Government shall place itself in communication with the
governments of the high contracting parties which have declared themselves prepared
to ratify the convention, with a view to deciding whether it shall be put into force. The
ratifications shall be deposited at Brussels at a date to be fixed by agreement among the
said governments. The first deposit of ratifications shall be recorded in a procès-verbal
signed by the representatives of the powers which take part therein and by the Belgian
Minister for Foreign Affairs.
The subsequent deposits of ratifications shall be made by means of a written
notification, addressed to the Belgian Government and accompanied by the instrument
of ratification.
A duly certified copy of the procès-verbal relating to the first deposit of ratifications, of
the notifications referred to in the previous paragraph, and also of the instruments of
ratification accompanying them, shall be immediately sent by the Belgian Government
through the diplomatic channel to the powers who have signed this convention or who
have acceded to it. In the cases contemplated in the preceding paragraph the said
Government shall inform them at the same time of the date on which it received the
notification.

ARTICLE 12
Nonsignatory States may accede to the present convention whether or not they have
been represented at the International Conference at Brussels.
A State which desires to accede shall notify its intention in writing to the Belgian
Government, forwarding to it the document of accession, which shall be deposited in
the archives of the said Government.
The Belgian Government shall immediately forward to all the States which have signed
or acceded to the convention a duly certified copy of the notification and of the act of
accession, mentioning the date on which it received the notification.
ARTICLE 13

The high contracting parties may at the time of signature, ratification, or accession
declare that their acceptance of the present convention does not include any or all of the
self-governing dominions, or of the colonies, overseas possessions, protectorates, or
territories under their sovereignty or authority, and they may subsequently accede
separately on behalf of any self-governing dominion, colony, overseas possession,
protectorate, or territory excluded in their declaration. They may also denounce the
convention separately in accordance with its provisions in respect of any self-governing
dominion, or any colony, overseas possession, protectorate, or territory under their
sovereignty or authority.
ARTICLE 14
The present convention shall take effect, in the case of the States which have taken part
in the first deposit of ratifications, one year after the date of the procès-verbal recording
such deposit. As respects the States which ratify subsequently or which accede, and
also in cases in which the convention is subsequently put into effect in accordance with
Article 13, it shall take effect six months after the notifications specified in paragraph 2
Government.
ARTICLE 15
In the event of one of the contracting States wishing to denounce the present
convention, the denunciation shall be notified in writing to the Belgian Government,
which shall immediately communicate a duly certified copy of the notification to all the
other States informing them of the date on which it was received.
The denunciation shall only operate in respect of the State which made the notification,
and on the expiry of one year after the notification has reached the Belgian
Government.

ARTICLE 16
Any one of the contracting States shall have the right to call for a fresh conference with
a view to considering possible amendments.
A State which would exercise this right should notify its intention to the other States
through the Belgian Government, which would make arrangements for convening the
conference.
Done at Brussels, in a single copy, August 25, 1924.

For Germany:
KELLER.
For the Argentine Republic:
For Belgium:
LOUIS FRANCK.
ALBERT LE JEUNE.
SOHR.
For Chile:
ARMANDO QUEZADA.
For the Republic of Cuba:
For Denmark:
For Spain:
The Marquis of VILLALOBAR.
For Estonia:
PUSTA.
For the United States of America:
WILLIAM PHILLIPS.
For Finland:
For France:
MAURICE HERBETTE.
For Great Britain:
GEORGE GRAHAME.
For Hungary:

WORACZICZKY.
For Italy:
GIULIO DANEO.
For Japan:
M. ADATCI.
Subject to the reservations formulated in the note relative to this treaty and
appended to my letter dated August 25, 1925, to His Excellency Mr. Emile
Vandervelde, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium.
For Latvia:
For Mexico:
For Norway:
For the Netherlands:
For Peru:
For Poland and the Free City of Danzig:
SZEMBEK.
For Portugal:
For Rumania:
HENRY CATARGI.
For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes:
Dr. MILORAD STRAZNICKT.
Dr. VERONA.
For Sweden:
For Uruguay:
PROTOCOL OF SIGNATURE

In proceeding to the signature of the international convention for the unification of
certain rules relating to bills of lading, the undersigned plenipotentiaries have adopted
the present protocol which will have the same validity as if the provisions thereof were
inserted in the very text of the convention to which it refers.
The high contracting parties may give effect to this convention either by giving it the
force of law or by including in their national legislation in a form appropriate to that
legislation, the rules adopted under this convention.
They may reserve the right:
1. To prescribe that in the cases referred to in paragraph 2 (c) to (p) of Article
4, the holder of a bill of lading shall be entitled to establish responsibility for
loss or damage arising from the personal fault of the carrier or the fault of his
servants which are not covered by paragraph (a);
2. To apply Article 6 insofar as the national coasting trade is concerned to all
classes of goods without taking account of the restriction set out in the last
paragraph of that article.
Done at Brussels, in a single copy, August 25, 1924.
For Germany:
KELLER.
For the Argentine Republic:
For Belgium:
LOUIS FRANCK.
ALBERT LE JEUNE.
SOHR.
For Chile:
ARMANDO QUEZADA.
For the Republic of Cuba:
For Denmark:
For Spain:

The Marquis of VILLALOBAR.
For Estonia:
PUSTA.
For the United States of America:
WILLIAM PHILLIPS.
For Finland:
For France:
MAURICE HERBETTE.
For Great Britain:
GEORGE GRAHAME.
In proceeding to the signature of the present Convention, His Excellency
made, in the name of his Government, the declaration of which the terms are
reproduced in an annex to the present Procés-Verbal.
For Hungary:
WORACZICZKY.
For Italy:
GIULIO DANEO.
For Japan:
For Latvia:
For Mexico:
For Norway:
For the Netherlands:
For Peru:
For Poland and the Free City of Danzig:

SZEMBEK.
For Portugal:
For Rumania:
HENRY CATARGI.
For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes:
Dr. MILORAD STRAZNICKY.
Dr. VERONA.
For Sweden:
For Uruguay:
[Annex 1]
I, the Undersigned, His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador at Brussels, on affixing my
signature to the Protocol of Signature of the International Convention for the
unification of certain rules relating to Bills of Lading, on this 15th day of November
1924, hereby make the following declarations by direction of my Government: I
declare that His Britannic Majesty’s Government adopt the last reservation in the
additional Protocol of the Bills of Lading Convention.
I further declare that my signature applies only to Great Britain and Northern Ireland. I
reserve the right of each of the British Dominions, Colonies, Overseas Possessions and
Protectorates, and of each of the territories over which His Britannic Majesty exercises
a mandate to accede to this Convention under Article 13.
GEORGE GRAHAME
His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador at Brussels
BRUSSELS, this 15th day of November 1924.
[Annex 2]
IMPERIAL EMBASSY OF JAPAN
NOTE ANNEXED TO THE LETTER OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE AMBASSADOR OF JAPAN TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF BELGIUM, ON AUGUST 25, 1925
At the moment of proceeding to the signature of the International Convention for the
unification of certain rules relating to Bills of Lading, the undersigned, Plenipotentiary

of Japan, makes the following reservations:
a) To Article 4:
Japan reserves to itself until further notice the acceptance of the provisions in
(a) of paragraph 2 of Article 4.
b) Japan is of the opinion that the Convention does not in any part apply to
national coasting trade: consequently, there should be no occasion to make it
the object of provisions in the Protocol. However, if it be not so, Japan
reserves to itself the right freely to regulate the national coasting trade by its
own law.
M. ADATCI
BRUSSELS, August 25, 1925.
advised by the Senate, May 6, 1937, subject to the following two understandings:
paragraph of Article 9 of the convention, neither the carrier nor the ship shall
in any event be or become liable within the jurisdiction of the United States
of America for any loss or damage to or in connection with goods in an
amount exceeding $500.00, lawful money of the United States of America,
per package or unit unless the nature and value of such goods have been
declared by the shipper before shipment and inserted in the bill of lading.”
2. “That should any conflict arise between the provisions of the convention
and the provisions of the Act of April 16, 1936, known as the ‘Carriage of
Goods by Sea Act’, the provisions of said Act shall prevail.”;
understandings, May 26, 1937; ratification of the United States deposited at Brussels,

Convention between the United States and
other powers for the protection of industrial
property, signed November 6, 1925
[191] The Netherlands Minister (De Graeff) to the Secretary of State
Washington, January 7, 1925.
[192] The Secretary of State to the Netherlands Minister (De Graeff)
Washington, March 3, 1925.
[193] Convention Between the United States and Other Powers for the Protection
of Industrial Property, Signed at The Hague, November 6, 1925
Done at The Hague, in a single copy, the 6th day of November, 1925.
Treaty Series No. 834

[Document 191]
The Netherlands Minister (De Graeff) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, January 7, 1925.
No. 3474
SIR: The next Conference of the “Union Internationale pour la Protection de la Propriété
Industrielle” which will be held this year at The Hague, according to a communication
of the “Bureau voor den Industrieelen Eigendom” (Netherland Patent Office), which is
making the preparatory arrangements for its reunion in cooperation with the Bureau
Internationale pour la Protection de la Propriété Industrielle at Berne, is expected to be
opened on October 8, 1925.
In view of the foregoing I have pursuant to instructions I received from the Minister of
Foreign Affairs at The Hague the honor to extend in the name of my Government a
cordial invitation to the Government of the United States of America to be officially
represented at the said Conference.
I add that the Bureau Internationale pour la Protection de la Propriété Industrielle will
soon send to the Federal Government the program of the items to be discussed.
Moreover, this Bureau will forward to the United States Patent Office the complete
collection of preparatory documents concerning this Conference.
Expressing the hope that I may have the pleasure of learning in due course of the
acceptance of the aforesaid invitation by the Federal Government I should be thankful
to be informed at the same time of the names of the delegates who will represent the
United States at the Conference.
Please accept [etc.]
DE GRAEFF

[Document 192]
The Secretary of State to the Netherlands Minister (De Graeff)
WASHINGTON, March 3, 1925.
SIR: Referring to your note of January 7, 1925, extending, in the name of your
Government, an invitation to the Government of the United States to be officially
represented at the International Conference for the Protection of Industrial Property
which is expected to be opened at The Hague on October 8th next, I have the honor to
inform you that the Government of the United States accepts the invitation with
pleasure, and that the Commissioner of Patents, Mr. Thomas E. Robertson, Mr. Wallace
Lane, formerly President of the American Patent Law Association, of Chicago, and Mr.
Jo. Bailey Brown, of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, who is a member of a committee
appointed by the Secretary of the Interior to make a study of the Patent Office and
patent laws, have been appointed to be delegates on the part of the United States to the
Conference.
Accept [etc.]
CHARLES E. HUGHES
[For the proceedings of the Conference, see Union internationale pour la protection de
la propriété industrielle, 1925, Actes de la Conference réunie à La Haye du 8 octobre

Treaty Series No. 834
[Document 193]
Convention Between the United States and Other Powers for the Protection
of Industrial Property, Signed at The Hague, November 6, 192595
[Translation]
The President of the German Reich; the President of the Republic of Austria; His
Majesty the King of the Belgians; the President of the United States of Brazil; the
President of the Republic of Cuba; His Majesty the King of Denmark; the President of
the Dominican Republic; His Majesty the King of Spain; the President of the Republic
of Estonia; the President of the United States of America; the President of the Republic
of Finland; the President of the French Republic; His Majesty the King of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas,
Emperor of India; His Serene Highness the Governor of Hungary; His Majesty the
King of Italy; His Majesty the Emperor of Japan; His Majesty the Sultan of Morocco;
the President of the United Mexican States; His Majesty the King of Norway; Her
Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands; the President of the Polish Republic, in the
name of Poland and the Free City of Danzig; the President of the Portuguese Republic;
His Majesty the King of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes; His Majesty the King of
Sweden; the Federal Council of the Swiss Confederation; the States of Syria and
Greater Lebanon; the President of the Czechoslovak Republic; His Highness the Bey of
Tunis; the President of the Turkish Republic, Having deemed it expedient to make
certain modifications and additions in the international convention of March 20,
1883,96 for the creation of an international union for the protection of industrial
1911,98 have appointed as their plenipotentiaries, to wit:
The President of the German Reich:
Mr. W. F. von Vietinghoff, Counselor of the German Legation at
The Hague;
Mr. von Specht, Privy Councilor, President of the Patent Office;
Mr. Klauer, Ministerial Councilor at the Ministry of Justice;
Prof. Dr. Albert Osterrieth, Counselor of Justice;
The President of the Republic of Austria:

Dr. Carl Duschanek, Ministerial Councilor, Vice President of the
Austrian Patent Office;
Dr. Hans Fortwängler, Ministerial Councilor at that Office;
His Majesty the King of the Belgians:
Mr. Octave Mavaut, Director General of Industry at the Ministry of
Industry, Labor, and Social Service;
Mr. Albert Capitame, Advocate at the Liége Court of Appeal,
former President of the Bar, Belgian Delegate at the Washington
Conference;
Mr. Louis André, Advocate at the Brussels Court of Appeal;
Mr. Thomas Braun, Advocate at the Brussels Court of Appeal;
Mr. Daniel Coppieters, Advocate at the Brussels Court of Appeal;
The President of the United States of Brazil:
Dr. Julio Augusto Barboza Carneiro, Member of the Economic
Committee of the League of Nations;
Prof. Dr. Carlos Americo Barbosa de Oliveira, Professor at the
Polytechnic School, Director of the Wenceslau Braz Normal
School of Arts and Crafts;
The President of the Republic of Cuba:
Dr. Raphael Martinez Ortiz, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of Cuba at Paris;
Dr. Raphael de la Torre, Chargé d’Affaires of Cuba at The Hague;
His Majesty the King of Denmark:
Dr. N. J. Ehrenreich Hansen, Assistant Bureau Chief at the Ministry
of Industry, Commerce, and Navigation;
The President of the Dominican Republic:
Mr. C. G. de Haseth Cz., Consul of the Dominican Republic at The
Hague;

His Majesty the King of Spain:
His
Excellency
Mr.
Santiago
Mendez
de Vigo,
Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of His Majesty the
King of Spain at The Hague:
Mr. Fernando Cabello y Lapiedra, Chief of the Spanish Bureau of
Industrial and Commercial Property;
Mr. José Garcia-Monge y de Vera, Secretary of the Spanish Bureau
of Industrial and Commercial Property;
The President of the Republic of Estonia:
Mr. O. Aarmann, Engineer, Director of the Patent Office;
The President of the United States of America:
Mr. Thomas E. Robertson, Commissioner of Patents, Member of
the Bar of the Supreme Court of the United States;
Mr. Wallace R. Lane, former President of the American and
Chicago Patent Law Associations, Member of the Bar of the
Supreme Court of the United States and the Supreme Court of
Illinois;
Mr. Jo. Baily Brown, Pittsburgh, Member of the Bar of the
Supreme Court of the United States and the Supreme Court of
Pennsylvania;
The President of the Republic of Finland:
Mr. Yrjö Saastamoinen, Chargé d’Affaires of Finland at The
Hague;
The President of the French Republic:
His Excellency Mr. Chassain de Marcilly, Envoy Extraordinary and
Minister Plenipotentiary of France at The Hague;
Mr. Marcel Plaisant, Deputy, Advocate at the Paris Court of
Appeal;
Mr. Charles Drouets, Director of Industrial Property at the Ministry
of Commerce;

Mr. Georges Maillard, Advocate at the Paris Court of Appeal, Vice
President of the Technical Committee on Industrial Property;
His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India:
For Great Britain and Northern Ireland:
Sir Hubert Llewellyn Smith, G.C.B., Chief Economic
Adviser to His Britannic Majesty’s Government;
Mr. Alfred James Martin, O.B.E., Assistant Comptroller
of the Patent Office and Industrial Property Department
of the Board of Trade;
Sir Arthur Balfour, K.B.E., One of His Majesty’s Justices
of the Peace; Chairman of the Committee on Trade and
Industry;
For the Dominion of Canada:
Mr.
Frederick
Herbert
Palmer,
M.C.,
Canadian
Government Trade Commissioner;
For the Commonwealth of Australia:
Lieut. Col. Charles Vincent Watson, D.S.O., V. D.,
Commissioner of Patents and Registrar of Trade Marks
and Designs;
For the Irish Free State:
Count Gerald O’Kelly de Gallagh, Representative of the
Irish Free State;
His Serene Highness the Governor of Hungary:
Mr. Elémer de Pompéry, President of the Court of Patents;
His Majesty the King of Italy:
Mr. Domenico Barone, Councilor of State;
Mr. Gustavo de Sanctis, Director of the Bureau of Industrial
Property;

Mr. Letterio Laboccetta, Engineer;
Mr. Gino Olivetti, Deputy, Secretary General of the Confederation
of Italian Industry;
Prof. Mario Ghiron, Professor of Industrial Law at the University
of Rome;
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan:
Mr. Saichiro Sakikawa, President of the Patent Office;
Mr. Nobumi Ito;
His Majesty the Sultan of Morocco:
His Excellency Mr. Chassain de Marcilly, Envoy Extraordinary and
Minister Plenipotentiary of France at The Hague;
The President of the United Mexican States:
Mr. Julio Poulat, Commercial Attaché to the Mexican Legation at
Paris;
His Majesty the King of Norway:
Mr. Birger Gabriel Wyller, Director General of the Norwegian
Bureau of Industrial Property;
Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands:
Dr. J. Alingh Prins, President of the Council for Patents, Director of
the Office of Industrial Property;
Dr. H. Bijleveld, former Minister, Member of the Chamber of
Deputies, former President of the Council for Patents, former
Director of the Office of Industrial Property;
Dr. J. W. Dijckmeester, Member of the Council for Patents;
The President of the Polish Republic:
For Poland:

His Excellency Dr. Stanislas Koźmiński, Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Poland at
The Hague;
Dr. Frédéric Zoll, Professor at the University of Cracow;
For the Free City of Danzig:
His Excellency Dr. Stanislas Koźmiński, Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Poland at
The Hague;
The President of the Portuguese Republic:
His Excellency Mr. A. C. De Sousa Santos Bandeira, Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Portugal at The
Hague;
His Majesty the King of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes:
Dr. Yanko Choumane, President of the Office for the Protection of
Industrial Property at the Ministry of Commerce and Industry;
Mr. Mihailo Preditch, Secretary of that Office;
His Majesty the King of Sweden:
Director General E. O. J. Björklund, Chief of the Administration of
Patents and Registration;
Mr. K. H. R. Hjertén, Counselor of the Court of Appeal of Göta;
Mr. A. E. Hasselrot, former Bureau Director at the above
Administration, Adviser in matters of industrial property;
The Federal Council of the Swiss Confederation:
His Excellency Mr. Arthur de Pury, Envoy Extraordinary and
Minister Plenipotentiary of Switzerland at The Hague;
Mr. Walther Kraft, Director of the Federal Bureau of Intellectual
Property;
The President of the French Republic:

For the States of Syria and Greater Lebanon:
His Excellency Mr. Chassain de Marcilly, Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of France at
The Hague;
The President of the Czechoslovak Republic:
His Excellency Mr. P. Baráček, Engineer, Envoy Extraordinary and
Minister Plenipotentiary of Czechoslovakia at The Hague;
Dr. Karel Hermann-Otavský, Professor at the University of Prague;
Mr. Bohuslav Pavlousek, Engineer, Vice President of the Patent
Office at Prague;
His Highness the Bey of Tunis:
His Excellency Mr. Chassain de Marcilly, Envoy Extraordinary and
Minister Plenipotentiary of France at The Hague;
The President of the Turkish Republic:
Mehmed Essad Bey, Chargé d’Aifaires of Turkey at The Hague.
Who, having communicated to each other their respective full powers, which were
found to be in good and due form, have agreed upon the following articles: ARTICLE 1
The contracting countries constitute themselves into a union for the protection of
industrial property.

The scope of the protection of industrial property includes patents, utility models,
industrial designs and models, trade-marks, commercial names and indications of
origin, or appellations of origin, as well as the repression of unfair competition.
Industrial property is to be understood in the broadest meaning and is to be applied not
only to industry and commerce as such, but likewise to agricultural industries (wines,
grain, tobacco leaves, fruit, cattle, etc.) and extractive industries (minerals, mineral
waters, etc.).
The term “patents” includes the various types of industrial patents granted by the laws
of the contracting countries, such as patents of importation, improvement patents,
patents and certificates of addition, etc.

ARTICLE 2
Nationals of each of the contracting countries shall, in all other countries of the Union,
as regards the protection of industrial property, enjoy the advantages that their
respective laws now grant, or may hereafter grant, to their own nationals, without any
prejudice of the rights specially provided by the present convention. Consequently they
shall have the same protection as the latter, and the same legal remedy against any
infringement of their rights, provided they observe the conditions and formalities
imposed on subjects or citizens.
Nevertheless no condition as to the possession of a domicile or establishment in the
country where protection is claimed can be required of those who enjoy the benefits of
the Union for the enjoyment of any industrial-property rights.
The provisions of the legislation of each of the contracting countries relative to judicial
and administrative proceedings and to competent authority, as well as to the choice of
domicile or the appointment of an authorized agent, which may be required by the laws
on industrial property are expressly reserved.
ARTICLE 3
Nationals of countries not forming part of the Union who are domiciled or who have
real and effective industrial or commercial establishments in the territory of any of the
countries of the Union, shall be assimilated to the nationals of the contracting countries.
ARTICLE 4
(a) Any person who has duly applied for a patent, the registration of a utility model,
industrial design or model, or trade-mark in one of the contracting countries, or his
legal representative or assignee, shall enjoy, subject to the rights of third parties, for the
purposes of registration in other countries, a right of priority during the periods
hereinafter stated.
(b) Consequently, subsequent filing in any of the other countries of the Union before
the expiration of these periods shall not be invalidated through any acts accomplished
in the interval, either, particularly, by another filing, by publication of the invention, or
by the working of it, by the sale of copies of the design or model, or by use of the
trade-mark.
(c) The above-mentioned periods of priority shall be twelve months for patents and
utility models, and six months for industrial designs and models and trade-marks.
These periods shall start from the date of filing of the first application in a country of
the Union; the day of filing is not counted in this period.

If the last day of the period is a dies non in the country where protection is claimed, the
period shall be extended until the next working day.
(d) Any person desiring to take advantage of the priority of a previous application must
make a declaration giving particulars as to the date of such application and the country
in which it was made. Each country will determine for itself the latest date at which
such declaration must be made.
The particulars referred to shall be stated in the publications issued by the competent
authority, and in particular in the patents issued and the specifications relating thereto.
The contracting countries may require any person making a declaration of priority to
produce a copy of the application (with the specification, drawings, etc.) previously
made. The copy, certified as correct by the authority receiving this demand, shall not
require any legal authentication, and in any circumstances can be filed at any time
within the period of three months from the lodging of the last application. They may
also require that the declaration shall be accompanied by a certificate by the proper
authority showing the date of application, and also by a translation.
No other formalities may be required for the declaration of priority at the time of
application. Each of the contracting countries shall decide for itself what consequences
shall follow the omission of the formalities prescribed by the present article, but such
consequence shall in no case be more serious than the loss of the right of priority.
At later stages, further proof in support of the application may be required.
(e) Where an application is filed in a country for the registration of an industrial design
or model by virtue of a right of priority based on the registration of a utility model, the
period of priority shall not exceed that fixed for industrial designs and models.
Furthermore, it is allowable to deposit in a country a utility model by virtue of rights of
priority based on a patent application, and vice versa.
(f)If an application for a patent contains claims for multiple priority, or if examination
discloses that the application contains more than one invention, the competent
authorities must at least allow the applicant to divide it, subject to the conditions of
internal legislation,! reserving as date of each divisional application the date of the
initial application and, if there is occasion for it, the benefits of the right of priority.
ARTICLE 4 BIS
Patents applied for in the various contracting countries by nationals of the Union shall
be independent of the patents obtained for the same invention in other countries,
whether such countries be or be not parties to the Union.

This stipulation must receive a strict interpretation; in particular, it shall be understood
to mean that patents applied for during the period of priority are independent, both as
regards the grounds for refusal and for revocation, and also as regards their normal
duration.
This stipulation shall apply to all patents already existing at the time when it shall come
into effect.
The same stipulation shall apply, in the case of the accession of new countries, to
patents in existence, either on one side or the other, at the time of accession.
ARTICLE 5
The introduction by the patentee into the country where the patent has been granted of
objects manufactured in any of the countries of the Union shall not entail forfeiture.
Nevertheless, each of the contracting countries shall have the right to take the
necessary legislative measures to prevent the abuses which might result from the
exercise of the exclusive rights conferred by the patent; for example, failure to use.
These measures will only provide for the revocation of the patent if the granting of
compulsory licenses shall not suffice to prevent such abuses.
In all cases the patent will not be subject to such measures before the expiration of at
least three years from the date of its grant and if the patentee produces just excuses.

The protection of designs and industrial models cannot be liable to cancellation by
reason of the introduction of objects corresponding to those protected.
Articles shall not be required to bear any indication of registration for recognition of
this right.
If in a country the use of a registered trade-mark is compulsory, the registration cannot
be canceled until after a reasonable period, and only then if those interested cannot
justify the causes of their inaction.
ARTICLE 5 BIS
A period of grace of at least three months will be granted for the payment of taxes
prescribed for the maintenance of industrial-property rights, together with a surcharge
if the internal legislation of a country so provides.

For patents of invention the contracting countries undertake moreover either to prolong
that extended period to six months at least, or to provide for the restoration of a patent
which has lapsed owing to the nonpayment of fees, it being understood that these
provisions are subject to the conditions prescribed by internal legislation.
ARTICLE 5 TER
In each of the contracting countries the following shall not be considered as infringing
the rights of the patentee:
(1) The use on board ships of other countries of the Union of anything the
subject matter of his patent in the body of the ship, in the machinery, tackle,
apparatus, and other accessories when such ships enter temporarily or
accidentally the waters of the country, provided that such thing is employed
there exclusively for the needs of the vessel.
(2) The use of anything the subject matter of the patent in the construction of
or functioning of the engines of locomotion for air or land of the other
countries of the Union, or of the accessories of these engines, when these
enter the country temporarily or accidentally.
ARTICLE 6
Every trade-mark duly registered in the country of origin shall be admitted for
registration and protected in the form originally registered in the other countries of the
Union.
Nevertheless, the following marks may be refused or canceled: (1) Those which are of
such a nature as to prejudice rights acquired by third parties in the country in which
protection is applied for.

(2) Those which have no distinctive character, or which consist exclusively of signs or
indications which serve in trade to designate the kind, quality, quantity, destination,
value, place of origin, or date of production, or which have become customary in the
current language, or in the bona fide and unquestioned usages of the trade of the
country in which protection is sought.
In arriving at a decision as to the distinctiveness of the character of a mark, all the
circumstances of the case must be taken into account, and in particular the length of
time that such a mark has been in use.
(3) Those which are contrary to morality or public order.

It is to be understood that a mark cannot be considered as contrary to public order for
the sole reason that it does not conform to some legislative requirement concerning
trade-marks, except in circumstances where this requirement itself relates to public
order.
The following shall be deemed the country of origin:
The country of the Union where the applicant has an actual and genuine industrial or
commercial establishment; and if he has not such an establishment, the country of the
Union where he has his domicile; and if he has not a domicile in the Union, the country
of his nationality in the” case where he is under the jurisdiction of a country of the
Union.
In no case shall the renewal of the registration of a trade-mark in the country of origin
involve the obligation of renewal of the registration of the mark in other countries of
the Union in which the mark has been registered.
The benefits of priority shall subsist in trade-mark applications filed in the period
allowed by article 4, even when the registration in the country of origin is only
completed after the expiration of such period.
The provisions of paragraph 1 do not preclude the right of requiring from an applicant a
certificate, in due form, as to the registration of his mark, issued by the competent
authority of the country of origin, but no legal authentication of such certificate shall be
required.
ARTICLE 6 BIS
The contracting countries undertake to refuse or invalidate, either administratively if
their legislation so permits, or at the request of an interested party, the registration of a
trade-mark which constitutes a reproduction or imitation liable to create confusion with
a trade-mark considered by the competent authority of the country of registration to be
well known there as being already a mark of a national of another contracting country
and used for products of the same or a similar kind.

A period of at least three years must be granted in order to claim the cancellation of
these marks. The period shall start from the date of registration of the mark.
No period shall be established to claim the cancellation of fraudulently registered
marks.
ARTICLE 6 TER

The contracting countries undertake to refuse or invalidate registration, and to prohibit
by appropriate means the use, failing authorization from the competent authority,
whether as trade-mark or as components of such, of all coats of arms, flags, and other
state emblems of contracting countries, official control and guarantee signs and stamps
adopted by them, and all imitation from an heraldic point of view.
The prohibition of official control and guarantee signs and stamps shall apply only in
cases where marks which comprise them are intended to be used on merchandise of the
same or a similar nature.
For the application of these provisions the contracting countries agree to communicate
reciprocally, through the intermediary of the International Bureau of Berne, the list of
state emblems and official control and guarantee signs and stamps which they desire, or
will desire, to place, wholly or with certain reservations, under the protection of the
present article, as well as all subsequent modifications added to the list. Each
contracting country shall place the communicated list at the disposal of the public in
due course.
Each contracting country may, within a period of twelve months from the receipt of the
notification, and through the intermediary of the International Bureau of Berne,
transmit its possible objections to any other country concerned.
For state emblems which are well known the provisions of paragraph 1 shall be
applicable only to marks registered after the signature of this convention.
For state emblems which are not well known, and for official signs and stamps, these
provisions shall be applicable only to marks registered more than two months after the
receipt of the notification provided for in paragraph 3.
In the case of bad faith, countries shall have the right to cancel even the marks
registered before the signature of the present convention and embodying state
emblems, signs, and stamps.
Nationals of each country who are authorized to make use of state emblems, and signs
and stamps of their country, may use them even if there be a similarity with those of
another country.
The contracting countries undertake to prohibit the unauthorized use in trade of state
coats of arms of other contracting countries when such use would be liable to cause
confusion as to the origin of the product.
The preceding provisions will not prevent the countries’ exercising the right to refuse

containing without authority coats of arms, flags, decorations, and other state emblems
or official signs and stamps adopted by a country of the Union.
ARTICLE 7
The nature of the goods on which the trade-mark is to be used can in no case form an
obstacle to the registration of the trade-mark.
ARTICLE 7 BIS
The contracting countries undertake to allow the filing of, and to protect, trade-marks
belonging to associations the existence of which is not contrary to the law of the
country of origin, even if such associations do not possess an industrial or commercial
establishment.
Nevertheless, each country shall be the sole judge of the particular conditions on which
an association may be allowed to obtain protection for its marks.
ARTICLE 8
A trade name shall be protected in all the countries of the Union without the obligation
of filing or registration, whether or not it form part of a trade-mark.
ARTICLE 9
All goods illegally bearing a trade-mark or trade name shall be seized on importation
into those countries of the Union where this mark or name has a right to legal
protection.
Seizure shall be effected equally in the country where the mark or name was illegally
applied, or in the country to which the article bearing it has been imported.
The seizure shall take place at the request either of the proper Government department
or of any other competent authority, or of any interested party or actual or legal person,
in conformity with the domestic law of each country.
The authorities are not bound to effect the seizure in transit.
If the law of a country does not admit of seizure on importation, such seizure shall be
replaced by prohibition of importation or by seizure within such country.
If the law of any country does not admit either of seizure upon importation, or of
prohibition of importation, or of seizure within the country, and until such time as this

legislation shall be accordingly modified, these measures will be replaced by the
remedies assured in such cases to nationals by the law of such country.
ARTICLE 10
The stipulations of the preceding article shall be applicable to every product which may
falsely bear as indication of origin the name of a specified locality or country when
such indication shall be joined to a trade name of a fictitious character or used with the
intent to defraud.
Any producer, manufacturer, or trader engaged in the production, manufacture, or trade
of such goods and established either in the locality falsely designated as the place of
origin, or in the district where the locality is situated, or in the country falsely
designated, shall be deemed in all cases a party concerned, whether such person be
actual or legal.
ARTICLE 10 BIS
The contracting countries are bound to assure to nationals of the Union an effective
protection against unfair competition.
Every act of competition contrary to honest practice in industrial or commercial matters
constitutes an act of unfair competition.
The following particularly are to be forbidden:
(1) All acts whatsoever of a nature to create confusion by no matter what
means with the goods of a competitor.
(2) False allegations, in the course of trade, of a nature to discredit the goods
of a competitor.
ARTICLE 10 TER
The contracting countries undertake to assure to the nationals of other countries of the
Union appropriate legal remedies to repress effectively all acts set forth in articles 9,
10, and 10 bis.
They undertake, moreover, to provide measures to permit syndicates and associations
representing the industry or the trade interested, and of which the existence is not
contrary to the laws of their country, to take action in justice or before the
administrative authorities, in view of the repression of the acts set forth in articles 9,
10, and 10 bis, so far as the law of the country in which protection is claimed permits it
to the syndicates and associations of that country.

ARTICLE 11
The contracting countries shall, in conformity with the legislation of each country,
accord temporary protection to patentable inventions, to utility models, and to
industrial designs or models, as well as to trade-marks in respect of products which
shall be exhibited at official, or officially recognized, international exhibitions held in
the territory of one of them.
This temporary protection shall not prolong the periods provided by article 4. If later
the right of priority is sought, the competent authority of each country may date the
period from the date of the introduction of the product into the exhibition.
Each country may require, as proof of the identity of the object exhibited, and of the
date of the introduction, such proofs as it may consider necessary.
ARTICLE 12
Each of the contracting countries agrees to establish a special Government service for
industrial property, and a central office for communication to the public of patents,
utility models, industrial designs or models, and trade-marks.
This service shall publish an official periodical paper.
ARTICLE 13
The international office, established at Berne under the name of International Bureau
for the Protection of Industrial Property, is placed under the high authority of the
Government of the Swiss Confederation, which is to regulate its organization and
supervise its working.
The official language of the International Bureau is French.
The International Bureau centralizes information of every kind relating to the
protection of industrial property and collates and publishes it. It interests itself in all
matters of common utility to the Union and edits, with the help of documents supplied
to it by the various Administrations, a periodical paper in the French language, dealing
with questions regarding the object of the Union.
The numbers of this paper, as well as the documents published by the International
Bureau, are circulated among the Administrations of the countries of the Union in the
proportion of the number of contributing units as mentioned below. Such further copies
as may be desired, either by the said Administrations or by societies or private persons,
will be paid for separately.

The International Bureau shall at all times hold itself at the service of members of the
Union, in order to supply them with any special information they may need on
questions relating to the international system of industrial property. The Director of the
International Bureau will furnish an annual report on its working, which shall be
communicated to all the members of the Union.

The expenses of the International Bureau will be borne by the contracting countries in
common. Unless fresh sanction is given, they must not exceed the sum of 120,000
Swiss francs per annum. This sum may be increased in cases of necessity by a
unanimous decision of one of the conferences provided for by article 14.
To determine the part which each country should contribute to this total of expenses the
contracting countries and those which may afterwards join the Union shall be divided
into six classes, each contributing in the proportion of a certain number of units,
namely:
First class 25 units
Second
20
Third
15
Fourth
10
Fifth
5
Sixth
3
These coefficients will be multiplied by the number of countries in each class, and the
sum of the result thus obtained will supply the number of units by which the total
expense has to be divided. The quotient will give the amount of the unit of expense.
Each of the contracting countries will designate, at the time of its accession, the class in
which it wishes to be placed.
The Government of the Swiss Confederation is to superintend the expenses of the
International Bureau, to advance the necessary funds, and to render an annual account
which will be communicated to all the other Administrations.
ARTICLE 14
The present convention shall be submitted to periodical revisions with a view to the
introduction of amendments calculated to improve the system of the Union.
For this purpose, conferences shall be held successively in one of the contracting
countries between the delegates of the said countries.

The Administration of the country in which the conference is to be held will make
preparation for the transaction of that conference, with the assistance of the
International Bureau.
The Director of the International Bureau will be present at the meetings of the
conferences, and will take part in the discussions, but without the privilege of voting.
ARTICLE 15
It is agreed that the contracting countries respectively reserve to themselves the right to
make separately, as between themselves, special arrangements for the protection of
industrial property, in so far as such arrangements do not contravene the provisions of
the present convention.

ARTICLE 16
The countries which have not taken part in the present convention shall be permitted to
adhere to it upon their request.
The accession shall be notified through the diplomatic channel to the Government of
the Swiss Confederation, and by the latter to all the other Governments.
It shall entail, as a matter of right, accession to all the classes, as well as admission to
all the advantages, stipulated in the present convention, and shall take effect one month
after the dispatch of the notification by the Government of the Swiss Confederation to
the other countries of the Union, unless a subsequent date has been indicated by the
acceding country.
ARTICLE 16 BIS
The contracting countries have the right of acceding to the present convention at any
time on behalf of their colonies, possessions, dependencies, and protectorates, or
territories administrated by virtue of a mandate from the League of Nations, or any of
them.
For this purpose they may either make a general declaration, including all their
colonies, possessions, dependencies, and protectorates, and the territories referred to in
paragraph 1, in the accession, or may expressly name those included, or may confine
themselves to indicating those which are excluded therefrom.
This declaration shall be notified in writing to the Government of the Swiss
Confederation and by the latter to all the other Governments.

Under the same conditions, the contracting countries may denounce the convention on
behalf of their colonies, possessions, dependencies, and protectorates, or for the
territories referred to in paragraph 1, or for any of them.
ARTICLE 17
The execution of the reciprocal engagements contained in the present convention is
subordinated, in so far as necessary, to the observance of the formalities and rules
established by the constitutional laws of those of the contracting countries which are
bound to procure the application of the same, which they engage to do with as little
delay as possible.
ARTICLE 17 BIS
The convention shall remain in force for an unlimited time, till the expiration of one
year from the date of its denunciation.
This denunciation shall be addressed to the Government of the Swiss Confederation. It
shall affect only the denouncing country, the convention remaining in operation as
regards the other contracting countries.
ARTICLE 18
The present act shall be ratified and the ratifications deposited at The Hague not later
than the 1st of May, 1928. It shall come into force, between the countries which will
have ratified it, one month after such date. However, if before May 1, 1928, it should
be ratified by at least six countries, it will come into force between those countries one
month after the Government of the Swiss Confederation has notified them of the filing
of the sixth ratification, and for the countries which should subsequently ratify, one
month after the notification of each of these ratifications.
This act shall replace, as regards relations between the countries which ratify it, the
final protocol, which shall remain in force as regards relations with countries which
have not ratified the present act.
ARTICLE 19
The present act shall be signed in a single copy, which shall be deposited in the
archives of the Government of the Netherlands. A certified copy shall be forwarded by
the latter to each of the Governments of the contracting countries.
In witness whereof, the respective plenipotentiaries have signed the present act.

Done at The Hague, in a single copy, the 6th day of November, 1925.
For Germany:
VIETINGHOFF
v. SPECHT
KLAUER
ALBERT OSTERRIETH
For Australia:
C. V. WATSON
For Austria:
Dr. CARL DUSCHANEK
Dr. HANS FORTWÄNGLER
For Belgium:
CAPITAINE
LOUIS ANDRÉ
THOMAS BRAUN
D. COPPIETERS
For the United States of Brazil:
J. A. BARBOZA CARNEIRO
CARLOS AMERICO BARBOSA DE OLIVEIRA
For Canada:
FREDERICK H. PALMER
For Cuba:
R. DE LA TORRE
For Denmark:
N. J. EHRENREICH HANSEN
For the Free City of Danzig:
ST. KOŹMIŃSKI
For the Dominican Republic:
C. G. DE HASETH CZ.
For Spain:
SANTIAGO MENDEZ DE VIGO
FERNANDO CABELLO LAPIEDRA
JOSÉ GARCIA MONGE
For Estonia:
O. AARMANN
For the United States of America:
THOMAS E. ROBERTSON
WALLACE R. LANE
JO. BAILY BROWN
For Finland:
YRJÖ SAASTAMOINEN
For France:
CH. DE MARCILLY
MARCEL PLAISANT
CH. DROUETS
GEORGES MAILLARD
For Great Britain and Northern Ireland:
H. LLEWELLYN SMITH
A. J. MARTIN
A. BALFOUR
For Hungary:
ELEMÉR DE POMPÉRY
For the Irish Free State:
G. O’KELLY DE GALLAGH

For Italy:
DOMENICO BARONE
LETTERIO LABOCCETTA
MARIO GHIRON
For Japan:
S. SAKIKAWA
N. ITO
For Morocco:
CH. DE MARCILLY
For the United Mexican States:
JULIO POULAT
For Norway:
B. WYLLER
For the Netherlands:
J. ALINGH PRINS
BIJLEVELD
DIJCKMEESTER
For Poland:
ST. KOŹMIŃSKI
FRÉDÉRIC ZOLL
For Portugal:
BANDEIRA
For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes: Dr. YANKO CHOUMANE
MIHAILO PRÉDITCH
For Sweden:
E. O. J. BJÖRKLUND
H. HJERTÉN
AXEL HASSELROT
For Switzerland:
A. DE PURY
W. KRAFT
For Syria and Greater Lebanon:
CH. DE MARCILLY
For Czechoslovakia:
BARÁČEK
Prof. Dr. KAREL HERMANN-OTAVSKÝ
Engineer BOHUSLAV PAVLOUSEK
For Tunis:
CH. DE MARCILLY
For Turkey:
President, Dec. 27, 1930; ratification of the United States deposited with the
Government of the Swiss Confederation, Jan. 22, 1931; proclaimed by the President,

Acceptance by the United States of invitation
to attend the Third International Telegraph
Conference at Paris in 192599
99 The first international telegraph conference was held at St. Petersburg in 1875, the
second at Lisbon in 1908; see Documents de la Conférence Télégraphique
Internationale de Lisbonne (Berne, Bureau International de l’Union Télégraphique,
1909).
[194] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Daeschner)
Washington, July 17, 1925.
[195] The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Daeschner)
Washington, August 17, 1925.
[196] The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
Washington, August 23, 1925.

[Document 194]
The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Daeschner)
WASHINGTON, July 17, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note dated May 14,
1925,1 with which you were good enough to send me a memorandum setting forth a list
of the principal questions concerning wireless telegraphy that it is proposed to discuss
at the International Telegraph Conference at Paris beginning September 1, 1925. You
state that you are informed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of your Government that
these questions are set forth in a book published by the International Telegraph Bureau
at Berne1a and that a copy of it has been delivered to the Minister of the United States
to Switzerland for transmission to this Government. You inquire whether this
Government agrees not to call the International Radiotelegraph Conference1b until the
spring of 1926 and what the program of that Conference will be.
I have referred these matters to the other interested Departments of this Government for
their consideration and I now desire to set forth the considered views of this
Government regarding these subjects.
Conferences of parties to the International Telegraph Convention are held pursuant to
the provisions of Article 15 of the Telegraph Convention, which reads as follows:
“The Tariffs and Regulations provided for by Articles 10 and 13 are annexed
to the present Convention. They possess the same authority and come into
operation at the same time as the Convention.
“They will be subject to revisions, at which all adhering States will have the
right to be represented.
“With this object, Administrative Conferences will take place periodically,
each Conference fixing the time and place of the next meeting.”1c
The provision for conferences of parties to the International Radiotelegraph
Convention is found in Article 11 of that Convention, which reads in part as follows:
“… Conferences of plenipotentiaries having power to modify the Convention
and the Regulations, shall take place from time to time; each conference shall
fix the time and place of the next meeting.”2

It will be observed that the Telegraph Convention provides that the “Tariffs and
Regulations” shall be revised at the administrative conferences, whereas the
International Radiotelegraph Convention provides for the revision of the “Convention
and the Regulations”. It is, therefore, evident that it was intended that the periodic
conferences to revise the Radiotelegraph Convention and Regulations annexed to it
might add to the subjects which are dealt with in the present Convention.
The limitations upon the work of the Telegraph Conference were recognized by the
International Telegraph Bureau at Berne when it issued its circular telegram No. 99/12
dated July 12, 1924, requesting Governments to submit their proposals. This telegram
reads as follows:
“French Service reports that as unanimity could not be secured for meeting of
mixed conference about which the offices were told in Circular No. 744, of
June 12, 1922, the French Government invites countries in the Telegraphic
Union to an International Telegraphic Conference at Paris in the spring of
1925. The exact date of opening will be given later. The International Bureau,
therefore, begs the several services to kindly forward to it within four months
their propositions for that conference based exclusively on the telegraph
regulations now in force. Circular letter follows.” (Underscoring added.)

follows:
“… It now appears from a communication of the French Service, of the
eighth instant, that the French Government which had sought the consent of
the Governments interested, concerning the expediency of calling the earliest
possible Conference of electric communications, which was to revise the
telegraph and radio Conventions and Regulations now in force in Paris, was
unable, although the proposition was well received, to secure unanimous
consent.
“Under the circumstances it (The French Government) thought it best to
adhere to the decisions arrived at in the Telegraphic Conference of Lisbon in
1908, and to call the International Telegraphic Conference which should have
taken place in 1915 to a meeting in Paris in the spring of 1925.
“Therefore, the French Government instructed its diplomatic officers abroad
to invite the countries in the Telegraphic Union to send representatives to the
said Conference, the date of the opening of which will be later announced.

“By reason of that call, on the one hand, and in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph 11 of Article LXXXIV of the Lisbon Regulations on
the other hand, the International Bureau has the honor to beg you jointly with
the French Service, kindly to forward to it, up to and not later than November
15, next, the additions or modifications that your office would like to
introduce in the International Service Regulations (Revised at Lisbon) and
the tariffs now in force. (Underscoring added)3
“With a view to preventing any misunderstanding we lay stress on the fact
that the propositions to be brought before the Conference, through the
International Bureau, shall not, as stated in the circular above mentioned, No.
744, rest on documents already mailed to the Offices dealing with the drafts
worked out by the Preliminary Conference at Washington.”4
the fact that at the last conference of the Telegraphic Union held in Lisbon in 1908 it
was decided that the next Telegraph Conference would meet in Paris, and that at the
last conference of the parties to the International Radiotelegraph Convention, held in
London in 1912, it was agreed that the next International Radiotelegraph Conference
would be held at Washington. Mr. Jusserand then referred to the proposal that one
conference should be held to deal with all the problems concerning electrical
communications and stated that the French Government had caused the Governments
to be approached as to the expediency of calling as soon as possible a universal
conference on electrical communications in Paris but that, although the proposition was
generally well received, unanimous consent to it could not be obtained. Mr. Jusserand
stated that the French Government therefore believed that it was advisable to adhere to
the decisions of the conference at Lisbon in 1908 and of the Conference at London in
1912 and had instructed him to inform Mr. Hughes that France would be glad if the
United States would take part in the Conference of the Telegraphic Union which was
scheduled to meet in Paris in the spring of 1925. In the circumstances this Government
took the necessary steps with a view to holding the International Radiotelegraph
Conference at Washington and, on February 16, 1925, Mr. Hughes instructed the
American Ambassador at Paris6 to inquire whether some time in the autumn would be
agreeable to your Government for holding the Radiotelegraph Conference at
Washington in accordance with the decision reached at London in 1912. On February
26, 1925, Mr. Herrick conferred with a representative of the Foreign Office regarding
arrangements for the Radiotelegraphic Conference and he was then informed that the
Telegraph Conference had been postponed until September and that, as it was
understood that the purpose of the conference at Washington was the establishment of a
much broader convention, information was desired regarding the exact program of this
Government so that it could be studied. The Foreign Office expressed the opinion that,

in the circumstances, your Government would probably be prevented from being ready
to attend the Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington in the autumn.7 On March 4,
1925, the Congress of the United States passed an Act, which was approved by the
President, authorizing this Government to make provision for holding the International
Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington.8 Two copies of this Act of Congress are
enclosed for your information.
In your note dated March 23, 1925,9 you referred to the plan of this Government to call
the International Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington and suggested that, as the
date for the opening of the International Telegraph Conference had been postponed
until September 1, 1925, it would be advisable to postpone the date of the meeting of
the International Radiotelegraph Conference to the spring of 1926. In response to
the subjects which it was proposed to take up for discussion at the forthcoming
conference at Paris, you were good enough to refer me, in your note dated May 14,
1925,10 to the document issued by the International Telegraph Bureau at Berne and
stated that the five proposals listed in the enclosure with your note are set forth in the
document. Copies of the document, which consists of 437 printed pages of technical
matter, were received by the American Legation at Berne and forwarded to me on April
It seems that the Bureau considered it advisable to print all the statements for proposals
submitted by the various administrations, even though they did not relate to the
Telegraph Regulations or Tariffs. However, the fact that the International Telegraph
Bureau considered that these proposals were not subjects for action at the Telegraph
Conference is evidenced by the following statement on the title page of the Document:
according to instructions received from the French Government, solicited
from the offices of the Union, only motions concerning the international
service regulation (The Lisbon Revision), certain governments have sent in
motions referring to the Convention of St. Petersburg.”11
The International Telegraph Bureau also printed the following preliminary statement in
connection with Parts III and IV of the Document:
“Certain Administrations have proposed to incorporate in various articles of
the Regulations, provisions relating to the exchange of messages by radio.
Therefore, these suggestions appear in their respective places in this part of
the present Document. Certain other Administrations, however, have grouped

these new provisions and proposed to make Special Articles of them. These
new Articles have been printed in the IVth Part of this Document.”
As the circular telegram dated July 12, 1924, issued by the International Telegraph
Bureau at Berne, pointed out that the proposals to be submitted by the respective
administrations for consideration at the International Telegraph Conference at Paris
were to be “based exclusively on the telegraph regulations now in force” and as the
circular letter dated July 15, 1924, issued by the Bureau jointly with the French
Administration, requested the administrations to forward “the additions or
modifications that your office would like to introduce in the International Service
Regulations (Revised at Lisbon) and the tariffs now in force”, it is surprising to find
that the administrations concerned have submitted a large number of propositions
dealing with the regulation of communication by means of radio and that the Berne
Bureau printed these proposals relating to radio in the Document.
I feel that it is of great importance to emphasize the fact that, in determining what
subjects shall be discussed at the conferences, care should be exercised to have the
discussions limited to subjects that properly fall within the scope of the conference. At
present there are two wholly independent conventions, each dealing with a separate
general subject, first, the Telegraph Convention, dealing with communication by means
of wire, and, second, the Radiotelegraph Convention, dealing with communication by
means of radio. Since the Paris Conference is to be held first, I am strongly of the
opinion that it should not concern itself with subjects which properly would come
before the Radiotelegraph Conference to be held at Washington. And in as much as
your Government has agreed to the holding of the International Radiotelegraph
Conference at Washington, I have no doubt that your Government is of the same
opinion that radio matters should be taken up at the Washington Conference and that
the printing of these proposals relating to radio does not involve their consideration at
the Paris Conference.
From such examination as it has been possible to make of the Document issued by the
International Telegraph Bureau at Berne, it seems clear that if the Conference at Paris
takes up the consideration of all of the subject matter contained in the above mentioned
Document it will take into consideration a great many matters which, in fact, relate
only to the use of radio and, in so doing, will invade the field that should properly be
reserved for study and discussion at the Washington Conference. This observation
applies particularly to Part IV of the Document.
A study of the five questions which you submitted makes this fact clearer and, with the
exception of the fourth question, I beg to suggest that your Government should, in the
light of the foregoing comments, consider carefully the propriety of taking them up at
the Telegraph Conference at Paris.

The first proposal stated in the enclosure with your note is that the Paris Conference
consider the advisability of the use of high efficiency [speed] apparatus on
radiotelegraphic communications having a large business [considerable traffic]12 to
dispose of. Apparently this refers to the installation of automatic sending machines,
perforators, direct writers, printers and similar equipment in the large radio stations. If
this understanding is correct, it would appear that the installation of such apparatus is
purely a wireless telegraph matter for consideration at the Washington Conference and
having no direct connection, either as a matter of regulation or in its technical aspects,
with the revision of the Regulations annexed to the Telegraph Convention.
Similarly, with respect to the proposal that the Paris Conference discuss the question of
the fixing of radiotelegraph rates between fixed points, I wish to point out that
consideration of rates on messages handled between fixed points by radiotelegraph
would not fall properly within a conference to consider the revision of the Regulations
annexed to the International Telegraph Convention and the Tables of International
Telegraph Tariffs established under Article XV of the Convention and Service
Regulation XXIV. If consideration of this question is proposed, it is believed that it
should be dealt with at the Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington.
With regard to the proposal that the Paris Conference shall consider changes to be
made in the transmitting regulations to make the rules applicable to wireless and wire
communication uniform, it would seem that this proposal should be understood to
apply to those articles of the International Telegraph Convention and Regulations
which are incorporated in the International Radiotelegraph Convention and Regulations
by Article 17 of the Radiotelegraph Convention and Article L of the Regulations
annexed to it. These articles read as follows: ARTICLE 17 OF CONVENTION
shall be applicable to international radiotelegraphy.”
ARTICLE L OF REGULATIONS
“The provisions of the International Telegraph Regulations shall be
applicable analogously to radio correspondence in so far as they are not
contrary to the provisions of the present regulations. The following
provisions of the Telegraph Regulations, in particular, shall be applicable to
radio correspondence: Article XXVII, paragraphs 3 to 6, relating to the
collection of charges; Articles XXVI and XLI relating to the indication of the
route to be followed; Article LXXV, paragraph 1, LXXVIII, paragraphs 2 to
However:— (1) The period of six months provided by paragraph 2 of Article
LXXIX of the Telegraph Regulations for the verification of accounts shall be

extended to nine months in the case of radiograms; (2) The provisions of
Article XVI, paragraph 2, shall not be considered as authorizing gratuitous
transmission, through radio stations, of service telegrams relating exclusively
to the telegraph service, nor the free transmission over the telegraph lines of
service telegrams relating exclusively to the radio service; (3) The provisions
of Article LXXIX, paragraphs 3 and 5, shall not be applicable to radio
accounts. As regards the application of the provisions of the Telegraph
Regulations, coastal stations shall be considered as offices of transit except
when the Radio Regulations expressly stipulate that such stations shall be
considered as offices of origin or of destination.”
Although it is recognized that, in the discussion of the Articles of the Telegraph
Convention and the Regulations mentioned in the above quoted articles, it would be
very desirable to consider their effect on communication by radio, I desire to make it
clear that I understand that it is not contemplated that changes in the Regulations
annexed to the Radiotelegraph Convention will be brought up for discussion at the
Paris Conference. The transmitting regulations for radio appear to be a subject of
especial interest to the representatives of the Governments who will participate in the
Washington Conference. In the interest of uniformity it is suggested that the Telegraph
Conference at Paris might desire to consider communication by radio to the extent that
any transmitting regulations for wire should be so framed as not to preclude the
possibility of their adoption by the Washington Conference and thus being made
applicable to radio should the Radiotelegraph Conference deem it desirable to do so.
Respecting the fourth proposal to discuss at the Paris Conference the use of the word
“fil” on European telegrams when the sender does not wish the message forwarded by
wireless, I am of the opinion that this matter is a proper subject for consideration at the
Paris Conference and, if the action taken on the subject is limited to the European
regime, it would not be of direct concern to the United States.
In regard to the fifth proposal that the Conference at Paris shall consider the drafting of
regulations respecting telegrams without address sent by radio, I desire to make it clear
that, if this statement refers to the broadcasting of information by radio, I am of the
opinion that the regulation of this new means of communication is purely a radio
matter with which it would seem that a telegraph conference should not properly
concern itself. The new problems raised by this new means of communication seem to
be closely related to the use of radio and I believe it would be more appropriate to
consider this subject at the Washington Conference.
Respecting your inquiry whether the United States would agree to the postponement of
the Radiotelegraph Conference until the spring of 1926, I am pleased to state that this
Government will be happy to make the necessary arrangements to hold the
International Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington in the spring of 1926, and

formal invitations for this Conference will be issued at an early date.13 The agenda for
the Washington Conference is being studied and, although I cannot at this time furnish
you a detailed statement of the subjects that I believe should be considered at the
Conference, it is believed that, in addition to the revision of the present Convention and
Regulations, the Conference should consider the transmission by radiotelegraph of
communications between fixed points, the broadcasting of communications, and
communications by radiotelephony, and other related subjects which the developments
of the art since 1912 make it advisable to consider.
In view of the considerations set forth in this note, I confidently encourage the hope
that you will find it possible at an early date to assure me that, as I have suggested
above, questions relating to radio will not be considered at the Paris Conference so that
I may be in a position promptly to inform the interested agencies of this Government
with a view to making the necessary arrangements looking to the participation of the
United States in the Conference at Paris.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
1 Not printed.
1a Documents de la Conference Télégraphique Internationale de Paris, 1925 (Berne,
Bureau International de l’Union Télégraphique, 1925), tome i.
3 Omission which follows indicated in original note.
5 Not printed.
6 Instruction not printed.
7 Correspondence not printed.
9 Not printed.
9 Not printed.
10 Not printed.
10 Not printed.
11 The Convention of St. Petersburg (1875) is printed in Documents de la Conference
Télégraphique Internationale de Lisbonne, p. 1.
12 Corrections supplied from a revised translation of Mr. Daeschner’s note of May 14

[Document 195]
The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Daeschner)
WASHINGTON, August 17, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: Referring to Mr. Jusserand’s note dated January 15, 1925,14 inviting this
Government to take part in the International Telegraph Conference at Paris, and to your
note dated March 23, 1925,14 stating that the date of the Conference had been
postponed until September 1, 1925, I have the honor to state that this Government
accepts the kind invitation of the French Government and the following delegates and
technical advisers have been appointed to attend the conference:
Honorable J. Beaver White of Pennsylvania—Delegate and Chairman of the
American Delegation,
Honorable Wallace H. White, Jr., Member of Congress from Maine—
Delegate,
Major General Charles McK. Saltzman, Chief of the Signal Corps, United
States Army,—Delegate,
Major Joseph O. Mauborgne, United States Army,—Secretary of the
Delegation and Technical Adviser,
Mr. William D. Terrell, Chief Supervisor of Radio of the United States,
Department of Commerce,—Technical Adviser,
Mr. Harry H. Kelly, Attached to the Office of the Bureau of Foreign and
Domestic Commerce at Paris—Technical Adviser,
Lieutenant Commander Jules James, Assistant Naval Attaché, American
Embassy Paris,—Technical Adviser,
Lieutenant E. M. Webster, United States Coast Guard, Treasury Department,
—Technical Adviser.
Mr. R. H. Redmond, European Radio Supervisor, United States Shipping
Board, Fleet Corporation,—Technical Adviser.

With the exception of Mr. Kelly, Lieutenant Commander James, and Mr. Redmond, the
above named representatives will sail from New York on the Steamship America on
next.
In this connection I venture to call your Excellency’s attention to the fact that a reply
has not as yet been received to Mr. Kellogg’s note dated July 17, 1925, regarding the
subjects to be considered at the International Telegraph Conference.
Accept [etc.]
JOSEPH C. GREW
14 Not printed.
14 Not printed.

[Document 196]
The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
[Translation15 ]
WASHINGTON, August 23, 1925.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: In your note of July 17 last you were pleased to convey to me some
observations which it appeared should be made by the American administration on the
list of questions which I had the honor to set forth as constituting the program of the
International Telegraph Conference to be held at Paris on September 1, 1925.
In reply, I have been instructed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs to inform Your
Excellency that the sole program of the Paris Conference is to consider additions and
amendments which the telegraphic office desires to have made in the service
regulations and rates in force. There is no question whatsoever of revising or amending
the St. Petersburg Convention. The French propositions are confined strictly to that
program which forms the subject of Circular No. 766 of the International Bureau of
Berne. If certain offices have exceeded those limits, the French Government has no
means to prevent them from offering their propositions. It could do no more than point
out, while the conference is in session, the limits of the program as outlined and
propose, if occasion should arise, that they be referred to the next Radiotelegraph
Conference.
As to the Radiotelegraph Conference, the Government of the Republic doubts if it may
be called with advantage before the year 1927. The Radiotelegraph Conference will
have to examine the propositions to amend or revise the London Convention, not only
those coming from the American Government but also those which all the adhering
powers to the Union have the right to offer.
Each office must be allowed sufficient time to prepare these propositions in order that
they may be assembled at the Berne office and submitted to all the offices.
Your Excellency will certainly admit that this procedure cannot but require much time.
Accept [etc.]
E. DAESCHNER

[For the proceedings of the Conference see, Documents de la Conference
Télégraphique Internationale de Paris, 1925 (Berne, Bureau International de l’Union
Télégraphique, 1925).]
15 Supplied by the editor.

Extension of invitations to the Third
International Radiotelegraph conference at
Washington in 192716
16 The First International Radiotelegraph Conference met at Berlin in 1906; see
Foreign Relations , 1912, pp. 444 ff., and Documents de la Conference
Radiotélégraphique Internationale de Berlin, 1906, Publiés par le Département des
Posts de l’Empire d’Allemagne (Berlin, 1906). The Second Conference met at London
Radiotélégraphique Internationale de Londres (Berne, Bureau International de l’Union
Télégraphique, 1913).
[197] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
[198] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow)
[199] The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
[200] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow)

[201] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Officers
Washington, March 15, 1926.

[Document 197]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
263. This Government is making arrangements to hold Radiotelegraph Conference in
Washington in accordance provision made in Act of Congress approved March 4,
1925.17 You are accordingly instructed to extend an invitation to the Government to
which you are accredited, reading in substance as follows:
Article XI of the Convention signed at London on July 5, 1912,18 provides
that each conference shall fix the time and place of the next meeting. It will
be recalled that at the close of the Radiotelegraph Conference held in London
in July, 1912, the delegates that represented the United States invited the
governments to hold the next radiotelegraph conference at Washington. The
invitation of the United States was accepted and it was agreed that the next
conference should take place at Washington in 1917. Later proposals were
made with a view to holding a joint conference of parties to the Telegraph
Convention and parties to the Radiotelegraph Convention and a draft for a
universal communications union was prepared and circulated. As unanimity
could not be obtained for these proposals, the French Government has
proceeded with arrangements to hold the Telegraph Conference at Paris
Accordingly the United States has taken the necessary steps for holding the
Radiotelegraph Conference and I hereby, pursuant to instructions of my
Government, have the honor to extend to you, as one of the parties to the
Radiotelegraph Convention, a courteous invitation to participate in a
radiotelegraph conference to be held in the spring of 1926 at Washington, the
exact date for the holding of the conference to be communicated to you later.
As regards the subjects to be considered at the conference at Washington, I
am instructed to refer to the fact that the provisions of the Radiotelegraph
Convention signed at London deal with communication between ships and
between ship and shore and do not cover many uses of radio which have been
developed since 1912. Furthermore, many of the provisions of the 1912
Convention with respect to communication between ships and between ship
and shore are not in general practice followed to a considerable extent.

In the circumstances I am instructed to state that the Government of the
United States believes that at the forthcoming conference to be held at
Washington the following subjects should be taken up for consideration:
1. Revision of the Convention and Regulations signed at London
July 5, 1912.
2. Preparation of new articles and modification of present articles
of convention and regulations so that they will be applicable to and
regulate
(a) Comnmnication by radio between fixed points;
(b)
Radiotelegraph
broadcasting,
including
press
messages;
(c) Radio telephony, including broadcasting;
(d) Allocation of frequencies to classes of service, such
as fixed stations, mobile stations, broadcasting stations,
etc.
(e) Elimination of interference as far as practicable.
(f) Distress messages so as to take cognizance of
increased uses and classes of service.
(g) Radio aids to navigation.
(h) All other international uses of radio.
A more complete program amplifying the statements above made will be
forwarded by my Government as soon as possible for your consideration and
an expression of your views.
[Here follow instructions to repeat invitation to the American missions in Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Free City of Danzig, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Monaco, Morocco,
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, San Marino, Serbs, Croats and Slovenes,
Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland.]20

In repeating invitation to mission accredited to government having dominions,
mandates, colonies or possessions for which ratification or adherence has been
deposited, state that invitation contained in third paragraph should be amended to
include these dominions, mandates, colonies and possessions. Set forth in your
message repeating the invitation the dominions, mandates, colonies or possessions of
Mail report stating action taken.
KELLOGG
20 By a telegram dated August 27, the Ambassador was instructed to repeat the
invitation to Albania. The invitation was also sent as a circular telegram on August 18
to the American missions in Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Guatemala,
Mexico, Panama, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.
The invitation was extended pro forma to all countries (except Ecuador and Russia)
which were then, or before the Conference convened, parties to the Conference of
1912. Invitations were not sent to Ecuador and Russia because those countries did not
have governments which were recognized by the United States. At later dates the
invitation (without the right to vote) was extended to non-adhering governments and to
certain private companies. On September 29, the invitation (without the right to vote)
was extended to the Radiotelegraph Section of the International Bureau at Berne.
21 Not printed.

[Document 198]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow)
Telegraph Bureau issued call for proposals prior to Radiotelegraph Conference at
London in 1912.22 Department has decided to follow similar procedure in obtaining
proposals of various governments for study at Radiotelegraph Conference.
Inform Radiotelegraph Section of International Bureau through appropriate channels
that this Government desires to have it proceed in accordance with provisions of Article
13 of Radiotelegraph Convention to obtain the additions or modifications to
International Radiotelegraph Convention and Regulations that the Governments desire
to have considered at forthcoming conference to be held at Washington in spring of
1926.
Add that as provisions of Radiotelegraph Convention signed at London deal with
communication between ships and between ship and shore and do not cover many uses
of radio which have been developed since 1912, United States desires to have Bureau
invite governments to submit propositions on the following subjects: [Here follows list
of subjects contained in section 2 of the fifth paragraph of the Department’s telegram
State that British Government has expressed a desire that revision of international code
of signals be included in subjects to be considered by a special subcommittee during
conference and that draft international code will be forwarded soon. Add that United
States believes it would be advantageous to consider this subject during Radiotelegraph
Conference and hopes that those governments interested in the code may send
representatives qualified to discuss it.
Suggest to Bureau that call for propositions be issued by October 1st and provide that
propositions must be submitted not later than February 1st.
KELLOGG
21 Not printed.
22 In this connection, see International Radiotelegraph Convention of Berlin, 1906, and
Propositions for the International Radiotelegraph Conference of London (Washington,

Government Printing Office, 1912).

[Document 199]
The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5:03 p.m.]
information on following points:
1. Should request for proposals be sent to the governments or to their
appropriate administrations, the latter procedure having been followed
similar previous conferences. He points out that first course would
necessitate intermediation of Swiss Government with consequent delay. He
assumes that in either case requests for proposals are to be sent to the
colonies, protectorates, et cetera, or their appropriate administrations (see
2. While appreciating inability of the United States to invite Ecuador and
Soviet Russia he inquires whether the Department intends to send invitations
to Argentine, Persia, Turkey, Iceland and Ireland whose appropriate
administrations correspond with the bureau and contribute to the expenses of
the radiotelegraph section and whether proposals should be requested from
them.
3. Should proposals be requested from certain companies and international
radiotelegraph organizations? (If desired I shall telegraph list of those
companies and organizations invited to participate and from whom proposals
were requested for the present Paris conference as well as others suggested
by the section.)
4. As all states contributing to the expenses of the bureau enjoy the right to be
furnished with all publications of the bureau he assumes that we would have
no objection to forwarding the requests for proposals to uninvited States
merely for their information.
5. He inquires whether it is desired that the proposed new international code
of signals upon its receipt should be circulated by the bureau and whether
requests for proposals relative thereto should also be sent out with a view to
their subsequent publication in document embodying all proposals.

6. He points out that although the proposals will be submitted to the bureau
by February 1st it would scarcely be possible to have them embodied and
circulated in a unique publication before May 31st. This calculation is based
on the assumption that publications as in past similar cases are to be only in
French. If English copies are also required there would be an additional delay
of two months.
WINSLOW
24 Not printed.

[Document 200]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow)
[Paraphrase]
By an act approved March 4, Congress provided that the Conference should be held in
Washington during the fiscal year 1926. It is therefore inadvisable to plan to hold
Conference subsequent to June 30, 1926. In view of this and for other reasons the
Department desires to hold the Conference in the spring of 1926.
Explain fully to bureau the wishes of this Government and ascertain shortest time in
which bureau can print and distribute propositions.
Ask bureau suspend action temporarily on Department’s telegram No. 80 dated
September 19, 1 p.m.
Department telegraphed invitations to Argentina, Persia, and Turkey, but stated that
representatives would not have right to vote unless governments ratify London
convention before Conference convenes. Invitations were also extended about August
18 to Iceland through the Foreign Office of Denmark and to Ireland through Foreign
Office of Great Britain.
KELLOGG

[Document 201]
The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Officers
WASHINGTON, March 15, 1926.
issued by the International Telegraph Bureau at Berne, respecting the International
Radiotelegraph Conference to be held at Washington. Owing to the period of time
required for obtaining statements of the various governments containing proposed
changes in or amendments to the International Radiotelegraph Convention concluded at
London on July 5, 1912, and in the Regulations annexed thereto, it has been decided
that it will be necessary to postpone the International Radiotelegraph Conference to be
held at Washington from the spring of 1926 to a later date. The exact date for holding
the Conference will be communicated to you in a later instruction.
You will inform the Government to which you are accredited of the postponement of
the Conference and you will state that information concerning the exact date on which
the Conference will be held will be forwarded at a later date.26
For the Secretary of State:
LELAND HARRISON
25 Not printed.
diplomatic officers that for the same reasons it had been considered advisable to
postpone the Conference until the fall of 1927.

Opposition of the Department of State to
participation by the League of Nations in
international conferences of American states
[202] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
Washington, January 15, 1925.

[Document 202]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
WASHINGTON, January 15, 1925.
No. 966
stating that Doctor Guillermo A. Sherwell, Secretary General, Inter-American High
Commission, was informed by Minister Pacheco28 that it was the latter’s desire that
Doctor Leo S. Rowe, Director General of the Pan American Union, should visit Rio to
confer with him regarding the meeting of the International Congress of Jurists which
should assemble at Rio next year. You add that Doctor Pacheco advised you that one of
the subjects he wishes to discuss with Doctor Rowe was the propriety of inviting the
Secretary General of the League of Nations to assign a representative of the
International Law Section of that body to attend the Rio meeting in order to bring the
members of the Section into relation with that committee from whose advice and
experience they might benefit.

In reply you are informed that the Department understands that it is not Doctor Rowe’s
intention to visit Rio at this time but rather to visit the Central American States on
returning to the United States after the termination of the Third Pan American
Scientific Conference at Lima.
The Department however desires that you should, should you perceive no reason for
not doing so, make known to Doctor Pacheco informally and confidentially the
Department’s views regarding the participation of the League of Nations, or Sections
thereof, in American conferences.
It should be understood that no disparagement or criticism of the League of Nations is
intended when it is observed that the International Conference of American States, and
the subsidiary, technical and specialized Pan American Conferences, are organized
upon a distinct and separate basis. The scope of the League of Nations is intended to be
world wide and a number of American States are members of the League and are thus
able to express their points of view on matters of world wide import which come before
the attention of the Council and the Assembly of the League respectively. The Pan

American Conferences exist because of the distinct interests of the American States
which, without antagonism to any world relationship, makes it desirable for them to
confer with respect to the problems which especially relate to the States of this
hemisphere.
There is, of course, not the slightest opposition to cooperation with the technical
service of the League of Nations through the exchange of reports and information, and
reciprocal advantage may thus appropriately be taken of statistics and reports of
investigation. Participation of representatives of the League of Nations in the
International Conferences of American States and the more important non-technical
subsidiary conferences resulting therefrom would however bring to the Conferences the
view points and policies of States who are members of the League of Nations and are
not American States and thus fundamentally alter the nature of the Conferences
themselves.
The law of nations is of universal application. Consequently it is not suggested that
there exists an American international law as distinct from that which necessarily
prevails throughout the society of civilized states. There are, however, legal problems
which are peculiar to the States of the American continents. In the formulation and
advocacy of proposals designed to make clear the application of the principles of
international law to those problems there are reasons for their particular consideration
by American States; for they have a distinctive interest in a cause peculiarly their own.
Thus the labors of the Congress of Jurists, like those of the International Conferences
of American States, possess a special character demanding the maintenance of the
integrity of the Congress as an exclusively American institution.
CHARLES E. HUGHES
27 Not printed.
28 Brazilian Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The Tacna-Arica question: The arbitrator’s
award
and
the
establishment
of
the
Plebiscitary Commission29
29
Continued from Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 364 ff.
Among the Chilean governmental publications relating to the award and plebiscite are:
Tacna-Arica Arbitration: The Case of the Republic of Chile, etc. [Washington (?),
1923]; The Appendix to the Case of the Republic of Chile, etc. [Washington (?), 1923];
The Counter-Case of the Republic of Chile, etc. [Washington (?), 1924]; The Appendix
to the Counter-Case of the Republic of Chile, etc. [Washington (?), 1924]; and Notes on
the Peruvian Case and Appendix, Submitted with the Counter Case of the Republic of
Chile, etc. [Washington (?), 1924].
Among the Peruvian governmental publications relating to the award and plebiscite
are: Arbitration between Peru and Chile: The Case of Peru, etc. (Washington, 1923);
Appendix to the Case of Peru, etc. (Washington, 1923); The Counter Case of Peru, etc.
(Washington, 1924); and Appendix to the Counter Case of Peru, etc. (Washington,
1924). Also El Arbitraje de Tacna y Arica: Actas de las Comisión Plebiscitaria, 2 vols.
(Lima, Imprenta Torres Aguirre, 1928); Documentos relativos al plebiscite de Tacna y
Arica, 6 vols. (Lima, Casa. Editora “La Opinion Nacional”, 1926); and El proceso de
Tacna y Arica (1925–1927): reseña de las principalis sucesos, etc. (Lima, Casa Editora
“La Opinion Nacional”, 1927).
Although it is not printed as a government publication, the following should be added
to the foregoing publications: Memoria presentada al Supremo Gobierno por el
Miembra-Representante de Chile en las Comisión Plebiscitaria (Arbitraje de Tacna y
Arica), etc. (Santiago, Soc. Imp. “Universo”, 1926).
[203] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

Matter of the Arbitration Between the Republic of Chile and the Republic of Peru
With Respect to the Unfulfilled Provisions of the Treaty of Peace of October 20,
1883, Under the Protocol and Supplementary Act Signed at Washington, July 20,
1922
Done in triplicate at the City of Washington on the fourth day of March in the year one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-five, and of the Independence of the United States
the one hundredth and forty-ninth.
[205] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[206] The Chilean Ambassador (Mathieu) to the Secretary of State
Washington, March 26, 1925.
[207] The Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde) to the Secretary of State
Washington, April 2, 1925.
[208] The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde)
Washington, April 9, 1925.
[209] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State

[210] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, April 14, 1925—noon.
[211] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs
(White)
[Washington,] May 8, 1925.
[212] The Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde) to the Secretary of State
Washington, June 18, 1925.
[213] The Secretary of State to the Permian Ambassador (Velarde)
Washington, June 30, 1925.
[214] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[215] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[216] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)

[217] The President of the Plebiscitary Commission (Pershing) to the Secretary of
State
[218] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[219] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[220] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[221] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[222] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[223] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

[224] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[225] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[226] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[227] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
The foregoing resolution was adopted by the Plebiscitary Commission, Tacna-Arica
Arbitration, on the second day of November, 1925.
[229] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[230] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State

[231] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[232] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[233] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[234] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[235] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[236] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[237] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)

[238] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[239] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[240] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[241] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[242] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[243] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[244] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[245] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[246] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[247] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[248] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, November 20, 1925—[noon].
[249] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[250] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[251] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)

[252] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[253] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[254] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[255] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[256] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[257] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, December 1, 1925—noon.
[258] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[259] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[260] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[261] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[262] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[263] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[264] The President of the Plebiscitary Commission (Pershing) to the Secretary of
State

[265] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)

[Document 203]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)30
7. The President yesterday signed Tacna-Arica decision. It is being printed and will be
handed to the Chilean and Peruvian Ambassadors by the President at 10 o’clock
Monday morning, March 9. A 12,000 word informal summary will be cabled to you
before midnight tonight.31 You will please arrange for its immediate decoding taking
every possible precaution that no inkling whatsoever of its contents becomes known to
anyone outside the commissioned personnel of your mission. You will arrange an
audience with the Minister for Foreign Affairs for Monday, March 9, at a time
corresponding to 10 o’clock A.M. Washington time to hand him a copy of the
summary.
KELLOGG
30 The same to the Ambassador in Peru as Department’s telegram No. 12.
31 Not printed; see complete text of the award, infra.

[Document 204]
Opinion and Award Rendered March 4, 1925, by the Arbitrator in the
Matter of the Arbitration Between the Republic of Chile and the Republic
of Peru With Respect to the Unfulfilled Provisions of the Treaty of Peace of
October 20, 1883, Under the Protocol and Supplementary Act Signed at
Washington, July 20, 192232
In response to the invitation of the Government of the United States of America,
representatives of the Republic of Chile and the Republic of Peru assembled in the City
of Washington in May, 1922, for the purpose of arriving at a settlement with respect to
the unfulfilled provisions of the Treaty of Peace of October 20, 1883. As a result of
their deliberations, a Protocol of Arbitration was signed containing the following
provisions:
“ARTICLE I. It is herein recorded that the only difficulties arising out of
the Treaty of Peace concerning which the two countries have not
been able to reach an agreement, are the questions arising out of the
unfulfilled provisions of Article 3 of said Treaty;
“ARTICLE II. The difficulties to which the preceding article refers will
be submitted to the arbitration of the President of the United States
of America who shall decide them finally and without appeal,
hearing both Parties and after due consideration of the arguments
and evidence which they may adduce. The terms and procedure
shall be determined by the Arbitrator.”
At the same time the following Supplementary Act was signed:
“For the purpose of defining the scope of the arbitration provided for in
Article 2 of the Protocol subscribed upon this same date, the undersigned are
agreed to leave on record the following points:
“1. Included in such arbitration is the following question, brought up by Peru
in the session of the Conference of the 27th of May last:
“‘In order to determine the manner in which the stipulations of
Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon shall be fulfilled, it is agreed to
submit to arbitration the question whether, in the present
circumstances, a plebiscite shall or shall not be held.’

The Government of Chile may submit to the Arbitrator such arguments in
reply as may seem appropriate for its defence.
“2. In case the holding of the plebiscite should be declared in order, the
Arbitrator is empowered to determine the conditions thereof.
“3. Should the Arbitrator decide that a plebiscite need not be held, both
Parties, at the request of either of them, shall discuss the situation brought
about by such award.
“It is understood, in the interest of peace and good order, that in such an
event and pending an agreement as to the disposition of the territory, the
administrative organization of the provinces shall not be disturbed.
“4. In the event that no agreement should ensue, both Governments will
solicit, for this purpose, the good offices of the Government of the United
States of America.
“5. Included in the arbitration likewise are the claims pending with regard to
Tarata and Chilcaya, according to the determination of the final disposition of
the territory to which Article 3 of the Treaty refers.
“This Agreement is an integral part of the Protocol to which it refers.”
Ratifications of the Protocol and Supplementary Act having been exchanged, the
President of the United States of America accepted the office of Arbitrator, and the
Cases and Counter Cases of the respective Parties have been submitted in accordance
with a schedule of arbitral procedure proposed by the Parties and approved by the
Arbitrator. The record, comprising nearly six thousand pages, having been carefully
examined, the Arbitrator now renders the following Opinion and Award.
TREATY OF ANCON
reads as follows:
“Art. 3. The territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica, bounded on the
north by the River Sama from its source in the Cordilleras on the frontier of
Bolivia to its mouth at the sea, on the south by the ravine and River
Camarones, on the east by the Republic of Bolivia and on the west by the
Pacific Ocean, shall continue in the possession of Chile subject to Chilean
laws and authority during a period of ten years, to be reckoned from the date
of the ratification of the present treaty of peace.

“After the expiration of that term a plebiscite will decide by popular vote
whether the territory of the above-mentioned provinces is to remain
definitely under the dominion and sovereignty of Chile or is to continue to
constitute a part of Peru. That country of the two, to which the provinces of
Tacna and Arica remain annexed shall pay to the other ten million pesos of
Chilean silver or of Peruvian soles of equal weight and fineness.
“A special protocol, which shall be considered an integral part of the present
treaty, will prescribe the manner in which the plebiscite is to be carried out,
and the terms and time for the payment of the ten millions by the nation
which remains the owner of the provinces of Tacna and Arica.”*

THE ARBITRATOR’S DUTY
The Protocol and Supplementary Act, which must be read together, provide not only
for arbitration but in a specified contingency for the good offices of the Government of
the United States, but these contingent good offices have nothing to do with the duty
which the terms of submission cast upon the Arbitrator.
That duty is—
1. To decide whether in the present circumstances a plebiscite shall or shall
not be held to determine the definitive sovereignty of the territory in question
as between Chile and Peru.
2. If the Arbitrator decides in favor of a plebiscite to determine the conditions
of that plebiscite, including the terms and time of the payment to be made by
the nation succeeding in the plebiscite as provided in Article 3 of the Treaty
of Ancon.
3. If the Arbitrator decides against the plebiscite to take no further action as
Arbitrator, except that—
4. Whether the decision be for or against a plebiscite, the Arbitrator is to
decide the pending questions with respect to Tarata and Chilcaya arising
respectively on the northern and southern boundaries of the territory.
FIRST—THE QUESTION OF THE PLEBISCITE
The first question is whether in the present circumstances a plebiscite shall or shall not
be held.

The territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica is understood to be about nine
thousand square miles in area and to have a population of between thirty and forty
thousand. It belongs to the desert region of the Pacific coast. There are some mineral
resources but these do not appear to be extensive. The valleys proceeding from the
mountains on the east give opportunities for agriculture. In one of these valleys lies the
city of Tacna, which was the capital of the Peruvian province of that name. The city of
Arica, the capital of the other Peruvian province mentioned in Article 3 of the Treaty of
Ancon, is a port on the Pacific ocean about forty miles from Tacna, with which it is
connected by railroad. Arica is the terminal of the railroad running to La Paz, Bolivia,
and has commercial importance.
At the time of the signing and ratification of the Treaty of Ancon, Chile was already in
possession of the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica, here in question, as a
result of the War of the Pacific. By the terms of the Article it was agreed that she
should continue in possession of this territory for a period of ten years and that during
this period it should be “subject to Chilean laws and authority.” It was further agreed
that “after the expiration of that term” a plebiscite should be held to decide whether the
territory should “remain definitely under the dominion and sovereignty of Chile” or
should “continue to constitute part of Peru,” i. e., whether the territory should be
permanently Chilean or permanently Peruvian. The paragraph then goes on to provide,
“that country of the two” to which the provinces of Tacna and Arica “remain annexed”
shall pay the other ten million Chilean pesos or Peruvian soles. Finally, the Article
provides for the negotiation by the two countries of “a special protocol” which will
prescribe, first, “the manner in which the plebiscite is to be carried out” and second,
“the terms and time for the payment of the ten millions.”
The question whether a plebiscite shall or shall not be held depends upon the question
whether the second and third paragraphs of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon are still in
effect. If these provisions have not expired by lapse of time, if they have not been
abrogated or discharged by the conduct of the Parties so that performance can no
longer be demanded, the plebiscite should be held because that is the agreement. If that
agreement for any reason is no longer binding, then the plebiscite should not be held
unless a new agreement for that purpose is made.
As the question thus relates to the construction, operation and obligation of this part of
the treaty, the province of the Arbitrator is more narrow than the range of the arguments
which have been presented. It is neither the duty nor the privilege of the Arbitrator to
pass upon the causes or the conduct of the War of the Pacific, or upon the justice of the
terms of peace, or upon the relations of either Party to the Republic of Bolivia, or upon
the wisdom of the provisions of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon, or upon the economic
effects of the treaty, or upon alleged general equities of the present situation, or upon
any questions whatever which are aside from the meaning and efficacy of the
agreement itself.

The correct interpretation of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon, as a whole, and it might
almost be said, of every word thereof, has been ably and ingeniously debated between
the Parties for years, and is again ably and ingeniously discussed in their Cases and
Counter Cases. Into the refinements of this debate it is not necessary to go, inasmuch as
they do not, in the opinion of the Arbitrator, affect the considerations which are
controlling in the determination of the issues in this arbitration.
LAPSE OF TIME
At the outset, it should be observed that the second and third paragraphs of Article 3 do
not provide for the termination of their obligations by lapse of time. The Article
contains no provision for forfeiture. It fixed no period within which the plebiscite must
be taken. The plebiscite was to be had “after the expiration of that term,” that is, after
the ten years but no limit was defined. It was to be taken pursuant to a special
agreement which it was left to the Parties to make. But no time was fixed within which
the special protocol for the plebiscite was to be negotiated. Whatever may have been
the reasons for leaving the matter thus at large, the fact remains that it was left without
prescribed limit of time and the obligations of the Parties under the treaty must be
determined accordingly.
If it be suggested that such an agreement—an agreement to agree with no time
specified and no forfeiture provided—is unsatisfactory or meaningless, a three-fold
answer presents itself, first, that the Arbitrator is not empowered to alter the treaty or to
insert provisions, however salutary they might be in his judgment viewing the matter
retrospectively, which the High Contracting Parties did not see fit to include; second,
that the Treaty of Ancon was a peace treaty—the parties were engaged in a devastating
war. Apparently the Parties in 1883–1884 thought it better to agree that they would
agree at some unspecified time in the future than to agree to disagree in the present.
They may well have taken into account the fact that failure to agree upon the terms of a
plebiscite when the matter came up again for adjustment would leave unsettled one of
the great issues of the War of the Pacific, and they may have believed that inasmuch as
a reopening of hostilities on this account after a lapse of at least ten years was
improbable and an amicable agreement would be in the interest of both parties, it was
at once unnecessary and inadvisable to prescribe a time limit for the negotiations.
Finally, the present arbitration is the best evidence that the agreement, elastic as it was,
was not without force, since these great States, in response to its provisions, having
failed again and again during the course of years to make the contemplated protocol,
have now submitted to arbitration the question of the plebiscite and its conditions.
It may further be observed that the Parties at the time of the making of the treaty must
have realized that they could have no assurance of the result of a plebiscite which was
not to be held until after the expiration of ten years. That result was left to hope and
conjecture. It might be that wise and beneficial administration might dispose the voters

to favor the continuance of existing authority while oppressive administration or
measures hostile to the welfare and traditions of the people might have an opposite
effect. The character of the future administration and its effect, whatever its character,
upon the disposition of the voters could not be safely predicted. The Parties
nevertheless agreed to postpone the plebiscite long enough to make the result uncertain.
And the point of the agreement was that neither Chile nor Peru was to be assured of
definitive control but that the decision should be left to popular vote.

It is apparent that there are no physical obstacles to the holding of a plebiscite at the
present time. So far as the necessary arrangements for a plebiscite are concerned, it
cannot be said that it must be abandoned because it has become in the nature of things
impracticable to hold it.
Nor has there been an agreement between the Parties to terminate the provisions of
Article 3.
It is the contention of Peru, maintained with earnestness and eloquence, that Chile
wilfully prevented the timely holding of a plebiscite and that her action in the course of
her administration of the territory constituted a perversion of the conditions essential to
the plebiscite as contemplated by the treaty; in short, that Chile by preventing the
performance of Article 3 has discharged Peru from her obligations thereunder, and
hence that a plebiscite should not now be held and that Chile should be regarded as a
trespasser in the territory in question since the year 1894.
This contention raises two principal questions: First, with respect to the conduct of
Chile in relation to the efforts to reach an agreement for a plebiscite; and, second with
respect to her Administration of the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica.
THE FAILURE TO AGREE—DELAYS IN NEGOTIATIONS
It has not been contended that the plebiscite should have been held before the
expiration of the ten-year period. The nature of the obligation imposed by Article 3
must be derived from its terms. Until the special agreement was made there could be no
plebiscite. As the Parties agreed to enter into a special protocol, but did not fix its
terms, their undertaking was in substance to negotiate in good faith to that end, and it
would follow that a wilful refusal of either Party so to do would have justified the other
Party in claiming discharge from the provision. But, as the Parties did not in the treaty
prescribe the conditions of the plebiscite and left these to be the subject of a future
agreement, it is manifest that with respect to the negotiations looking to such an
agreement they retained the rights of sovereign States acting in good faith. Neither
Party waived the right to propose conditions which it deemed to be reasonable and
appropriate to the holding of the plebiscite, or to oppose conditions proposed by the

other Party which it deemed to be inadvisable. The agreement to make a special
protocol with undefined terms, did not mean that either Party was bound to make an
agreement unsatisfactory to itself provided it did not act in bad faith. Further, as the
special protocol was to be made by sovereign States, it must also be deemed to be
implied in the agreement set forth in Article 3 that these States should act respectively
in accordance with their constitutional methods, and bad faith is not to be predicated
upon the refusal of ratification of a particular proposed protocol deemed by the
ratifying authority to be unsatisfactory. In order to justify either Party in claiming to be
discharged from performance, something more must appear than the failure of
particular negotiations or the failure to ratify particular protocols. There must be found
an intent to frustrate the carrying out of the provisions of Article 3 with respect to the
plebiscite; that is, not simply the refusal of a particular agreement proposed thereunder,
because of its terms, but the purpose to prevent any reasonable agreement for a
plebiscite. While there should be no hesitation in finding such intent, or bad faith, if
established, and in holding the Party guilty thereof to the consequences of its action, it
is plain that such a purpose should not be lightly imputed. Undoubtedly, the required
proof may be supplied by circumstantial evidence, but the onus probandi of such a
charge should not be lighter where the honor of a Nation is involved than in a case
where the reputation of a private individual is concerned. A finding of the existence of
bad faith should be supported not by disputable inferences but by clear and convincing
evidence which compels such a conclusion.
It is unnecessary to review in detail the history of the negotiations between the Parties.
To determine whether Peru has sustained her burden of proof with respect to the course
of negotiations requires a painstaking examination of the diplomatic exchanges
between the two countries which fill hundreds of pages in the record. This examination
has been made and its results can be stated in a brief compass.
SUMMARY OF NEGOTIATIONS
Formal negotiations to arrive at the terms of the special protocol for a plebiscite were
begun in 1892’ and were diligently prosecuted for several months in formal
conferences, the debates in which covered the principal questions which had arisen
between the two governments, including the boundary questions which have been
submitted in the present arbitration, and resulted in the Jimenez- Solar exchanges of
January 26, 1894, which, however, left open the most vital conditions of the plebiscite.
The negotiations were continued, but the ten-year period expired without further
progress being made, and they were then interrupted, and the gains already made were
largely lost by a cabinet crisis in Chile and the death of the President of Peru. In the
early part of 1895, civil disturbances in Peru resulted in the establishment of a
Provisional Board of Government with which the Chilean Minister opened negotiations
in August, 1895, which were carried through numerous conferences and ended by an
exchange of notes in February, 1896, disclosing the respective views which had been

found to be irreconcilable. There followed an interval in which the matter was not
pressed by either government, the reasons for which were set forth in a joint
memorandum of August 14, 1897, in which also each government expressed its desire
to have a definite solution. Thereafter Señor Billinghurst, Vice President of Peru, was
sent on special mission to Santiago to negotiate the protocol. As a result the so-called
Billinghurst-Latorre protocol was signed on April 16, 1898. The Executives of the two
countries thus reached an agreement upon all points except two, namely, the
qualifications of the voters at the plebiscite and whether the voting should be public or
secret, and it was agreed that these questions should be left to the arbitration of the
Queen of Spain. In Peru, the protocol was approved. In Chile, the Committee of
Foreign Affairs of the Senate reported on the Protocol unfavorably by a divided vote,
but the Senate nevertheless approved it on August 1, 1898. A majority of the
Committee of Foreign Relations of the Chilean Chamber of Deputies first voted in
favor of the Protocol but later reported adversely and the Chamber of Deputies failed to
give its approval. The ground especially asserted was that the points proposed to be left
to arbitration should be settled directly between the two governments and the records
were returned to the Executive so that new negotiations might be had “for the purpose
of carrying into effect Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon.” While there was extreme
disappointment in Peru at this result, neither Peru nor Chile regarded the rejection of
the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol as a justification for terminating the negotiations
under the treaty.
Meanwhile a serious dispute had arisen over the methods of Chilean administration in
Tacna and Arica. Peru’s vigorous complaints led to a diplomatic debate which reached
an impasse and Senor Chacaltana, Peru’s Minister to Chile, was recalled in March,
1901. The representation was not renewed until 1905. In February of that year, the
Minister of Foreign Relations of Peru addressed a direct diplomatic communication to
the Chilean Minister of Foreign Relations protesting against the Treaty of 1905
between Chile and Bolivia providing among other things for the construction of a
railway at Chile’s expense from Arica to La Paz, and giving Bolivia commercial
privileges. Peru protested against this treaty as an infringement of her sovereign rights,
Chile responded giving the Chilean theory in justification and concluded by inviting
Peru to resume negotiations. In his reply of April 25, 1905, the Peruvian Foreign
Minister said that his Government was “highly pleased to accept Your Excellency’s
invitation to negotiate the fulfillment of the Treaty of Ancon in respect of the provinces
of Tacna and Arica.” Ministers were accredited but the record does not disclose the
negotiations had.

On March 25, 1908, the Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs, Senor Puga Borne, in an
elaborate note addressed to the Peruvian Minister at Santiago, proposed a series of five
conventions relating respectively to commerce, merchant marine, a connecting railroad,

the plebiscite and the indemnity, and set forth his views as to the manner of holding the
plebiscite. The Peruvian Minister, Senor Seoane, declined to combine the plebiscitary
protocol with other matters. He refuted the suggestion which had been made that
“according to modern precedents the plebiscite incorporated in the history of
international law constitutes a formula for disguised cession” and presented at length
Peru’s position as to the terms of the plebiscite. Later it was agreed that the
negotiations should proceed at Lima. Thereafter occurred the so-called wreath incident.
The Chilean Minister at Lima expressed a desire to place a bronze wreath on the
mausoleum erected to the memory of the Peruvian soldiers who died in the war with
Chile. This proposal was first accepted but later this acceptance was withdrawn and the
Chilean Minister immediately returned home.
In the absence of diplomatic representation of either country at the capital of the other,
there ensued a period of direct negotiations between the Foreign Ministers of the two
countries. These negotiations began in August, 1909, with a note by the Chilean
Foreign Minister complaining of certain language used by the President of Peru in his
message to Congress in relation to the question of Tacna and Arica. The Peruvian
Minister replied in justification and in another note took up the questions connected
with Chilean administration, which will be discussed later. In October, 1909, Chile
presented certain definite proposals as to the conditions of a plebiscite, these being
founded on the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol and covering the points which by that
protocol were to be referred to arbitration. Peru replied in November, 1909, with a
memorandum of counter-proposals modifying in certain important respects the Chilean
plan. Correspondence ensued setting forth the answer of Chile to Peru’s complaints as
to the conduct of administration in the Territory of Tacna and Arica and Peru rejoined.
In a note of March 3, 1910, the Chilean Foreign Minister recurred to the idea that the
plebiscites in international law were but disguised formulas for annexation and applied
this to the case of Tacna and Arica saying that the provisions in question of the Treaty
of Ancon were devised “as the only means designated by history of satisfying the
territorial demands of Chile without deeply wounding a national sentiment of Peru.”
“Nevertheless,” the Chilean Foreign Minister added, his Government “has sought in the
holding of the plebiscite the satisfaction of its legitimate exigencies, and it only asks
that the act be essentially popular and that it be effected without violating for a single
instant, by interrupting them, its rights as a sovereign in the territories of Tacna and
Arica.” The Chilean Foreign Minister then set out in considerable detail proposed
conditions for the plebiscite,—providing that it should be held within six months after
the exchange of ratifications of the protocol, and setting forth the manner in which a
Directive Board and Registration and Receiving Committees should be appointed and
act, the qualification of voters and the canvass of the votes.
diplomatic relations were severed as a protest against the course of Chile’s
administration in Tacna and Arica. The Chilean Foreign Minister replied to the notice

of the withdrawal of Peru’s representative by calling attention to the fact that it came
almost immediately after his detailed proposals for a plebiscite.
Diplomatic relations were not resumed. In September, 1912, Senor Billinghurst became
President of Peru. Evidently as a result of informal negotiations, there occurred on
November 10, 1912, an exchange of telegrams between the Foreign Ministers of the
two countries, called the Huneeus-Valera telegrams.33 These were identic and provided:
the plebiscite by a committee of five delegates,—two Chileans, two Peruvians, with the
President of the Supreme Court of Justice of Chile presiding; (3) for the right to vote of
persons born in Tacna and Arica, and Chileans and Peruvians that may have resided for
three years in the territory and who are able to read and write. There are other
conditions less important. President Billinghurst explained his reasons for this
agreement in a message delivered at a secret session of the Peruvian Congress. When
the Huneeus-Valera exchanges were made public there was a violent outburst of public
opinion in Peru against President Billinghurst and the feeling thus engendered
apparently contributed to the downfall of his Government in 1914. In May of that year
the new government of Peru announced its succession to office and was promptly
recognized by Chile. In December, 1914, Peru requested of Chile the expulsion of the
former President Billinghurst from Tacna and Arica and this request was granted.
In 1920, the President of Chile authorized Senor Puga Borne to negotiate informally
with the President of Peru with the instruction to keep so far as possible within the
limits of prior negotiations and to submit new propositions to the home government as
he might think fit. Apparently nothing came of this.
On December 12, 1921, the Chilean Foreign Minister made another attempt to reopen
negotiations as to the plebiscitary protocol by proposing directly to the Peruvian
Foreign Minister that the Huneus-Valera plan be taken as a basis for perfecting the
protocol.34 Peru responded by inviting Chile to “submit jointly the entire question of
the South Pacific that divides us to an arbitration, agreed to through the initiative of the
Government of the United States of America.”35 The ensuing negotiations led up to the
present arbitration.
CONCLUSIONS AS TO THE NEGOTIATIONS
The conduct of the negotiations must be viewed in the light of the rights and
obligations of the Parties, under the Treaty, as already set forth. It is not necessary to
discuss the merits of the positions taken from time to time on either side. The question
now presented is not whether the particular views, proposals, arguments and objections
of either Party during the course of the negotiations should be approved, but as to the
good faith with which these views, proposals, arguments and objections were
advanced. The failure to agree upon a special protocol fixing the conditions of the

plebiscite cannot therefore be regarded as being in itself a breach of the treaty. The
Parties, by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon, having left to a future agreement the
conditions of the plebiscite, must be deemed to have thereby agreed that each Party
should have the right to make proposals, and to object to the other’s proposals, so long
as they acted in good faith.
From an examination of the history of the negotiations the Arbitrator is unable to find
any proper basis for the conclusion that Chile acted in bad faith. The record fails to
show that Chile has ever arbitrarily refused to negotiate with Peru the terms of the
plebiscitary protocol. On the contrary, the record shows affirmatively that Chile not
only has accepted Peru’s invitations to proceed with the negotiations but has herself
initiated negotiations. Such causes of delay as a cabinet crisis, a revolution, the illness
of a minister, the death of a president—political contingencies which did not lie beyond
the contemplation of the Parties—cannot be charged to either side as constituting a
wilful refusal to proceed with negotiations. The argument based on the failure of Chile
to ratify the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol of 1898 must proceed on the assumption
either that Chile was bound to ratify that particular agreement or that Chile’s conduct in
relation thereto establishes absence of good faith in the prosecution of the negotiations
pursuant to the treaty. Neither position can be maintained. The Billinghurst-Latorre
protocol provided that two important conditions of the plebiscite, namely, the
qualifications of voters and the secrecy of the vote should be submitted to the
arbitration of the Queen of Spain. Chile had not promised to agree to such an
arbitration and acted within her rights in seeking a direct agreement upon these points.
Nor does Chile’s conduct in relation to the protocol afford ground for a finding of bad
faith. The Executive of Chile negotiated the protocol and the Chilean Senate approved
it. As already stated, the Committee of the Chilean Chamber of Deputies first approved
the protocol and then changed its recommendation and the Chamber of Deputies acted
on the adverse report of the Committee. The Legislature of Chile under the
constitutional system of Chile had the same right to refuse to approve the protocol as
the Executive had to negotiate it and no unfavorable inference can be drawn from the
exercise by the Legislature of its constitutional prerogative in the circumstances
described. The disposition of the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol cannot be regarded as
due to anything other than the normal processes of constitutional government in
relation to a matter of transcendent public interest, nor did Peru even under the stress of
disappointment make the rejection of the protocol a basis for refusing to go on with
negotiations for the fulfillment of the Treaty of Ancon. In considering the obligations of
that treaty, regard must be had as well to the freedom which the Parties enjoyed under
that treaty, by virtue of the fact that the conditions of the plebiscite were left to a future
agreement, as to the duty which the treaty imposed. It must be concluded that Chile
was no more bound to ratify the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol than Peru was bound to
accept later the proposals made by Chile.

The Arbitrator is of the opinion that so far as the negotiations for the special protocol
are concerned neither Party can be charged with bad faith and that there is no ground
for the conclusion that Chile’s, action in respect to these negotiations has resulted in the
abrogation of the second and third paragraphs of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon or
absolved Peru from the obligation to proceed to their fulfillment.
CHILEAN ADMINISTRATION IN TACNA AND ARICA
It follows from what has been said that the provisions in question of the Treaty of
Ancon must be regarded as still in effect unless the course of Chile in the
administration of Tacna and Arica has been of such a character as to frustrate the
purposes of these provisions and hence to deprive them of force.
Article 3 provided that the described territory of the Provinces of Tacna and Arica
should “continue in the possession of Chile subject to Chilean laws and authority
during a period of ten years” and that “after the expiration of that term” (the Peruvian
translation of the text has been set forth above) there should be a plebiscite to decide
whether the territory “is to remain definitely under the dominion and sovereignty of
Chile or is to continue to constitute a part of Peru.” There has been a long and serious
controversy between the Parties (1) as to the nature of the authority thus conceded to
Chile, and (2) as to the status of the territory after the expiration of the ten-year period.
Chile has maintained that she had full dominion and sovereignty subject to termination
by an adverse plebiscite held under the treaty, and that pending the holding of the
plebiscite this sovereignty continued. Peru has insisted that the territory remained under
the sovereignty of Peru; that Chile was only a possessor with administrative authority
for ten years and that at the end of that period Chile’s authority ceased.
(1) It is unnecessary to discuss the arguments on the question of sovereignty.
It is sufficient for the purposes of the Arbitrator to take the express words of
the treaty. Under the first paragraph of Article 3, the territory was to be in
Chile’s possession and “subject to Chilean laws and authority.” This
provision is without express qualification. There is no condition set forth as
to either laws or authority, that is, as to the character of laws or the extent of
authority. “Laws and authority” clearly embrace the full legislative, executive
and judicial power. The Arbitrator has no privilege to limit the power thus
conferred by the treaty. If any limit is to be found it must be in the terms of
the treaty itself; that is, in the provision for a plebiscite. It may be implied
that the exercise by Chile of legislative, executive and judicial power should
not go to the extent of frustrating the provision for a plebiscite. Further than
this, it is not possible to go without derogation of the authority which the
Parties agreed that Chile should have. The question whether the
administration of the territory was wise or unwise, beneficial or the reverse,
was not submitted by the treaty to any review and is not reviewable by the

Arbitrator. The administration of government in all countries exhibits in
varying degrees the infirmities of human nature and affords abundant room
for controversy as to the wisdom and justice of measures, but the Parties in
their treaty did not attempt to create limitations even of a general character.
(2) Article 3 made no provision as to what should happen after the expiration
of the ten-year period and pending the holding of a plebiscite. As the
plebiscite was not to be held until the term had expired, it must be deemed to
have been within the contemplation of the Parties that there might be an
interval before the result of the plebiscite could be ascertained. But no
express provision was made for this contingency. It seems unreasonable to
suppose that the Parties intended that after the expiration of the ten years
Chile should surrender possession to Peru, that then the plebiscite should be
held, and that, if it were decided in favor of Chile, the possession should then
be restored to Chile. Such a disruption and reconstitution of administrative
authority would involve practical difficulties which it is hardly to be thought
that the Parties intended to create. Chile was in possession of the territory
when the treaty was made and was to continue in possession for ten years,
and after that period a plebiscite was to be held to determine whether the
territory was “to remain definitely” under her dominion and sovereignty. The
fair construction is that Chile was to retain possession pending the holding of
a plebiscite and that thus retaining possession her administrative authority
continued. This would be subject, of course, to the continuance in effect of
the provisions of the treaty, and with the implied undertaking on the part of
Chile that she would not prevent the holding of a plebiscite and would
negotiate in good faith to make the contemplated special protocol to establish
the conditions of the plebiscite. This seems to have been the understanding at
the outset, for in the Memorandum delivered by the Minister of Foreign
Relations of Peru to the Minister of Chile on March 9, 1894, it appeared that
the Chilean Minister desired to include among the bases of a protocol “that
the territories should remain during the plebiscite in the same state as that in
which they are to-day” and that the Peruvian Foreign Minister responded
“that it would be unnecessary to say so, for, only in order to change the
person of the occupant, would an express declaration be necessary.” If this
was the situation immediately after the ten-year period expired, there is no
warrant for holding that the failure to agree on the special protocol for the
plebiscite produced a change unless there was bad faith in the conduct of the
negotiations, and this charge, as already stated, cannot be sustained.
The Arbitrator finds the conclusion inescapable that the territory continued “subject to
Chilean laws and authority” pending the negotiations for the special protocol. The
question then is whether this authority has been used in such a way as to frustrate the
purpose of the agreement for the plebiscite.

The conduct, of which Peru complains and which was the subject of numerous and
elaborate protests evoking serious controversy, is charged to have been the execution of
a policy described as “Chilenization” of the territory, embracing as alleged, (a) the
subsidized introduction of Chilean citizens and (b) the dispersion of the Peruvian
population after 1900.
A. The acts charged as constituting the subsidized introduction of Chilean citizens may
be summarized as follows: (1) the creation of the Department of Tarata; (2) the removal
of the court of appeals from Iquique to Tacna; (3) the removal of military headquarters
from Iquique to Tacna and the concentration of Chilean military forces in the
Provinces; (4) founding of newspapers for pro-Chilean propaganda; (5) the subsidizing
of factories; (6) the granting of railway, irrigation and other concessions; (7)
colonization; and (8) the arrangements in regard to the Arica customs.
As to these charges, it may be said: The creation of the Department of Tarata involves
the question of the extent of the territory covered by Article 3, a question which will be
considered in dealing with the boundary dispute. In so far, however, as the creation of
this department was a matter of the administrative organization of a portion of the
territory placed by the treaty under “Chilean laws and authority”, there would be no
ground for complaint as there was no restriction upon the authority of Chile to provide
administrative organization of the territory. The same is true of the removal of the court
of appeals from Iquique to Tacna, the removal of military headquarters from Iquique to
Tacna, and the concentration of military forces in the Provinces, if such concentration
took place. All these acts were clearly within the authority conferred upon Chile by the
treaty. Chile denies the charge that periodicals and newspapers were founded to carry
on pro-Chilean propaganda, but apart from the issue of fact the Arbitrator finds it
impossible as matter of law to deny to Chile the right to establish or subsidize
newspapers in territory “subject to Chilean laws and authority.” Chile admits the
subsidizing of new industries in Tacna and Arica but adds that “unfortunately however
these factories have been forced to discontinue operations.” Whether such factories
succeeded or failed, there can be no question of Chile’s general right to subsidize
industry. It is unnecessary to consider an extreme situation in which large sums of
government money invested in the subsidizing of industries in Tacna and Arica might
have stimulated a considerable artificial immigration of persons into the provinces,
because no such showing has been made on the facts.
The granting of railway, irrigation and other concessions was clearly within the
authority of Chile. The life of the concessions might be limited to such time as she
possessed the legislative and executive power, but this is a matter which it is not
necessary for the Arbitrator to determine in this case. Such a limitation would not affect
the validity of the concessions during the time of the grantor’s possession and authority.
The only aspect in which the granting of railway and other concessions need to be
considered as a factor in “Chilenization” is in relation to the tendency of such

enterprises to bring Chileans, particularly Chilean workmen, into Tacna and Arica. The
principal enterprise of this character undertaken by Chile as disclosed by the record
was the construction of the Arica-La Paz railway undertaken in accordance with the
provisions of the Chilean- Bolivian Treaty of 1904.36 The record indicates that this
railway resulted in the introduction into the provinces of Tacna and Arica of a number
of Chilean laborers. To what extent these laborers remained in the provinces after the
completion of the road in 1913 does not affirmatively appear, but there were such
obvious economic reasons for the Arica-La Paz railway that it could not reasonably be
inferred that the importation of Chilean labor in connection with this project was
anything more than an incident to an enterprise which Chile was entitled to undertake.
Undoubtedly successful concessions meant industrial development, development meant
population, and increase of the population of the provinces in these circumstances
naturally meant a greater proportion of persons of Chilean nationality, but Peru cannot
object to the legitimate and normal development of the provinces during the period in
which they remain under Chilean laws and authority, ‘there is nothing in the treaty
requiring stagnation.
The question of colonization is intimately related to the matter of concessions. Indeed
so far as the record shows it is chiefly if not entirely in connection with the
construction of public works such as the Arica-La Paz railway that Chile has achieved
any measure of practical success in “colonizing” Tacna and Arica. The question of
colonization was discussed between the two countries in 1900 principally upon the
basis of Chile’s right to alienate public lands in connection with colonization schemes,
and the evidence indicates that more or less ambitious plans for colonization were from
time to time under consideration and that the colonization laws of Chile were extended
to Tacna and Arica in 1909. There is, however, no adequate proof that any of these
colonization plans were carried out and Chile denies that the colonization law was ever
actually put into operation or that any land was purchased as therein provided or that
there was any substitution under these laws of Peruvian farmers by Chilean farmers.
This denial is not met by any adequate affirmative evidence. In view of this state of the
record it becomes unnecessary to consider to what extent Chile could have carried out a
systematic policy of expropriation and colonization of the lands in Tacna and Arica
before it would have amounted to such a depopulation of the provinces and substitution
of Chilean for Peruvian inhabitants as to frustrate the purpose of Article 3 of the Treaty
of Ancon. It is sufficient to say that the evidence fails to establish any such colonization
on the part of Chile as would form any basis for a conclusion that Peru had been
discharged from her plebiscitary obligation.
By various arrangements with Bolivia, Chile has conceded to Bolivia commercial and
customs privileges in the ports of Tacna and Arica which have given rise to diplomatic
protests on the part of Peru. Chile expressly concedes that “should Tacna and Arica as a
consequence of the plebiscite be returned to the sovereignty of Peru, the latter would
take this territory free from any incumbrances resulting from such a trade agreement.”

In these circumstances it is not perceived that Peru has any just complaint on account
of any commercial and customs arrangements which Chile may have made for the
regulation of the territory subject to her authority. If such arrangements benefited the
territory and thereby promoted immigration this was merely a legitimate incident of the
administration of the territory contemplated by the treaty.
The Arbitrator therefore holds that, with respect to the specific acts adduced by Peru as
tending to show the subsidized introduction of Chilean citizens, either as a matter of
law these acts were within Chile’s right under the treaty during the period in which the
territory is “subject to Chilean laws and authority” or there is no sufficient evidence to
show that they were in fact committed.
B. The acts of which Peru has complained as constituting the dispersion of the Peruvian
the Peruvian priests; (3) the suppression of Peruvian newspapers; (4) depriving
Peruvians of the right to assemble and display the Peruvian flag; (5) the boycotting of
Peruvian labor; (6) the conscription of Peruvian youth into the Chilean army; (7) the
expulsion of Peruvian citizens; and (8) general persecution of the Peruvian people
through mob violence either tolerated or encouraged by the authorities and
miscellaneous official persecution of all kinds.
Peruvian Schools. On May 14, 1900, the Governor of Tacna issued a decree closing the
Peruvian schools. The Peruvian Government made vigorous protest. It was stated by
the Peruvian Minister of Foreign Affairs that this action was “contrary to the laws of
Chile and, consequently, contrary to the Treaty of Ancon, which dictates their force and
effect in these territories.” The Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs in answer denied
that there had been exceptional procedure and asserted justification under Chilean law.
It was said that permits had been refused for the schools in question because of the
violation of the law by the Peruvian teachers; that neither the history nor the geography
of Chile was taught as required by the general law, and that on the other hand
sentiments of hostility toward Chile were inculcated in the pupils and a campaign of
propaganda carried on, in view of which the action was taken pursuant to law. It was
replied on behalf of Peru that schools maintained by private individuals or by tuition
fees paid by pupils were subject to the inspection established by law in respect of the
morality and order of the establishment but not in respect of the teaching that may be
imparted in them or of the methods that may be employed. The Chilean Minister
rejoined by reasserting his position saying that “if in those schools propaganda, has
been made against Chile, if sentiments of hatred toward this country have been
inculcated in their pupils, if in this way the authority and rights that Chile exercises
have been denied,” these considerations were sufficient to justify the measure as one of
public order. The Peruvian Minister insisted that there was no teacher of honorable and
lofty views who does not endeavor to inculcate into his pupils sentiments of love and
self-denial in favor of their fatherland; that this was one of the most elementary and

sacred duties; and that if in fulfilling it, the teachers had been guilty of unbecoming
exaggerations, they should have been curbed according to law, but not in any other
way. The matter rested with this disagreement. There is no adequate disproof of the
grounds upon, which Chile acted and it does not appear that she misinterpreted her
laws, which cannot be regarded as being in excess of her authority. It should be added
that the record indicates that Chile has not failed to provide appropriate educational
facilities for the people of the territory. There are a few complaints in the record to the
effect that the authorities in the Chilean schools have discriminated against Peruvians
or endeavored to force Peruvians to elect Chilean nationality, but these complaints are
not sufficiently numerous or well sustained to be accepted as establishing any
deliberate policy.
The Expulsion of Peruvian Priests. Both Chile and Peru are Roman Catholic countries
and there is no question of an attempt to introduce an alien faith. The question is
essentially one of ecclesiastical patronage. As the Peruvian Minister said in his note of
November 14, 1900:
“In Peru, as in Chile, the Catholic Church lives and prospers under the
protection of the age-old system of patronage. According to the latter, the
Civil Government, in the territorial divisions which are permanently under its
control, intervenes in the creation and subdivision of dioceses, or parishes, in
the creation of apostolic or other vicarages, in providing ecclesiastical
benefices, and in all other functions closely related to the temporal attributes
of States. Patronage, furthermore, irrespective of the source from which it is
derived, is a prerogative intimately associated with the exercise of national
sovereignty. Its action upon certain churches continues until sovereignty over
the territories in which they are located ceases, and it is not transferred except
when sovereignty itself is finally and permanently transferred. In respect to
Tacna and Arica, neither has Peru ceded final control and sovereignty over
them, nor has Chile acquired either of these; the moment has not arrived,
therefore, to consider that the attributes of Peru, as patron in respect to these
churches, are at an end.”

The Chilean Foreign Minister in his answer of January 19, 1901, took issue with this
position. He said:
“Your Excellency recognizes that in Peru, as in Chile, the Catholic Church
lives and is developed under the auspices of the secular regime of patronage.
“This principle being established, it only remains to ascertain to which of the
two Governments pertains the exercise of patronage for the provision of

ecclesiastical functions and benefices in the territory that Chile occupies
pursuant to the stipulations of the Treaty of Ancon.
“If the Treaty of Ancon placed the territories of Tacna and Arica under the
dominion of the Chilean Constitution and laws, it would seem
unquestionable that the President of the Republic must use there the special
faculty that is bestowed on him by the Constitution of the State in Article
LXXXII, section 13, which says:
“‘13. To exercise the faculties of patronage in respect of churches
and ecclesiastical benefices and persons in conformity with the
law.’”
The Peruvian Minister insisted in reply that the rights asserted were related to the
permanent and definite sovereignty, and belonged to Peru. In accordance with the
position of Chile based on the provision that the territory should be subject to its “laws
and authority,” the Chilean Government demanded that the Peruvian priests secure
permits from the Chilean authorities. The priests declined to request these permits and
the Chilean Government closed the churches. The Peruvian priests, it is alleged, then
“opened oratories which they called private but which were in fact public” and the
Chilean Government ended the controversy by expelling the priests under an order of
February 17, 1910. It appears that later in that year, the Holy See, without appearing to
take sides in the growing controversy, created a Military Vicarship in charge of a
Chilean Chaplain, who was afterwards promoted by the Holy See to the episcopal
dignity.
It is not the province of the Arbitrator to deal with any matter of ecclesiastical polity,
but as the fundamental question seems to have been one of ecclesiastical patronage as
above stated, there is no sufficient reason for concluding that this patronage did not
pertain to the territorial authority. The wisdom or expediency of the action is not before
the Arbitrator.
Peruvian Newspapers. The Peruvian Case charges Chile with suspending and
suppressing Peruvian newspapers but it does not satisfactorily prove this charge. In his
correspondence with the Chilean Foreign Office in 1900–1901, the Peruvian Minister
expressed his apprehension that the Chilean Government would yield to the wishes of
subordinate officials who desired to suppress the voice of the press but he made no
charge that the Government had actually interfered with the press and the Chilean
Government denied that it had done so. There the matter appears to have rested so far
as diplomatic exchanges are concerned until 1918 when the closing of Peruvian
newspapers was listed as one of the features of the so-called Chilenization campaigns
in the circular of the Peruvian Minister of Foreign Affairs of December of that year. No
evidence was adduced in support of this passing reference. In like manner the Chilean

Minister of Foreign Affairs in his reply of December 6, 1918, contented himself with a
parenthetical assertion of the “liberty of the press.” In the memorandum of the Peruvian
Minister of Foreign Affairs of February 14, 1919, there appear extracts from a
memorial which certain Peruvian citizens are said to have “just presented to the
President of the Republic and which Government investigation proves to be absolutely
accurate.” In the course of this memorial it is stated “this persecution was exemplified
…37 by the assault and destruction of the Union Club Building in 1911 and by that of
the printing offices of La Voz del Sur, El Tacora and El Morro de Arica during the same
year.”
While there is no sufficient evidence in the record to show that Chile has either
suppressed or censored the Peruvian press of Tacna and Arica by operation of law or by
action of the Chilean Government, there is satisfactory evidence to show that Peruvian
newspapers were destroyed by mob violence in 1911. Although it is not possible on the
evidence to charge this action to the Government of Chile, it does appear that the
Peruvian newspapers have not been reestablished and the situation thus existing
demands consideration in fixing the conditions of a possible plebiscite.
Depriving Peruvians of the Right to Assemble and Display the Peruvian Flag. The
principal incidents brought forward in support of this charge are ancient and trivial. The
charge fails on the dual ground that it is not sufficiently supported by the record, and
that it is not shown that any regulations which may have been made were not within the
reasonable discretion of the Chilean Government in the circumstances obtaining in
Tacna and Arica.
Boycotting of Peruvian Labor. This is a charge which is easy to make, hard to prove,
and almost equally hard to disprove affirmatively. It is made by Peru repeatedly in
official documents and in the affidavits of private parties. It is denied by Chile except
as to preference on public works such as the Arica-La Paz Railway. In these
circumstances it has been necessary to examine in detail the individual cases in which
Peru has endeavored to establish the boycotting of workmen. Among twenty-seven
specific cases of expulsion, persecution, etc., which are presented in the Peruvian Case
and contested in the Chilean Counter Case and which therefore afford the best basis for
testing the contentions of the parties, there are two cases in which Peru has endeavored
to establish the boycotting of workmen, the cases of Roberto Nalvarte and Alberto
Forero Marquez, In both of these instances Peru distinctly fails to make out a case.
Among the three hundred and forty cases of expulsion set forth in the Peruvian Counter
Case there are some cases in which it is alleged that the affiant was deprived of
employment because he was a Peruvian. Bearing in mind that these are ex parte
affidavits to which Chile has had no opportunity to reply, there are very few of these
affidavits which, in the opinion of the Arbitrator, make out a sufficient case prima facie
and there is evidence elsewhere in the record which casts serious doubt upon some of
these. In other words, there is a paltry showing of specific cases of boycotting of

Peruvian labor and these rest upon ex parte affidavits. This is too unsubstantial a
foundation upon which to establish such a charge. While the evidence leaves in the
mind of the Arbitrator a question whether there has not been more discrimination
against Peruvian labor than the record establishes there is nothing to indicate that this
discrimination has attained such proportions as to make it possible to consider it as
affording any ground for a decision against a plebiscite.
Conscription. Peru charges that Chile is applying her conscription laws to Peruvian
citizens in Tacna and Arica as a means of driving them out of the provinces and thereby
eliminating their votes in case a plebiscite is had. To this charge Chile interposes a
three-fold defense to the effect first, that conscription is not an effective way to
Chilenize a Peruvian recruit; second, that children of Peruvian parents born in Tacna
and Arica and claiming Peruvian nationality are not in fact conscripted; and third, that
Peru has not put in evidence the requirements of Chilean law with respect to the
military service of Peruvians. The first defense misses the point of the charge. Peru
does not charge that the conscription laws are being used to win votes for Chile through
the Chilenization of the conscripts, but that they are being used to eliminate Peruvian
votes because young Peruvians on being called on to register or enlist prefer to
emigrate to Peru. The second defense is on the merits; it rests largely on the circular of
the Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs of February 12, 1920, in which, after asserting
that under the Constitution of Chile, Chilean conscription laws rightfully apply to all
persons in Tacna and Arica, including Peruvians, the Minister proceeds: “Nevertheless,
by special administrative disposition, all youths born in Tacna and Arica who because
of their Peruvian parentage, may have indicated their preference to adhere to Peru, have
been eliminated from the military service in those provinces.” As this defense asserts
the applicability of the Chilean conscription laws and rests upon administrative
leniency in their enforcement, it is unnecessary to consider the third defense. The claim
of leniency in enforcement raises an issue of fact and requires an examination of some
two hundred affidavits introduced by Peru in which the affiants claim to have been
forced to leave Tacna and Arica to avoid military service or to have been expelled from
Tacna and Arica because of their failure or refusal to discharge their military duty under
the Chilean conscription laws. The great majority of these affidavits appear in the
Peruvian Counter Case and Chile has therefore had no opportunity to meet them with
evidence in rebuttal. Making due allowance for this, however, and taking into account
the other evidence in the record, the Arbitrator is unable to conclude that the policy of
administrative leniency proclaimed by the Chilean Government with respect to
conscripts born in Tacna and Arica of Peruvian parentage who themselves claim to be
Peruvians, has been consistently pursued by the administrative officers on the ground.
While the affidavits indicate that the enforcement of the law has been intermittent as to
time and sporadic as to places and persons, and that many young Peruvians have not
been molested even in places and at times when the law was being enforced against
other Peruvians, they also indicate that in a considerable number of cases, particularly
in the year 1923, the Chilean conscription laws have been used not so much for the

obtaining of recruits (for so far the policy of leniency appears to have been reasonably
well carried out) but with the result, if not the purpose, of driving young Peruvians
from the provinces. So far as this has been done, the Arbitrator holds it to be an abuse
of Chilean authority. However, while the record leaves it somewhat uncertain as to the
extent of this abuse, it is clear that there is no sufficient showing either as to time or
persons or places to establish such a serious situation as would discharge the
plebiscitary obligations of the treaty. The intermittent and sporadic infractions which
have occurred are however important in connection with the consideration of the
conditions of a plebiscite.
Expulsion of Peruvian Citizens. The Peruvian Case and Counter Case and the Peruvian
diplomatic correspondence submitted to the Arbitrator charge repeatedly that Chile has
expelled and is expelling the Peruvian population of Tacna and Arica both en masse
and as individuals. The Chilean Counter Case and the Chilean diplomatic documents
meet this charge with unqualified denials, except as to fifty-two persons whose
expulsion is admitted and justified on the ground of “repeated violations of the laws
and attempted conspiracies against the State.”
Peru has submitted in support of her contentions several hundred individual cases in
which she maintains that expulsion has taken place. As has been heretofore stated,
twenty-seven specific instances of direct or indirect expulsion are presented in the
Peruvian Case and controverted in the Chilean Counter Case. Three hundred and forty
additional cases are presented in as many affidavits in the Peruvian Counter Case and
there are certain other cases scattered through the documents. Each of these cases may
involve either one or more individuals. Most of the evidence on both sides is in the
form of ex parte affidavits of persons residing either in Tacna and Arica or lately
resident there and now resident in Peru, and therefore subject to a greater or less degree
to observation on account of their relation to the case and the environment under which
they give their evidence.
In the case of the affidavits presented in the Peruvian Counter Case Chile has had no
opportunity to present evidence in rebuttal, and of course in no case has there been
opportunity for the confrontation or cross examination of the witnesses. In these
circumstances the natural difficulties of arriving at the truth in a contested matter of
this sort are greatly increased. In view however of the number of these cases put
forward and the number of cases in which Chile has had an opportunity to produce
evidence in rebuttal, the Arbitrator believes that a general conclusion can be safely
formed from these cases in connection with the other evidence in the record. An
examination accordingly has been made of each individual case of expulsion put
forward in the record. To discuss these cases individually would expand this opinion far
beyond its proper limits and any other discussion beyond the statement of the
Arbitrator’s conclusions would be unsatisfactory if not useless. The Arbitrator is of the
opinion that as is usual in cases of this character, the truth lies between the extreme

contentions of the respective parties. The Arbitrator accepts the statement on behalf of
Chile that only fiftytwo persons have been formally expelled in such a manner as to
cause their cases to be formally recorded in the archives of the Ministry of Foreign
Relations. But the Arbitrator can not overlook the fact that it is not necessary for the
local Chilean officials to make a case of expulsion of record in order to accomplish it
and that expulsions may be brought about informally by threats and intimidation
without even being brought to the attention of the Chilean Government or made of
record in the Ministry of Foreign Relations. In fact the evidence in the record indicates
that the majority of the so-called cases of expulsion were brought about through the
application or threatened application of the conscription laws and that in many of these
cases there was no expulsion in any technical sense of the word. The affiant left
“voluntarily” in order to escape the application of the law. The Arbitrator holds that the
evidence indicates that the informal expulsions of various kinds have considerably
outnumbered the formal expulsions which are admitted and justified by the Chilean
agents. How many of these formal or informal expulsions were based on good cause it
is impossible to say on the record presented, but it is reasonable to conclude that aside
from the conscription cases there were also other cases in which justification could not
be successfully established. When all this is said however, it is very far from justifying
the picture of mass expulsion and depopulation painted in the Peruvian documents. The
Arbitrator finds that Peru’s charges of wholesale expulsion and depopulation are not
supported by the record. It is believed that Chile has underestimated the number of
expulsions and that Peru has overestimated them. Taking the entire evidence into
consideration, and the nature of the ultimate question presented for the determination of
the Arbitrator and the principles that must be applied in its determination, as already
stated, the Arbitrator is unable to find in the expulsions which have taken place any
such serious and deliberate violation of Peru’s treaty rights as to justify Peru in
repudiating the plebiscitary obligations of Article 3. The expulsions which have taken
place are however relevant in connection with the further question submitted to the
Arbitrator.
General Persecution of Peruvians through mob violence and otherwise. Little need be
said with respect to the question of mob violence which occupies a considerable place
in the record. Unfortunately mob violence is not unknown in any country. It occurred in
Chile at Iquique both in 1911 and in 1918 and Peruvians suffered. Iquique is some
seventy-five miles south of the southern border of Tacna and Arica and what happened
at Iquique has no direct bearing upon the matters with which this arbitration is
violence occurred in Tacna and Arica and again Peruvians were the sufferers. The
the part of the Chilean Government is not established on this record. Again, the record
is full of miscellaneous charges of official persecution of Peruvian citizens in Tacna
and Arica. These charges in so far as they are serious, and some of them are very
serious, are not sustained by credible and specific evidence. They rest on general

declarations, and the Arbitrator is constrained to hold that these charges of general
persecution are not adequately supported. There are also numerous charges of petty
persecution, some of which if taken individually might be sustained, but all of which
put together are not sufficiently serious to affect the decision of the weighty question
under consideration.
Conclusion. The Arbitrator is far from approving the course of Chilean administration
and condoning the acts committed against Peruvians to which reference has been made,
but finds no reason to conclude that a fair plebiscite in the present circumstances
cannot be held under proper conditions or that a plebiscite should not be had. The
agreement which the Parties made that the ultimate disposition of the territory of Tacna
and Arica should be determined by popular vote is in accord with democratic
postulates. It furnished when it was made a desirable alternative to a continuance of
strife and it affords today a method of avoiding the recurrence of a not improbably
disastrous clash of opposing sentiments and interests which enter into the very fiber of
the respective nations. In agreeing upon a determination of the embittered controversy
by popular vote, the Parties had recourse to a solution which the present circumstances
not only do not render impracticable but rather the more imperative as a means of
amicable disposition. The Parties in the Treaty of Ancon provided no alternative mode
of settlement and made no provision for limitation of time or for forfeiture. It is
manifest that if abuses of administration could have the effect of terminating such an
agreement, it would be necessary to establish such serious conditions as the
consequence of administrative wrongs as would operate to frustrate the purpose of the
agreement, and, in the opinion of the Arbitrator, a situation of such gravity has not been
shown.
The Arbitrator holds that the provisions of the second and third paragraphs of Article 3
of the Treaty of Ancon are still in effect; that the plebiscite should be held; and that the
interests of both Parties can be properly safeguarded by establishing suitable conditions
therefor.
SECOND—THE CONDITIONS OF THE PLEBISCITE
The Supplementary Act of the Protocol of Arbitration provides that “In case the holding
of a plebiscite should be declared in order, the Arbitrator is empowered to determine
the conditions thereof.”
The Parties having failed to agree on the special protocol contemplated by Article 3 of
the Treaty of Ancon prescribing “the manner in which the plebiscite is to be carried
out” have submitted this question to the Arbitrator and the present Award is therefore to
be deemed to be the substitute for the special protocol. The Treaty of Ancon contains
no provision as to the conditions of the plebiscite, stating merely that it is to be a
decision “by popular vote.” As the time for the plebiscite was not fixed, save that it was

not to be until after the expiration of the ten-year period, the constituency to which the
Parties were to appeal was manifestly that existing at the time of the plebiscite, and,
aside from the futility of such an attempt, there is no warrant for an endeavor by
artificial rules to reestablish a constituency of a past period, although it may be
appropriate to make reasonable regulations which will have regard to the position of
the Peruvians of the provinces who may have been wrongfully expelled. The conditions
of the plebiscite should be such as will be plain and practical and work substantial
justice between the Parties in the present circumstances. They have also been framed in
the light of the proposals made and views expressed by the Parties respectively in the
course of their negotiations, and the Arbitrator has not failed to consider whatever
historical precedents may be deemed to be of value.
QUALIFICATIONS OF VOTERS
In the beginning of the Jimenez-Solar negotiations it was maintained on behalf of Peru
that “the right of suffrage belonged to none except Peruvians,” while the Chilean
Minister urged that “all the inhabitants of the territory …38 had the right to declare their
will to belong either to Peru or to Chile.” However, this point was yielded on behalf of
Peru and both Peruvians and Chileans were to be allowed to vote under the Peruvian
draft protocol of February 23, 1894, submitted in the Jimenez-Solar negotiations. That
draft drew a distinction as respects residence between Peruvians and Chileans
permitting “Peruvians …38 who reside at present in the provinces of Tacna and Arica”
to vote, but only allowing “Chileans who can establish a continuous residence of two
years …38 and who live there at present” to participate in the election.
Again, in the negotiations leading to the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol of April 16, 1898
the representative of Chile maintained that “all the inhabitants of the territory” should
vote; the Peruvian representative, “that only Peruvians born in the territory or that
reside in it ought to be permitted to vote.” By the terms of the protocol, this was one of
the points to be submitted to arbitration.
In the Puga Borne-Seoane negotiations of 1908 it was contended for Chile “that all the
qualified inhabitants of the territory should be called on to exercise the right of
plebiscitary suffrage,” but it was answered for Peru that “the right of sovereignty
belongs to the natives alone” or as the Peruvian translation has it, “the right to vote
belongs to the denizens alone.”
In the Edwards-Porras negotiations of 1909-1910, it was proposed on behalf of Chile
that “all the inhabitants, Chileans, Peruvians and foreigners” should vote. It was
responded on behalf of Peru that “all the Peruvians and Chileans” should have the right
to vote that met the following requirements: “a. Twenty-one years of age, b. residence
in the territory at least from July 1, 1907. Those also may take part who, born in the
territory of Tacna and Arica may be present at the moment of the vote, if they shall

have been registered previously for that purpose. Public employees and members of the
army or of the police that may be in service in the provinces mentioned may not vote.”
The Huneeus-Valera exchanges of November 10, 1912, provided as follows: “Persons
born in Tacna and Arica, and Chileans and Peruvians that may have resided for 3 years
in the territory will be entitled to vote.” The Chilean Case in referring to the provisions
of the Huneeus-Valera exchanges according a vote to “persons born in Tacna and
Arica” without a residential requirement, points out that the Huneeus-Valera plebiscite
was only to take place in 1933, but expresses the view that “the right to vote because of
birth in the territory is an unimportant matter.”
It thus appears that on three occasions in the course of negotiations the representatives
of Peru have conceded the right to vote to Chileans having prescribed residence in the
territory, and that the insistence on the right to vote of persons born in the territory,
irrespective of present residence is not strongly opposed. The latter provision will give
opportunity to such native Peruvians of the territory as may have been expelled,
without attempting the difficult task of determining all the questions of fact as to
particular cases.
The only remaining question as respects nationality is whether the right to vote should
be extended to residents of Tacna and Arica who are neither Peruvians nor Chileans. It
must be remembered that a whole generation has grown up in the territory, since the
treaty, among them a number of foreigners who are neither Chileans nor Peruvians,
who do not know whether the land in which they live will ultimately be Chilean or
Peruvian, and who may well have been restrained by this uncertainty from acquiring
either Chilean or Peruvian nationality, although Peru permits naturalization after two
years’ residence and Chile after only one year’s residence. In these circumstances, it
would be no more than fair, while the number of such voters apparently would not be
large, to permit foreigners, i. e., persons neither Chileans nor Peruvians, who have had
a bona-fide actual residence in the territory for a sufficient length of time to become
naturalized in either Chile or Peru, and who are willing to make affidavit of their
intention to seek naturalization in whichever country is successful at the plebiscite, to
have a vote. Aside from persons born in the territory, there remains to consider what
period of bona fide residence in Tacna and Arica ought to qualify any person as a voter
at the plebiscite irrespective of the place of his birth.
The Arbitrator is of the opinion that the date upon which the qualifications of every
voter in the plebiscite should be fixed, to the extent at least that he cannot acquire rights
by the lapse of time thereafter, should be the date of the protocol of arbitration and
supplementary act, namely, July 20, 1922. Also, that any person of Peruvian or Chilean
nationality who has resided continuously in Tacna and Arica for two years prior to July
20, 1922, and who has continued to maintain his residence therein until the date of
registration should be entitled to vote. Further, that any person of any other nationality

who has resided continuously in Tacna and Arica for two years prior to July 20, 1922
and who has continued so to reside until the date of registration, and who makes a
solemn declaration in a form to be provided of his intention to continue to reside in the
province and to seek naturalization under the laws of the country successful in the
plebiscite should be likewise entitled to vote. And, also that for obvious reasons it
would be advisable in addition to the foregoing requirements as to residence in the
territory to require residence for a short but reasonable period immediately before
registration in the sub-delegation in which the voter registers.
Women’s suffrage does not exist either in Chile or Peru. Neither Party has requested it
nor has it been suggested in any of the negotiations between the Parties.
Ability to read and write is made a qualification for the exercise of the right of suffrage
in both countries. But in view of the circumstances and of what is understood to be the
character of a considerable portion of the population of the territory, it is believed to be
just that a literacy qualification should not be required of those who own real property
situated in the territory.
In both countries, there are certain disqualifications by reasons of military service, and
in Peru, the civil servants of the State are also excluded from the right of suffrage. It is
believed that persons born in Tacna and Arica should not be deprived of a vote in this
plebiscite by reason of either military or civil service. With respect to others, in view of
the policy of the laws of Chile and, Peru, it is deemed to be advisable that those in the
military service should not vote, and while Chile does not exclude from the franchise
those engaged in the civil service, the Arbitrator sees no reason in this case for
establishing a difference between the military and civil services.
Accordingly, the Arbitrator holds that the following persons shall be entitled to vote in
the plebiscite directed to be held under this award:
A. Male persons, 21 years old, able to read and write, who qualify under one
1. Persons born in Tacna and Arica, that is, in the territory as
hereinafter defined in this Award;
2. Chileans and Peruvians who
(a) on July 20, 1922 had resided two years continuously
in said territory; and
(b) continue so to reside in said territory until the date of
registration; and

(c) reside for three months immediately preceding
registration in the sub-delegation in which they are
resident at the time of registration; and
(d) make an affidavit as to residence in a form, to be
prescribed by the Plebiscitary Commission hereafter
described.
3. Foreigners, i. e., persons who are neither Chileans nor Peruvians,
who are eligible for naturalization in either Chile or Peru and who
fulfill the qualifications described in subdivisions a, b, c and d,
under paragraph A-2, and who, in addition, make affidavit in a
form prescribed by the Plebiscitary Commission of their intention
to apply at once for naturalization in the State winning the
plebiscite.
B. 1. Provided, however, that no person shall be denied the right to vote at
the plebiscite solely because of inability to read and write who on July 20,
1922, and continuously from that date until the date when he applies for
registration was the owner of real property in said territory.
2. Provided, further, that no person shall acquire a vote through residence in
said territory under the provisions of paragraphs A-2 and 3 if during any part
of such required period of residence he has been a member in any capacity of
the army, navy, carbineers, government police, secret service, or gendarmerie
of either Chile or Peru, or has received compensation as such; or has been a
government official or civil employee in the political, judicial or fiscal
service of either country, or has received compensation as such.
3. Provided, further, that military persons of all ranks and civil employees of
every degree of both governments who were born in said territory shall be
given the opportunity to return to their native place both to register and vote
in the plebiscite.
4. Provided, further, (a) that no person serving a term of imprisonment after
sentence for a non-political offense involving moral turpitude or (b) under
guardianship, non compos mentis or insane, shall be allowed to register or
vote.
The Governments of Chile and Peru shall facilitate the entry into Tacna and Arica and
the transit through Chile and Peru respectively for that purpose of any person claiming
to be entitled to vote at the plebiscite, and the Plebiscitary Commission shall be
competent to receive claims based on alleged violations of the foregoing provision and
to decide as to the validity of such claims and the right of such persons to vote.

SUPERVISION OF THE PLEBISCITE
It is obvious that the holding of the plebiscite should be appropriately supervised by
competent and impartial authority, and in the negotiations of the Parties considerable
attention has been given to the constitution of such authority. As one of the conditions
of the plebiscite, the Arbitrator decides that there shall be constituted a Plebiscitary
Commission, and Registration and Election Boards with the following organization,
powers and duties: PLEBISCITARY COMMISSION
A. Constitution. A Plebiscitary Commission shall be constituted consisting of three
members, one to be appointed by the Government of Chile, one to be appointed by the
Government of Peru, and the third member, who shall act as President of the
Commission, to be appointed by the President of the United States.
In case one party to the arbitration appoints a member of the Plebiscitary Commission
but the other party fails to appoint a member for thirty days after the time hereafter
provided in this Award, it shall thereupon become the duty of the President of the
Plebiscitary Commission to appoint a member to fill the vacancy thus existing. In
making this appointment the President of the Commission is not limited as to
nationality except that no more than one member of the Plebiscitary Commission may
be a national of either Chile or Peru.
Vacancies shall be filled according to the manner of the original appointment.
B. Procedure. The Plebiscitary Commission shall act by a majority vote and shall
establish its own rules of procedure subject to the provisions of this Award.
C. Powers. 1. The Plebiscitary Commission shall have in general complete control over
the plebiscite and shall have authority to determine all questions as to the registration
of voters, the casting and counting of the vote and whether the persons claiming the
right to register and vote are qualified to do so, subject only to the provisions of this
Opinion and Award.
2. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Plebiscitary Commission shall
have the power and duty to promulgate rules and regulations for the plebiscite which
shall provide as follows:
(1) For the procedure of Registration and Election Boards;
(2) For public notice of the time and places of registration and the time and
places of voting;
(3) For the registration of voters;

(4) For the opening to public scrutiny of the lists of registered voters before
the date set for voting so as to furnish opportunity for the investigation of
contested cases and the correction of the voting lists;
(5) For the secrecy of the ballot;
(6) For the printing of the plebiscitary ballots which shall be in simple form
with two columns headed by representations of the national flags of Chile
and Peru, respectively, with the words “for Chile” in one column and the
words “for Peru” in the other, and a square in each column to be marked by
the voter according to his preference;
(7) For the reception and counting of the ballots;
(8) For the tabulation and scrutiny of the returns of the vote;
(9) For appeals from the Registration and Election Boards to the Plebiscitary
Commission;
(10) For proceedings either by way of appeal from the Registration and
Election Boards or by way of original contest proceedings before the
Plebiscitary Commission to exclude any or all votes cast or apparently cast at
any voting place on account of intimidation, bribery or fraud.
D. Appeal to the Arbitrator. 1. The Arbitrator reserves the power and right on his own
motion to entertain an appeal from the Plebiscitary Commission on any question
decided by it. The Arbitrator further reserves the power and right to entertain an appeal
on the certificate of the Commission to the effect that the question decided involves the
interpretation of the Award, the jurisdiction of the Commission, or some question of
general importance in relation to the holding or result of the plebiscite and that one
member of the Commission has filed a dissenting opinion in writing and requested that
the question be certified to the Arbitrator.
In every case of appeal, the Arbitrator reserves the power and right to determine the
time and manner in which, and the record upon which, the appeal shall be submitted to
the Arbitrator.
E. Report to the Arbitrator—Contest Proceedings. After the tabulation and scrutiny of
the returns submitted by the Registration and Election Boards to the Plebiscitary
Commission is complete, the Plebiscitary Commission shall report by telegraph the
result of the plebiscite to the Arbitrator and to the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the
Parties. Within five days after this report either Party may institute contest proceedings
before the Plebiscitary Commission upon the ground that the result of the plebiscitary
vote as announced has been affected by intimidation, bribery or fraud to such an extent

that the result reached does not represent the will of the people of Tacna and Arica. If
such contest proceedings be instituted the Commission shall hear said proceedings
summarily in accordance with rules of procedure to be determined by it and report its
findings thereon at the earliest possible date to the Arbitrator and to the Parties. If no
contest proceedings are instituted within five days, the Plebiscitary Commission shall
so advise the Arbitrator and the respective Ministers of Foreign Affairs by telegraph.
REGISTRATION AND ELECTION BOARDS
A. Constitution and Numbers.—At least four Registration and Election Boards and as
many more as the Plebiscitary Commission finds to be necessary, each Board
consisting of three members, shall be appointed in the following manner: One member
shall be appointed by each member of the Plebiscitary Commission, other than the
President of the Commission, and the third, who shall act as President of the Board,
shall be appointed by the President of the Plebiscitary Commission. Vacancies shall be
filled according to the manner of the original appointment.
B. Procedure. The registration and Election Boards shall respectively act by majority
vote.
C. Place of sitting.—One Registration and Election Board shall sit in Arica, one in
Tacna and the others shall sit in such places as may be designated by the Plebiscitary
Commission to the end that proper opportunity shall be given to persons qualified to
register and vote.
D. Powers.—The Registration and Election Boards shall proceed, in accordance with
regulations promulgated by the Plebiscitary Commission, to make up and publish lists
of the voters entitled to take part in the plebiscite and shall receive and count the vote.
No person not duly registered shall be allowed to vote in the plebiscite.
THE TIME OF THE PLEBISCITE
The members of the Plebiscitary Commission shall be appointed within four months
from the date of the rendition of this Award, and the Commission shall assemble in the
City of Arica for its first meeting not later than six months from the date of the
rendition of this Award. These times may be changed by the Arbitrator. The
Commission shall thereupon proceed at once to formulate rules for its own procedure
and regulations governing the plebiscite in conformity with the conditions herein set
forth, and shall fix the date for the plebiscite, and the time and places of registration
and voting.
The dates, times and places so fixed may be changed by the Commission.
EXPENSES OF THE PLEBISCITE

A. The expenses of the plebiscite shall be borne by the two countries in equal
parts.
B. The members of the Plebiscitary Commission shall be repaid their actual
expenses and each member shall receive as compensation a sum equivalent to
$1,000 per month during the period of service.
C. The Commission shall at the earliest practicable moment make and submit
to the Arbitrator an estimate of the total cost of carrying out the plebiscite,
and a schedule showing the amounts which from time to time should be made
available for the use of the Commission. Upon the approval of this estimate
and schedule by the Arbitrator the two Governments shall deposit these sums
in equal parts in an institution designated by the Commission and in the
amounts and at that [the?] times specified in the estimate. If necessary, a
supplementary estimate or estimates, schedule or schedules shall be made
and submitted in like manner. Any amount not expended in the necessary and
proper expenses of the plebiscite shall be repaid by the Commission at the
conclusion of its labors to the two Governments in equal parts.
D. Within four months after the date of the rendition of this Award, the two
Governments shall each deposit in a financial institution to be designated by
the Secretary of State of the United States the sum of $15,000 to be made
available for the initial expenses and compensation of the members of the
Plebiscitary Commission.
E. The Arbitrator may extend the period fixed for the first deposit and may
likewise modify any schedule presented by the Commission either before or
after its approval in order to conform to any modification of the date of the
plebiscite.
F. In case either Party does not deposit its moiety of any amount required for
the expenses of the plebiscite within the time or times specified as
hereinbefore provided, or as provided in any schedule prepared by the
Commission and approved by the Arbitrator, the other Party may advance the
requisite amount in order that the work of the Plebiscitary Commission may
not be interrupted, and any amount so advanced shall be added or subtracted
as the case may be in paying the treaty sum of ten millions as hereinafter
provided and the reimbursement of such advance or advances shall be
secured in the same manner as the payment of the ten millions is secured.
G. The Plebiscitary Commission shall appoint a bonded disbursing officer
who shall on the authority of the Commission disburse from the sums

deposited as aforesaid the amounts required for the work of the Commission
and the Registration and Election Boards.
PROCLAMATION OF THE RESULT OF THE PLEBISCITE
Upon being properly advised by the Plebiscitary Commission of the result of the
plebiscite, the Arbitrator in case no contest proceedings have been instituted as
hereinbefore provided, will proclaim the result by notifying both Parties. In case
contest proceedings are instituted the Arbitrator upon receiving the report of the
Plebiscitary Commission thereon will either proclaim the result of the plebiscite by
notifying the Parties accordingly or will declare the plebiscitary vote void and decree a
new plebiscite within three months.

LEGISLATION IN AID OF PLEBISCITE
Both Chile and Peru shall enact appropriate legislation providing within their
respective jurisdictions for the protection of the members of the Plebiscitary
Commission and the Registration and Election Boards in the discharge of their
functions; for the apprehension, trial and punishment of persons guilty of intimidation,
bribery, fraud or other offense in connection with registration or voting in the
plebiscite, or of interference with the Plebiscitary Commission or any of its members or
any Registration and Election Board or any member or employee thereof in the
discharge of their respective functions or duties; for compelling the attendance of
witnesses before the Plebiscitary Commission and the Registration and Election Boards
upon the request of the Commission duly made to some appropriate Chilean or
Peruvian authority as the case may be and for the punishment of witnesses who when
duly summoned refuse to testify before the Commission or any Registration and
Election Board or who are guilty of perjury.
CLAIMS FOR REIMBURSEMENT AND ACCOUNTING
Chile contends that the Arbitrator shall impose as a condition of the plebiscite that in
case Chile is defeated in the plebiscite she should be reimbursed for her expenditures
for public works during the past forty years in Tacna and Arica.
Peru on the other hand insists that any investments or improvements made by Chile in
Tacna and Arica since 1894 were made at her own peril, and that Peru is not
responsible for their value. And, furthermore, Peru contends that not only has Chile
already received the ten million pesos provided by the Treaty through her prolonged
occupancy of Tacna and Arica after the expiration of the original ten year period, but
that Peru is entitled to an award of twenty million pesos in addition by way of payment
on account of Chile’s prolonged and illegal occupation of the territory.

Although the Arbitrator is of the view that the conclusions heretofore set forth in this
Opinion and Award are in effect decisive of these claims set up by the respective
Parties, the Arbitrator does not consider himself to be entitled by the Terms of
Submission to pass upon these claims as substantive matters. The Arbitrator is
empowered to decide whether or not a plebiscite shall be held, and having decided in
the affirmative the Arbitrator is then empowered to fix the conditions of the plebiscite,
but the Arbitrator holds that the conditions which it is within his competence to impose
are those which relate to the holding of the plebiscite and the matters which were to
have been established by the special protocol contemplated by the Treaty of Ancon.
The claims presented by the Parties do not relate to the manner in which the plebiscite
is to be carried out.
The Arbitrator therefore dismisses these claims’ of both Parties on the ground that they
are not within his jurisdiction.
THE PAYMENT OF THE TEN MILLIONS
Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon provided, in the third paragraph relating to the
contemplated special protocol, that this protocol should prescribe “the manner in which
the plebiscite is to be carried out, and the terms and time for the payment of the ten
millions by the nation which remains the owner of the provinces of Tacna and Arica.”
As this payment by the terms of Article 3 depends upon and is to follow the plebiscite,
it is deemed to be within the duty of the Arbitrator under the agreement of submission
to determine the time and terms of payment. The matter is one in which there is no
controlling legal principle. It is a question to be determined within certain general
limits of fairness in the light of the treaty obligation.
Chile in her case has informed the Arbitrator of her present desires, but doubtless
because in her view of the case it was unnecessary to do so, Peru has not discussed the
plan for the payment of the ten millions suggested by Chile or indicated her present
views on the subject. Chile, however, in addition to proposing a plan of payment, has
also indicated her present readiness to accept an arrangement which was at one time
acceptable to Peru, namely, the arrangement for which provision was made in the
Billinghurst-Latorre protocol of April 16, 1898. This was as follows:
“Article XV. The indemnity of ten million pesos prescribed by Article III of
the Treaty of October 20, 1883, will be paid by the country that shall become
the owner of the provinces of Tacna and Arica on the following terms: one
million within the period of ten days, reckoned from the proclamation of the
general results of the plebiscite; another million within the following year;
and two millions at the end of each year of the subsequent four years.

“The sums referred to will be paid in Peruvian silver soles or in Chilean
silver coin of the kind that circulated at the time when the Treaty of October
20, 1883, was signed.
“Article XVI. The total products of the customhouse at Arica are assigned for
the payment of the indemnity mentioned in the preceding article.”
As there is no apparent reason for adopting a basis of a different sort, the Arbitrator
holds that the payment of the ten millions should be made in the following amounts and
at the following times:
One million within ten days after the proclamation by the Arbitrator of the
result of the plebiscite;
A second million within the year following; and
Two millions at the end of each year of the subsequent four years.
These sums shall be paid in Peruvian silver soles or in Chilean silver coin
equivalent to the kind in circulation on October 20, 1883.
The total revenues of the Custom House at Arica are assigned as security for
the above payments.
THIRD—THE BOUNDARY QUESTIONS—TARATA AND CHILCAYA
The remaining questions relate to the boundaries of the territory to which Article 3 of
the Treaty of Ancon refers. The Article describes that territory as follows:
“The territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica, bounded on the north by
the River Sama from its source in the Cordilleras on the frontier of Boliva to
its mouth at the sea, on the south by the ravine and River Camarones, on the
east by the Republic of Bolivia, and on the west by the Pacific Ocean, shall
continue in the possession of Chile subject to Chilean laws and authority
during a period of ten years, to be reckoned from the date of the ratification
of the present treaty of peace.”
THE NORTHERN BOUNDARY—TARATA
Immediately after the signing of the treaty, a dispute arose as to the northern boundary
and the controversy has continued ever since. Chile contends that the treaty established
a river line, that is, the River Sama from its source to its mouth and that this line should
be defined and followed as the northern boundary irrespective of any Peruvian
provincial lines. According to Chile’s contention, the territory in question would

embrace not only territory of the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica but also a
portion of the Peruvian province of Tarata. Peru insists that Article 3 of the treaty dealt
solely with the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica and that no part of the province
of Tarata was included.
It is not open to dispute that at the time of the signing of the treaty there existed under
Peruvian law, and had existed for several years, a Peruvian department known as the
Department of Tacna and that this department embraced three provinces known as the
Provinces of Tacna, Arica and Tarata. It is also clear that the reference in the treaty to
the provinces of Tacna and Arica must be taken to relate to the Peruvian provinces of
Tacna and Arica. If it were not for the description of the river Sama as a boundary no
one would suggest that any territory was included which was not within the limits of
the two Peruvian provinces named.
The argument for the inclusion of other territory is that the reference to the two
provinces must be deemed to be controlled by the described river line. The difficulty
with this argument is that there is in fact no such river line as the treaty describes.
There is no river Sama that has “its source in the Cordilleras on the frontier of Bolivia.”
The river Sama as known and defined is formed by the confluence of the River
Chaspaya and the River Tala, a confluence which takes place west of the town of Tarata
(the capital of the Peruvian province of that name). From that junction the river Sama
flows to its mouth at the sea cutting across the! northern portion of the Peruvian
province of Tacna. So that there was territory of that province lying south of the river
Sama and the Peruvian province of Arica lay to the south of the province of Tacna.
There is a dispute as to which of the tributaries of the river Sama east of the junction of
the rivers Chaspaya and Tala should be regarded as the main affluent or the
continuation of the river Sama, but neither the Chaspaya nor the Tala, nor their
tributaries, conform to the description of the treaty and enable’ the Arbitrator to
establish any line of the river Sama as described “from its source in the Cordilleras on
the frontier of Bolivia to its mouth at the sea.” The Chilean Case states that the Chilean
geographer, Alejandro Bertrand, in a report to the Government of Chile in 1903,
suggested “as a solution of the problem brought up by the fact that the River Sama does
not rise in the mountains bordering upon Bolivia,” the adoption of a line that would
unite the source of the Chaspaya or of the Ticalaco (which appears to be a tributary of
the Tala) with the intersection of the two old Peruvian departments of Tacnan and Puno
at the Bolivian border. In this uncertainty, Chile insisting upon a river line suggests that
the Arbitrator appoint a Special Commissioner to investigate and report for the purpose
of establishing a boundary line in the area intervening between the head of one or the
other of the tributaries of the river Sama and the frontier of Bolivia.
After the treaty was signed, Chile established her occupation on the line of the river
Ticalaco, a river which lies about midway between the northern tributary of the Sama,
the Chaspaya, and a southern tributary, (apparently through the Tala) the Estique, but

she insists that she has always claimed the Chaspaya as the true source of the Sama.
Peru at once protested against occupation under the treaty of any portion of the
Province of Tarata and has always maintained this position. Chile, under her claim of
right, proceeded to establish a Chilean Province of Tacna, including a sub-delegation of
Tarata. In a dispatch of July 14, 1886, from the Peruvian Consul in Iquique to the
Peruvian Foreign Minister, it is stated that Chile had assumed jurisdiction in three of
the districts of the Peruvian Province of Tarata, that is, the districts of Tarata, Tarucachi
and Estique.
It is quite apparent that the representatives of the Parties who negotiated the treaty, had
little exact knowledge of the geography of the region to the east and wrote into the
treaty an inaccurate description. It should also be said that there has not been furnished
to the Arbitrator satisfactory evidence as to the exact line of the old Peruvian provincial
boundaries. The record is strikingly deficient in appropriate maps and geographical
information bearing upon these questions.
Despite these difficulties, the Arbitrator finds certain controlling considerations in the
construction of the treaty. The fundamental question is the intention of the Parties and
any artificial construction is to be avoided. The Peruvian Provinces of Tacna and Arica
were well known political divisions with their respective capitals of like names, and the
Peruvian Province of Tarata was also a well known political division with its capital of
the same name. It is difficult to believe that representatives of Governments who,
however lacking in exact geographical information, knew of these political divisions,
and the jurisdictions they denoted, and particularly the most important towns they
embraced, would have used the expression—“the territory of the provinces of Tacna
and Arica” when they intended to embrace not only such territory but also a portion of
the territory of a distinct political division known as Tarata. The argument that this
reference to political divisions should yield to a described geographical boundary
assumes that there is a definite geographical boundary laid down, which is not the case,
or that the description of a geographical boundary indicates an intention to include
territory lying outside the provinces of Tacna and Arica, when in truth the description
of a geographical boundary which did not exist serves to indicate that they did not
know where the geographical boundary lay which they were attempting to describe.
The reference to the political divisions known as the provinces of Tacna and Arica
cannot, in the judgment of the Arbitrator, be overridden by a description of a line which
it is impossible to lay down as described.
Some light is thrown upon the question by the history of the negotiations leading to the
Treaty of Ancon. In the conference of October 28, 1880, Chile stated as one of the
conditions of peace:—“Retention on the part of Chile of the territory of Moquegua,
Tacna, and Arica, occupied by Chilean forces.” In the protocol of February 11, 1882,39
Chile made the condition: “Occupation of the region of Tacna and Arica for ten years.”
Reference is made by Chile in her Counter Case to a proposal of the Minister of the

United States in Chile to the Chilean Foreign Minister, in the course of good offices,
that Chile should have the right to purchase “the Peruvian territory between the river
Camarones and the River Sama,” but if any significance is to be attached to this as a
proposal of a river line exclusively, it is met by the fact that in the later protocol of May
10, 1883,40 the Parties did not set forth a river line but stated that “The territories of
Tacna and Arica shall continue in the possession of Chile,” etc.
There were further discussions on the wording of the paragraph in question when the
time came for the signature of the formal treaty, and it is to be regretted that the record
is not more complete on this point. There is some evidence in the record which
indicates that Chile endeavored to obtain the insertion of the expression “Department
of Tacna” which would have embraced the provinces of Tacna, Arica and Tarata. The
Peruvian Counter Case quotes from the work of Gonzalo Bulnes (“Guerra del
Pacifico”—vol. III, p. 578) what purports to be a telegram from the Chilean Foreign
Minister, then in Lima, to the President of Chile, on October 18, 1883, two days before
the signing of the treaty, as follows:
“In subscribing the definitive treaty, read the telegram of Aldunate to Santa
Maria (President of Chile) dated October 18, 1883, we said that the
department (departmento) de Tacna was to remain for ten years in the power
of Chile; and the negotiators of Iglesias (President of Peru) argue that what
was agreed in May, covered only the area, until the plebiscite of the
provinces (provincias) of Tacna and Arica as far as the river Sama, and not
the additional province of Tarata (no la otra provincia de Tarata) which
reaches up to Locumba and which also forms part of the departmento de
Tacna. In the presence of this difficulty, I do not dare to decide anything by
myself. If we, concluding a treaty, had said that we ceded the territories
(territorios) of Santiago and Victoria, would it be understood that we also
ceded Rancagua? Everything is prepared for the delivery of Lima and Callao
on Saturday; and the present difficulty causes grave perturbation.”
While Chile has not had the opportunity to reply to the Peruvian Counter Case, it is
apparent from the Chilean Counter Case that some question of this sort had arisen, as it
gives a telegram of October 19, 1883, from the President of Chile to the Chilean
negotiators as follows:
“The telegrams and records that we have consulted convince us that we
always have pointed to the River Sama as the boundary line between the
Peruvian territory and that territory that is to be turned over to Chile.
According to the conditions of the agreement we took the Sama in its entire
extension, from the coast to the point where it branches off and continues to
the Bolivian border, all settlements south of that line to be included in the
territory to be ceded. When the said line was fixed it was also kept in mind

that the entire road leading into Bolivia—a fact that could not be overlooked
—remained in the territory to be ceded, according to the result of the
plebiscite. If, by taking the Sama as the boundary line, Tarata remains under
our control, let it be so. We are keeping our word. We did not speak of
departments but of territories when we mentioned Tacna and Arica before,
because we fixed a line such as the Sama, which might or might not be a
boundary line in the Peruvian territorial divisions of those regions.”

Peru has had no opportunity to comment on this telegram.
The inference to be drawn from these exchanges is that the question of including
territory of the province of Tarata was in the minds of the Parties. If Chile sought to
include Tarata, she did not succeed in securing a reference to the province of Tarata in
the description. If it was thought that the mention of the river boundary would effect
this purpose, the fact remains that the description of the territory as that “of the
provinces of Tacna and Arica” was put in the treaty and the river line was deprived of a
controlling significance by its inaccuracy. If it be assumed, as appears to be the fact,
that the question of the inclusion of territory of the province of Tarata was presented, it
is deemed to be decisive that the treaty does not set forth a river line exclusively, and
that the words “the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica” were retained. There
is no sufficient evidence of intention, and no provision of sufficient precision, as to
justify the conclusion that any territory of the province of Tarata was included in
Article 3.
It does not militate against this view that the exact line of the Peruvian provincial
boundary is not defined in the record, or that there may have been some uncertainty in
relation thereto. The capital of the Province of Tarata was the town of Tarata, a town of
considerable importance. This furnishes a test as, on the Chilean claim, the town of
Tarata was to go to Chile. But it is plain that neither of the Parties supposed that the
town of Tarata was in the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica. So, also,
arguments based on the strategic or economic importance of Tarata must be dismissed.
If Chile for any reason attached importance to the retention of Tarata, it is all the more
significant that she did not include in the treaty any reference to the Province of Tarata,
while making distinct reference to the provinces of Tacna and Arica. Not only the first
paragraph, but also the second and third paragraphs, of Article 3 of the treaty refer to
these provinces. The second paragraph states that the plebiscite will decide “whether
the territories of the above mentioned provinces will remain under the dominion and
sovereignty of Chile or continue to form part of Peru.” It is added that either of the two
countries to which “the provinces of Tacna and Arica” may remain annexed shall make
the described payment. The third paragraph provides that the special protocol will

prescribe the terms and time of the payment to be made by the nation “which may
remain in possession of the provinces of Tacna and Arica.”
The Arbitrator decides that no part of the Peruvian Province of Tarata is included in the
territory covered by the provisions of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon; that the territory
to which Article 3 relates is exclusively that of the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and
Arica as they stood on October 20, 1883; and that the northern boundary of that part of
the territory covered by Article 3 which was within the Peruvian Province of Tacna is
the River Sama.
THE SOUTHERN BOUNDARY—CHILCAYA
The southern boundary of the territory covered by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon is
stated therein to be “the ravine and River Camarones.”
In this relation, it should be noted that Article 2 of the treaty provided for the cession
by Peru to Chile in perpetuity of “the territory of the littoral province of Tarapaca, the
boundaries of which are, on the north the ravine and River Camarones.”
It thus appears that by both these articles the boundary between the Peruvian Province
of Tarapaca, ceded absolutely to Chile, and of the territory of the Peruvian provinces of
Tacna and Arica to be continued, as stated, in the possession of Chile, is given simply
as “the ravine and the River Camarones.” There appears to be no dispute as to this
boundary between the mouth of the river. Camarones at the Pacific Ocean and
Arapunta, the junction of the two principal tributaries, the Ajatama coming in from the
northeast and the Caritaya coming in from the southeast. Chile contends that the
Ajatama is the true continuation of the Camarones and claims the line of the Ajatama to
the point where it is joined by the Rio Blanco and from that point draws a line to the
Bolivian frontier which is based largely upon what Chile asserts to have been the legal
or traditional boundary line between the territories of the Peruvian provinces of Arica
and Tarapaca. This is in accord with a Chilean decree of May 4, 1904. Chile, however,
asks that an expert commission be appointed by the Arbitrator to fix the line.
Peru expresses her intention of abiding by the decision which the Arbitrator may
consider to be appropriate and equitable, but is understood to claim the river Caritaya
as the true boundary from Arepunta to its source, apparently maintaining that that
source intersects with the Bolivian frontier.
Between these two lines lie the valuable borax deposits of Chilcaya, over which there
has been a serious controversy between rival private claimants. This dispute may have
been influential in bringing about the delimitation decree made by Chile in 1904. Much
of the evidence introduced in this record consists of reports and opinions which were
pertinent to the controversy between private litigants. In the litigation, it was held in
1904, by the Chilean court in Arica that the plaintiffs, claimants of the borate mines of

Chilcaya under Tarapaca titles had failed to sustain their claims by a preponderance of
evidence and that the judgment should be in favor of the defendants in possession
claiming under Arica titles. The court held, however, that it was not competent to
decide on the boundaries between Arica and Pisagua (Tarapaca). On January 3, 1905,
this decision was affirmed on technical grounds by the Chilean Court of Appeals of
Tacna.
Both Parties seem to agree that the treaty line and the old Peruvian provincial boundary
line are the same, and the Arbitrator taking the clause in question in the light of its
context is of this view. It is impossible, however, to fix this line upon the data
submitted to the Arbitrator.
The Arbitrator decides that the southern boundary of the territory covered by Article 3
of the Treaty of Ancon is the Peruvian provincial boundary between the Peruvian
provinces of Arica and Tarapaca as they stood on October 20, 1883.
CONCLUSION
The Arbitrator accordingly decides:
That the territory to which Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon relates, and the disposition
of which is to be determined by the plebiscite to be held as hereinbefore provided, is
the territory of the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica as they stood on October 20,
1883; that is to say, so much of the territory of the said Peruvian province of Tacna as is
bounded on the north by the River Sama, and the whole of the said Peruvian province
of Arica; That the Arbitrator reserves the power and right to appoint a Special
Commission consisting of three persons, one to be nominated by Chile, another to be
nominated by Peru, and the third to be designated by the Arbitrator, to draw the
boundary lines of the territory covered by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon in
accordance with the determination of the Arbitrator in this Opinion and Award; that if
either Party fails to make its nomination of a member of said Commission within four
months after the date of this Opinion and Award, the Arbitrator shall have the power
and right to appoint a member of said Special Commission to fill the vacancy so
arising; and that vacancies in said Special Commission shall be filled in the same
manner as the original appointments; That within four months after the date of this
Opinion and award, each Party shall deposit a sum to be fixed by the Arbitrator in an
institution to be named by him in order to meet the expenses and compensation of the
members of said Special Commission and the Parties shall within two months after the
date of this Opinion and Award submit to the Arbitrator their estimates of said expenses
and compensation; that the failure of either Party to submit such estimate, shall not
prevent the decision of the Arbitrator as to the amount of such deposit, and if either
Party fails to make deposit of the amount fixed by the Arbitrator, the other Party may
make the deposit required and the amount so advanced by either Party on behalf of the

other shall be added to or deducted from the amount to be received or paid by such
Party, making the advance, under the second paragraph of Article 3 of the Treaty of
Ancon; That all the periods hereinbefore mentioned may be extended or changed by the
Arbitrator; That the holding of the plebiscite as hereinbefore provided shall not be
delayed to await the proceedings or report of said Special Commission on boundaries
but that either Party may challenge the right of any person to register or vote in said
plebiscite upon the ground that he was born or resided as the case may be, outside the
limits of the territory covered by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon as defined in this
Opinion and Award, and the Plebiscitary Commission shall cause a separate record to
be kept of all such persons whose right to register and vote may be affected by the
report of the Special Commission on boundaries, and the votes of such persons shall
also be separately kept.
That the Arbitrator reserves the power and right to pass upon, adopt, modify or reject
the report of said Special Commission, or to appoint a new Special Commission and
pass upon its report in like manner; That if it appears from the report of the Plebiscitary
Commission that the result of the plebiscite may depend upon the votes of persons
whose right to register or vote may be in doubt until the boundaries of the territory
covered by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon have been fixed as hereinbefore provided,
the Arbitrator shall withhold the proclamation of the result of the plebiscite until said
boundaries have been fixed and the right of such persons to register and vote has been
determined accordingly.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to
be affixed.
DONE in triplicate at the City of Washington on the fourth day of March in the year one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-five, and of the Independence of the United States
the one hundredth and forty-ninth.
[SEAL] CALVIN COOLIDGE
By the President:
CHARLES E. HUGHES,
Secretary of State
* (N. B. This text is the translation given in the Appendix to the Peruvian Case. The
Chilean translation, which is taken from the Foreign Relations of the United States for
1883, is not materially different.) [Footnote in the original.]

37 Omission indicated in the original award.
38 Omission indicated in the original award.
38 Omission indicated in the original award.
38 Omission indicated in the original award.

[Document 205]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)41
12. Inform Chilean authorities that the President has today appointed General John J.
Pershing as President of the Plebiscitary Commission. The Department hopes to be able
to advise you in a few days of the President’s nominee on the Special Commission to
determine the boundaries of Tacna-Arica.42
KELLOGG
41 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in Peru, as Department’s telegram
to inform the Governments to which they were accredited that Gen. Jay J. Morrow, U.
S. Army (retired), ex-Governor of the Panama Canal Zone, had been appointed

[Document 206]
The Chilean Ambassador (Mathieu) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, March 26, 1925.
No. 14
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to inform Your Excellency, with the request that you kindly
convey the information to His Excellency the President, Mr. Coolidge, that under the
stipulations of the Opinion and Award of His Excellency, the President of the United
States, as umpire in the case between the Republic of Chile and the Republic of Peru,
the Government of Chile has designated to serve as a member of the Plebiscite
Commission created by the said Award, Señor Don Agustín Edwards.
I avail myself [etc.]
B. MATHIEU

[Document 207]
The Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, April 2, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to deliver to Your Excellency with the request that you
forward it to its high destination the enclosed memorial which the Peruvian
Commission of Defense sends in the name of the Government of Peru on the occasion
of the Award made by the Arbitrator concerning the Provinces of Tacna and Arica to the
Honorable Arbitrator, His Excellency, the President of the United States of America.
In making this request I renew [etc.]
HERNAN VELARDE
[Enclosure]
The Peruvian Commission of Defense to President Coolidge
WASHINGTON, April 2, 1925.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: The Peruvian Embassy having informed
the Peruvian Defense Commission of your decision in the Tacna and Arica case, and
the same having been communicated to the Government of Peru, I am directed to
express to your Excellency how highly the Government of Peru appreciates the
courtesy of the President of the United States in having pronounced his finding upon
the question which was submitted to him for arbitration by the protocol and
supplementary act signed at Washington on the 20th of July, 1922. I am furthermore
directed to present to your Excellency the following as the views of the Government of
Peru.
Before signifying its consent to participation in the plebiscite which is ordered by the
said Opinion and Award, it cannot neglect to set forth certain considerations relative to
the very essence of the Opinion and Award and to present definite requests tending to
the best and most faithful execution of the plebiscite.
First of all, the Government thinks that the Honorable Arbitrator has been led into a
substantial error, from which the decision in favor of the plebiscite at this time is

derived, in translating the words, which, in the text of the Treaty, say literally:
“expirado este plazo”, which in the English language is equivalent to “At the expiration
of this time limit”, or “this time limit having expired”, by the words “after the
expiration of”, which, translated into Spanish, mean “después de expirado”; the phrase
given in the authentic text thus peremptorily fixes a time limit of ten years for
possession by Chile, and fixes the time for the realization of the plebiscite. Had the
Honorable Arbitrator obtained a correct and unimpeachable translation of the Spanish
words used in the Treaty of Ancon, he would necessarily have arrived at the logical
conclusion that the plebiscite should have taken place in 1894; and he could not have
reached the unacceptable conclusion, which deeply wounds the Peruvian national
pride, that Chile had the right to hold our provinces after the time limit expressly
stipulated in the Treaty of Ancon, thus leaving the indefinite prolongation of the said
period at the arbitrary will of one of the parties.

It is therefore necessary to declare respectfully, before the Honorable Arbitrator, that
Peru cannot accept the declaration as to the legitimacy of the Chilean sovereignty over
the territories of Tacna and Arica, or the legitimacy of their occupation during the years
subsequent to 1894. My Government cannot understand the argument contained in the
Opinion and Award to the effect that since no provision was made in the third clause
for the nullification of the obligations at the expiration of the time limit, such
nullification could not have taken place. The nullification, by its nature, need not be
stipulated by the parties, since it is automatically effected when certain circumstances
are brought about, without the necessity for a previous agreement; and it is a general
principle in law that one reason for nullifying a contract is failure to fulfil the
obligations within the time stipulated.
Moreover, the time stipulated was ten years, as is declared specifically and
unequivocally by the text of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon, when it says, “the
territory of the provinces … shall continue in the possession of Chile and subject to
Chilean laws and authority for a period of ten years, from the date of the ratification of
the present Treaty of Peace”. As the ratification was effected on March 28, 1884, the
possession by Chile and the subjection of the territory to the legislation and authorities
of that country legally ended on March 28, 1894. The failure to effect the plebiscite
upon the expiration of that day, that is, immediately after March 28, 1894, constituted a
failure to comply with the third clause and consequently made it void.
While it is true that in the Appendix to the Case of Peru the Treaty was presented in the
form given in Foreign Relations of the United States43 where it is roughly translated
“after the expiration of”, the obvious meaning of “after” is “upon”, or “at”, or
“immediately after” the expiration of the ten year time limit, and not “at any time
after”, as the Honorable Arbitrator evidently assumed. In the Case of Peru, on pages 22

translation of “expirado este plazo un plebiscito decidirá” was given, and on page 26 of
the Countercase of Peru it is clearly shown that these Spanish words can only be
correctly translated into English as “at the expiration of that term a plebiscite will
decide.”
While the Opinion and Award mentions the rather inaccurate translation in the
Appendix to the Case of Peru, it does not mention the fact that twice, in the Case of
Peru, and four times in the Countercase of Peru, the accurate translation was made
entirely clear, and urged earnestly as the claim of Peru.

The importance of this error of translation is shown on page 7 of the Opinion and
Award, where the following language is used:
“The plebiscite was to be had ‘after the expiration of that term,’ that is, after
the ten years, but no limit was defined.”
In point of fact, correctly translated, there was a specific limit of time, and that limit
was “at the expiration of that term,” which was limited, by the Treaty, to ten years from
the date of ratification of the Treaty. The Treaty was ratified March 28, 1884. The ten
years therefore expired on March 28, 1894.
The word “plazo” is defined in Spanish dictionaries to mean “time limit”, so that the
language of the Treaty, correctly translated, expressly fixes a time limit for the holding
of the plebiscite.
The exact translation of the words would be “expirado”, “having expired”, “este”,
“this”, “plazo”, “time limit”, which is the equivalent of “at the expiration of that term”,
and clearly places a time limit upon Chilean possession of the provinces, and upon the
holding of the plebiscite.
The Spanish word “después” means “after”, in the sense adopted by the Honorable
Arbitrator. No such word is found in the Treaty, and no other word that could be
properly interpreted to mean “after” in such a sense.
To insert the word “después”—“after”—in the second paragraph of Article 3 of the
Treaty of Ancon is to change entirely its meaning and add an express provision not
therein contained.
The consequence of this error of translation runs through the entire Opinion and Award.
It is made the basis of excusing Chile for failing to surrender possession of Tacna and
Arica at the time named in the Treaty, when the right of Chilean possession ceased, and

it is used to relieve Chile from responsibility for all the acts committed under the claim
of sovereignty illegally committed by Chile since March 28, 1894, inasmuch as
possession of the provinces should, under the terms of the Treaty, have been yielded to
Peru at that time.
It must also be noted that the Honorable Arbitrator seems to have failed to give weight
to the conclusive proofs offered by Peru relative to the expulsions, spoliation of
property, acts of terrorism and fraudulent colonization of Chileans on lands of the
Peruvians, facts which are so notorious to the world that the Honorable Arbitrator
might well have taken judicial notice thereof, and which are sufficient, if they are duly
examined and appreciated, to leave no doubt as to the error of submitting this
controversy to solution through a plebiscite.
The manner with which the Opinion and Award has seemed to treat these acts of
vandalism, outrage, and oppression has led the Chileans to renew their persecutions
against the Peruvians of Tacna and Arica even since the Award was published, as if
they were reassured that they could continue to commit such crimes with impunity.
Indeed, through our Embassy, we have informed the Honorable Arbitrator of the recent
criminal acts, among which are the following: A Peruvian merchant, Antonio Mollo,
with his family, on the 11th of March was violently driven out from Putre. In Tarata the
Peruvian homes of Musso, Bulis and Bravo were assaulted, and the last named was
killed. The schools of Tacna have been closed. Martines Birne’s house on the Chilean
side of the River Sama in Tacna was also assaulted, after the Award was handed down,
by three Chilean carabineers and the master of the house and two other Peruvians,
Roman y Angel Yanes, and all the occupants of the house were tied and beaten. Threats
and violence were committed against defenseless Peruvian inhabitants of Tarata, the
women being outraged by Chilean carabineers. The Peruvians Felix Nalvarte, Timoteo
Rodriguez, Vicente Mamani, Pedro Lamrec and Lorenzo Flores having escaped from
the persecutions of Chilean authorities in Arica, reached Locumba and advise that two
hundred Peruvians resident in Arica were shipped from that port to the south of Chile to
avoid their vote in the plebiscite. New detachments of Chilean carabineers have been
established on the Ticalaco and Tarata rivers cutting off communications between
Locumba and Tarata and from there are shooting in upon the defenseless inhabitants of
Locumba. Chilean forces are terrorizing the Peruvian inhabitants of the territories
involved in the plebiscite with the purpose of forcing them to vote in the plebiscite in
favor of Chile, and when they resist they are persecuted and expelled from the territory.
Steps are being now taken by Chilean officials to compel Peruvian citizens by force to
sign documents of allegiance in which they request that they continue under Chilean
sovereignty. Carlos Becerra, Manuel Corvacho, Felix Baluarte, Saturnino Florez,
Miguel Corvacho, Nataniel Corvacho, Luciano Lira, Benjamin Navarro, Tomas
Chambo y Carlos Otoya have arrived at Locumba, fugitives from Chilean persecutions
in Arica, saying that their families have been cruelly outraged. They were forced to
flee, making the trip on foot, to avoid being embarked for the South of Chile.

This picture of actual conditions which has been sketched shows that there has truly
been a violation of the essential conditions for the plebiscite, which would justify Peru
in refusing to accept the decision; but, as it is the invariable policy of our country to
comply with international responsibilities, we will not fail to carry out the Award
rendered, notwithstanding the errors which have been pointed out, and in spite of the
fact that they so deeply wound the sentiments of justice which actuate Peru in insisting
that Chile by her refusal to hold the plebiscite when it should have been held, in 1894,
brought about the nullification of the third clause of the Treaty of Ancon. That clause
was unfulfilled by wish of Chile alone, which country has not had and could not show
the slightest legitimate excuse for its recalcitrant attitude.
The guarantees which we are about to enumerate specifically, if granted and declared
by the Honorable Arbitrator—guarantees which are unanimously required by our
national opinion supporting the just desires of the Peruvian population that has been
expelled from our provinces, after suffering countless outrages—would respond to the
principles of elementary justice. Without such guarantees, the rights of our voters
would be destroyed; intimidated by Chilean acts of violence, they would hesitate to
return to the land in which they were born. Even today those that have remained still
continue to be subjected to the cruelty of oppressors who, by the terms of the Opinion
and Award, consider themselves amply justified in continuing the abuses and violence
which they have endured for more than thirty years.
The guarantees which the Government of Peru asks of the Honorable Arbitrator, as a
condition for assuring the fairness of the voting, are the following:
First: the evacuation of the territories of Tacna and Arica by the Chilean civil
authorities, army, gendarmerie and police force, who should be replaced by
American authorities and forces not only during the plebiscite, but
immediately, in order to put an end to the hostilities which are still being
carried on against Peruvian inhabitants who still remain in these territories,
and to make it possible for the natives who are outside of the territories to
return freely, without the fear of becoming the victims of a repetition of the
outrages and crimes which have been committed and continue to be
committed even after the arbitrator’s decision, since it is absolutely necessary
for the inhabitants of the said territories to remain free from all moral and
material pressure which tends to curtail their personal liberty and their
freedom to vote, as is universally established by the doctrines and precedents
concerning plebiscites.
Second: that the installation and operation of the Plebiscite Commission be
hastened, in order that its high, impartial authority may at once begin to
govern the provinces of Tacna and Arica, avoid the continuation of acts of
violence, expulsion and internment in the southern provinces of Chile of the

Peruvian inhabitants who should take part in the plebiscite, and permit
Peruvians and Chileans, on an equal footing, to prepare directly in the
disputed territories the conditions for their participation in the plebiscite.
Third: that the time limit for the taking of the plebiscite vote commence to be
reckoned from the date of the civil and military evacuation of the provinces
of Tacna and Arica, a procedure which is in accordance with the known
precedents and very particularly with that of the plebiscite of Upper Silesia,
in which a representative of the United States actually intervened (second and
fourth annexes to Article 88 of the Versailles Treaty).44
Fourth: that it be declared that Peruvians who have resided in Tacna and
Arica for five years and who have been expelled by the Chilean authorities,
have not lost the character of residents. The same period is fixed in the Award
in treating of residents with a right to vote, and the right to make claims is
recognized in similar cases, especially in the plebiscite of Schleswig
(Versailles Treaty) and in that of Upper Silesia (fourth annex to Article 88 of
the Treaty of Versailles).
Fifth: that the Honorable Arbitrator arrange for the residents to be required to
prove the character of the occupation or industry in which they are engaged
and from which they gain their livelihood, since this would be the only
method of avoiding fraud, which the Government of Peru knows has been
perpetrated systematically for several years and continues to be perpetrated at
present in Tacna and Arica, in order to give the appearance of the existence of
a large Chilean resident population. It is obvious that this requirement should
be clearly established because it is the one most likely to assure the honesty
of the voting.
Sixth: that it be taken into consideration with reference to the provisions
contained in that part of the Award relative to the qualification of voters, by
which the right to vote is taken from a person who has been imprisoned by
virtue of a judicial sentence for common crimes, that trials for such alleged
offenses have for years been instituted by the Chilean authorities, a party
interested in the present controversy, on ostensible, simulated and fraudulent
grounds, for the very purpose of putting such Peruvians out of the way and
incapacitating them from voting in any eventual plebiscite.
These requests do not involve any substantial modification of the Opinion and Award.
They concern only such measures as are absolutely necessary for the faithful execution
of the plebiscite, which it is indispensable to have declared expressly as the only
effective means of guaranteeing the liberty and honesty of the voting in the plebiscite,
more particularly in the present case, above all others, because it has reference to a

country which for the last thirty years has made our countrymen the victims of the most
reprehensible violence. In making these requests, my Government accepts the
provisions contained in the second part of the second Article of the protocol of
arbitration, which authorizes the Honorable Arbitrator to determine the procedure and
time limits for the execution of the Opinion and Award.
I have [etc.]
By the Peruvian Defense Commission,
SOLÓN POLO
President
which President Wilson was a member resolved that a plebiscite should be held in
Upper Silesia; on June 14, the Council of Four decided that the plebiscitary period
should be from 6 to 18 months (League of Nations, Minutes of the Extraordinary
Session of the Council of the League of Nations, Held at Geneva from August 29th to
annex 2 to article 88 of the Treaty of Versailles provided for an American member of
the Plebiscitary Commission, none was ever appointed.

[Document 208]
The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde)
WASHINGTON, April 9, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 2nd instant
enclosing a Memorial, signed by the President of the Defense Commission of Peru,
addressed to the President of the United States as Arbitrator in the Tacna-Arica
controversy, and to transmit herewith the ruling and observations of the Arbitrator on
the questions presented. I beg to request that you transmit this document to the Defense
Commission of Peru.
The ruling and observations of the Arbitrator will be given to the press for publication
in the morning papers of Friday, April 10, and I therefore beg to request you to consider
this note and its enclosure as strictly confidential until that time. In accordance with
your authorization to Mr. White,45 in your telephone conversation with him on the 7th
instant, the communication addressed to the President on April 2, by the President of
the Defense Commission will be given to the press at the same time.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
[Enclosure]
The Ruling and Observations of the Arbitrator
The Arbitrator has had the honor to receive and carefully consider the communication
addressed to him under date of April 2, 1925, by the President of the Peruvian Defense
Commission, the representative of Peru in the pending arbitration under the Protocol
and Supplementary Act signed by the representatives of Chile and Peru at Washington,
July 20, 1922. In the course of his communication the President of the Peruvian
Defense Commission first, submits the views of the Peruvian Government in regard to
the Award of the Arbitrator, second, informs the Arbitrator of certain acts said to have
been perpetrated against the Peruvian inhabitants of Tacna and Arica since the date of
the Award, and, third, requests certain guarantees in regard to the conduct of the
plebiscite decreed under the Award.
The Arbitrator deems it his duty to make the following reply: First: The views of the
Peruvian Government with respect to the Opinion and Award have been duly noted.

The Award was the result of a careful examination of the elaborate record submitted by
the parties. This record fully covered all the questions treated in the views now
submitted on behalf of the Government of Peru and argued all the questions which it is
now sought to reargue. Under the Terms of Submission agreed to by both parties as
well as by general principles of International Law these questions have been decided by
the Award “finally and without appeal.”
This reply well might end here. In deference, however, to the great nations who are the
parties to this arbitration, and keeping in mind the importance of a correct
understanding of the Arbitrator’s Award, and the proper procedure thereunder, the
Arbitrator deems it advisable to make certain additional observations.
A large part of the communication now presented to the Arbitrator is based upon a
claim of an improper translation of Article III of the Treaty of Ancon, it being claimed
that this Article as translated should read “at” and not “after” the expiration of the term
of ten years. As pointed out in the Award, the translation complained of is the
translation submitted by Peru in her Case, and in the opinion of the Arbitrator fairly
interprets the meaning of the passage in question. The problem before the Arbitrator
was one of substance—of construction rather than translation, a problem which had
been debated by the parties long before this arbitration gave rise to any questions of
English translation. It goes far beyond the relatively unimportant and largely academic
question of the use of any particular English word in translating the Treaty whether that
word be “after”, “at”, “on”, or “upon”, all of which are used at various places in the
Peruvian documents.
It may also be said that the Award of the Arbitrator is in entire harmony with the
practical construction placed upon the Treaty by the parties in their dealings with one
another after the expiration of the ten-year period, from 1894 to 1912; the parties
repeatedly negotiated for a plebiscite and in 1898 agreed on the terms of a protocol
providing for a plebiscite which was not ratified by the Chilean Congress.
The President of the Peruvian Defense Commission suggests that the Arbitrator failed
to give weight to the “proofs offered by Peru relative to the expulsions, spoliation of
property, acts of terrorism and fraudulent colonization of Chileans on lands of the
Peruvians,” (page 6 of communication under consideration). There was a large body of
testimony submitted by both parties on this subject and the Arbitrator weighed the
evidence with the greatest care but did not find the proofs sufficient on which to base a
finding “that a fair plebiscite in the present circumstances cannot be held under proper
conditions or that a plebiscite should not be had” (Award of Arbitrator page 36).
Second: The Arbitrator also notes the specific instances of expulsion and oppression
which the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission charges have taken place

since the rendition of the Award. These charges should be brought to the attention of
the Plebiscitary Commission when it shall have been constituted.
The Arbitrator notes with satisfaction that the President of the Peruvian Defense
Commission, although expressing the opinion that conditions of Tacna and Arica as
described by him “would justify Peru in refusing to accept the decision,” gives formal
assurance that “as it is the invariable policy of our (his) country to comply with
international responsibilities” Peru “will not fail to carry out the Award rendered.”
Third: With regard to the various guarantees with respect to the conditions of the
plebiscite requested by the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission, the
Arbitrator, so far as his formal ruling is concerned, contents himself with the reply
already made to the views submitted on behalf of the Peruvian Government, namely,
that the conditions of the plebiscite constituted one of the questions submitted to the
Arbitrator; that the Award was made after careful consideration of the record submitted
by the parties, and that both by the agreement of the parties and under the principles of
International Law the Award is final and without appeal.
However, the Arbitrator makes the following general observations: As already stated,
the conditions under which the plebiscite was to be held constituted one of the
questions submitted to the Arbitrator. The parties agreed upon a procedure which was
approved by the Arbitrator and which gave to both ample opportunity to be heard. Peru,
with full knowledge, made no requests even in the alternative for findings in regard to
the conditions of the plebiscite while these conditions were sub judice—neither the
requests she now makes nor any others. Of course, orderly procedure and the
agreement under which this Arbitration was held forbid that a party to the arbitration
should wait until after the Award is rendered before making requests for findings.
Nevertheless, the Arbitrator did not permit the interests of Peru to be prejudiced
through her failure to make requests for findings in regard to the conditions of the
plebiscite. He considered the whole question carefully and fixed the conditions under
which the plebiscite was to be held so as to afford the most ample protection to the
rights of both parties to the arbitration.

The Arbitrator furthermore makes the following observations responsive to each of the
several requests submitted by the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission:
“First: the evacuation of the territories of Tacna and Arica by the Chilean
civil authorities, army, gendarmerie and police force, who should be replaced
by American authorities and forces not only during the plebiscite, but
immediately,” etc.

The Arbitrator is constrained to point out that this request goes beyond the scope of the
authority of the Arbitrator under the Terms of Submission and the findings of the
Award. The Supplementary Act of the Washington Protocol provides that even in the
event that the Arbitrator decides that a plebiscite need not be held, “pending an
agreement as to the disposition of the territory the administrative organization of the
provinces shall not be disturbed.” Therefore, even in the event the Arbitrator had held
Chile’s present possession unlawful, he would have been without power to direct the
evacuation of the provinces “pending an agreement as to the disposition of the
territory.” But the Award on the contrary holds that “the fair construction (of the Treaty
of Ancon) is that Chile was to retain possession pending the holding of the plebiscite
and that thus retaining possession her administrative authority continued.” (Award, p.
20).
The foregoing observations, however, are without prejudice to the exercise of the
powers of the Plebiscitary Commission as provided in the Award which are ample to
guarantee to every qualified voter full assurance of personal protection as well as the
assurance that his vote may be freely cast and will be fairly counted. The Award
provides “that the Plebiscitary Commission shall have in general complete control over
the plebiscite,” and the Arbitrator has named as President of this Commission General
Pershing, a distinguished American, who himself embodies every guarantee in his
character and personality.
“Second: that the installation and operation of the Plebiscite Commission be
hastened, in order that its high, impartial authority may at once begin to
govern the provinces of Tacna and Arica,” etc.
In so far as this request merely asks that “the installation and operation of the Plebiscite
Commission be hastened,” the Arbitrator points out that it asks for something which
depends, first, upon the action of the Government of Peru alone, and, second, upon the
action of the Governments of Chile and Peru. In accordance with the terms of the
Award, “the members of the Plebiscitary Commission shall be appointed within four
months from the date of the rendition of this Award, and the Commission shall
assemble in the City of Arica for its first meeting not later than six months from the
date of the rendition of this Award. These times may be changed by the Arbitrator.” In
other words, the Award merely fixed a maximum time for the appointment of the
members of the Commission. The Arbitrator has already appointed the presiding
member of the Plebiscitary Commission, as well as the third member of the Special
Boundary Commission. Chile has also appointed her member of the Plebiscitary
Commission. It is suggested that nothing stands in the way of the constitution of the
Commission as soon as similar action shall have been taken by Peru. The Commission
once constituted could arrange to hold its first meeting at Arica as soon as the necessary
preliminaries shall have been accomplished by the two Governments.

“Third: that the time limit for the taking of the plebiscite vote commence to
be reckoned from the date of the civil and military evacuation of the
provinces of Tacna and Arica, etc.”
This request is governed by the observations of the Arbitrator on the first request since
this request also goes beyond the scope of the authority of the Arbitrator under the
Terms of Submission and the findings of the Award in that it is predicated on the “civil
and military evacuation of the provinces.”
“Fourth: that it be declared that Peruvians who have resided in Tacna and
Arica for five years and who have been expelled by the Chilean authorities,
have not lost the character of residents.”
As heretofore pointed out the Arbitrator in fixing the qualifications of the voters did not
have the advantage of having before him requests for findings in that regard on the part
of Peru. He nevertheless considered the questions involved with great care in the light
of the evidence and arguments submitted by both parties. The various provisions of the
Award on this subject are interrelated in a general plan. Compliance with this request is
therefore not only impossible because of the finality of the Award but unnecessary and
inadmissible because it would involve the revision of a plan which was carefully
drafted and which in its entirety in the opinion of the Arbitrator does justice between
the parties.
“Fifth: that the Honorable Arbitrator arrange for the residents to be required
to prove the character of the occupation or industry in which they are
engaged and from which they gain their livelihood, since this would be the
only method of avoiding fraud,” etc.
It is the duty of the Plebiscitary Commission to consider all the evidence as to the
qualifications of voters in order to prevent fraudulent voting. This request should
therefore be brought to the attention of the Commission for its consideration.
“Sixth: that it be taken into consideration with reference to the provisions
contained in that part of the Award relative to the qualification of voters, by
which the right to vote is taken from a person who has been imprisoned by
virtue of a judicial sentence for common crimes, that trials for such alleged
offenses have for years been instituted by the Chilean authorities, a party
interested in the present controversy, on ostensible, simulated and fraudulent
grounds, for the very purpose of putting such Peruvians out of the way and
incapacitating them from voting in any eventual plebiscite.”
The Arbitrator is not clear as to the precise meaning of this request. The Award
provides, p. 42:

“That no person serving a term of imprisonment after sentence for a non-
political offense involving moral turpitude … shall be allowed to register or
vote.”
It will be the duty of the Plebiscitary Commission to interpret and apply this provision
according to its letter and spirit to the facts of each individual case presented to the
Commission to which it is relevant. It is suggested, therefore, that any specific case or
cases which are thought to involve the interpretation or application of this provision be
presented to the Plebiscitary Commission.
In general, the Award makes the most ample provision for the consideration by the
Plebiscitary Commission of all questions involving the qualifications of voters and the
prevention of fraud, with a view to insuring to every qualified elector the right to vote.
Ample provision is also made for appeal from the Plebiscitary Commission to the
Arbitrator.
In conclusion it need hardly be said that only a desire to be of service in bringing about
a settlement of a long standing controversy between two great nations with whom the
United States enjoys the most friendly relations induced the Arbitrator to undertake this
arduous task and that so far as in him lies, acting always within the well defined limits
of the Terms of Submission, he will leave nothing undone which scrupulous care and
attention on his part can accomplish in securing a fair election and equal justice to both
parties.
The ruling which the Arbitrator has felt constrained to make, viz. that the Award is final
and without appeal, has rendered it unnecessary to afford opportunity to the Agents of
the Government of Chile to present the views of their Government. A copy of the
communication of the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission and of this reply
is, however, being furnished to the Agents of the Government of Chile.
CALVIN COOLIDGE
Arbitrator
By the Arbitrator
FRANK B. KELLOGG
Secretary of State
45 Francis White, Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs.

[Document 209]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
41. Today I learn from a high source close to President Leguía that in view of the
American answer to the Peruvian note, the Peruvian people and the members of
Congress which convenes April 13 are generally opposed to participation in the
plebiscite, and that the Government feels that it is in the most dangerous situation that
it has ever been in. My informant tells me that many of the friends of the Government
in Congress have turned against it because it is in favor of participating in the
plebiscite, and that, should the Government name a Peruvian member of the
Commission, there is danger that a revolution would be precipitated, and if Peru should
participate and lose the plebiscite that the President and his supporters would be put to
death. President Leguía and the President of the Chamber of Deputies are, nevertheless,
determined at all costs to persevere and participate in the plebiscite. I was also told that
if all the expelled Peruvians could be induced to return and vote, Peru would easily win
the plebiscite, but that their fear of the Chilean military forces is so great in view of
what they have suffered that they can not be induced to return to Tacna Arica without
more explicit guarantees of protection. My informant also said that it is the popular
impression that General Pershing will go to Arica with a civilian staff only, and that as
the General does not speak Spanish and will be without adequate force to back up his
authority, the Chileans will impose upon him and will have their own way in the
plebiscite and in the preparations for it; he concluded by saying that a declaration from
some official American source that Peruvians will be protected from outrage in the
disputed region would have a most beneficial effect on both popular and governmental
opinion in Peru; and that an announcement that General Pershing would go to the
provinces accompanied by a war vessel and an adequate military guard to see that the
terms of the award were observed and that all voters and the Plebiscitary Commission
were protected would have a deeply beneficial influence on Peru’s participation in the
plebiscite.
I was also told by the same informant that the Joint Committee of Foreign Affairs of
both houses of Congress have taken over entirely the conduct of foreign affairs, leaving
the Minister for Foreign Affairs without either authority or voice.

Pounvexter

[Document 210]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 14, 1925—noon.
ruling and award of April 9, in reply to the communication from the Peruvian Defense
Commission of April 2. The Department understands that text of this note in full was
cabled to Lima by the Associated Press. Inform Department if you are unable to obtain
copy from the Associated Press and it will be cabled to you.
The award makes most ample provision for consideration by Plebiscitary Commission
of all questions involving qualifications of voters and prevention of fraud, with aim of
insuring to every qualified elector the right to vote. Also ample provision is made for
appeal from Plebiscitary Commission to the Arbitrator. Department must assume that
both parties had confidence in good faith of the Arbitrator in submitting question to
him. In the ruling and award of April 9, Arbitrator stated that so far as in him lay,
always acting within well-defined limits of terms of submission, he would leave
nothing undone which scrupulous care and attention on his part can accomplish in
according fair election and equal justice to both parties. The Arbitrator cannot continue
indefinitely asserting intention on his part to act fairly and to endeavor to see that rights
of both parties will be scrupulously observed. Even less could he state that one side
will be protected from so-called “atrocities” on the part of the other. If Peru feels her
interests are being prejudiced in Provinces of Tacna and Arica, it seems she might well
expedite constitution of Plebiscitary Commission by appointment of Peruvian member;
Chilean member has been appointed; the President has appointed his member; and
there is nothing further that the Government of the United States can do.
KELLOGG

[Document 211]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs
(White)
[WASHINGTON,] May 8, 1925.
SEAPORT FOR BOLIVIA
The Bolivian Minister, Señor Freyre, called on Friday, May 8, to say that as I was
familiar with his endeavors not only as Bolivian Minister to Chile and as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Bolivia but also in his conversations a year ago with Secretary
Hughes to bring about a revision of the Chilean-Bolivian Treaty of 1904, by which
Bolivia would obtain a seaport,46 he had called to inquire whether the very last word
had been said by this Department in the matter. He remarked that considerable change
has taken place in the last year by the rendition of the Award in the Tacna-Arica case
and he wanted to know whether something could not be done in this matter.
I told Señor Freyre that I felt the situation was the same as it had been when he
conversed with Secretary Hughes a year ago; that the policy of this Government was
the same as then stated, namely, that it was always ready to be of service to the
countries of this hemisphere in composing their difficulties if requested to lend its good
offices by all those concerned. I pointed out that in this case Chile had not asked for
our good offices and that I might say as my purely personal opinion that I could not see
much likelihood that Chile would want to take up any further matters of this sort while
it is now so busily preparing for the coming plebiscite in Tacna- Arica.
Señor Freyre then said that there appeared to be two distinct phases of the matter: First.
Whether the United States would use its good offices under certain conditions even
should one of the parties not have asked for its intervention, and, second, whether or
not the present was an opportune moment to broach the question to Chile. He said that
the present was perhaps an inopportune moment. He then inquired whether this
Government would be prepared after the holding of the plebiscite of Tacna-Arica to use
its good offices to bring about a settlement of this matter.
I replied that I of course could not answer a hypothetical question and state just what
the attitude of the Department would be at some future occasion all the circumstances
of which could not be known at this time. When the moment arrives the Department
will have to make its decision in the light of the conditions as they then exist. The
Minister thanked me and withdrew.

Wane

mia eT. °

[Document 212]
The Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, June 18, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: In compliance with instructions from my Government I have the honor to
apply to Your Excellency with a request that you kindly place in the hands of His
Excellency the President of the United States of America, Arbitrator in the case
concerning the Provinces of Tacna and Arica the communication which I append to this
note.
I renew [etc.]
HERNÁN VELARDE
[Enclosure]
The Permian Ambassador (Velarde) to President Coolidge47
WASHINGTON, June 18, 1925.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: The Government of Peru has duly
received the ruling and observations of the Honorable Arbitrator on the appeal
presented on March 31, and has decided in accordance with the provisions of paragraph
“A” of the chapter entitled “Plebiscitary Commission”, page 43 in the original English
text of the Award, to appoint a member who on behalf of Peru is to act on said
commission and in doing so begs to place the following observations on record: The
Government of Peru considers that the petitions which it has presented do not involve
an amendment of the Award nor even a broadening of its terms but simply to enunciate
its scope clearly and precisely in the spirit of equity and justice in which the Honorable
Arbitrator has acted and in which, it is but natural, a plebiscite will be held, presided
over by one who so worthily represents him and his great nation.
Further, the Government of Peru holds that in a decision pronounced in an arbitral suit
touching so serious a matter involving as it does the integrity of territory and the
sentiment of nationality, one of the parties thereto is not to be debarred from freely and
fully exercising every legitimate action in order to defend its rights. Therefore, the
Government of Peru does not concur with the Honorable Arbitrator when he asserts

that the fundamental petitions in its appeal are beyond the powers of the Arbitrator
inasmuch as the arbitral agreement precisely provides that in the event of a plebiscite
being declared in order the Honorable Arbitrator is authorized to determine the
conditions thereof.
The principle among such conditions is that the absolute freedom and protection of the
voters shall be assured as otherwise the provision for a popular ballot called for in
Article III of the Treaty of Ancón would be frustrated.
Although the Honorable Arbitrator considers that the plebiscitary commission is
sufficient to guarantee a true ballot there can be no doubt that the presence of the
authorities and troops of the occupant state would hamper said guarantees with
inevitable difficulties and limitations, both as to the prevention of fraud and to avoid
and repress violence on the part of the administration in occupation, which it would be
practicably [practically] impossible to control effectively in such a manner as to
prevent it from harming the other party by availing itself of its dominant position to
win the plebiscite by unlawful means if needed. The Government of Peru is confident
that should this eventuality materialize the authorities and troops of the occupying state
would be replaced by those of some neutral administration.
Nor does the Government of Peru concur with the Honorable Arbitrator in his
interpretation of the Supplementary Act of the Arbitration Protocol, where from the
provision that “even in the event that the Arbitrator decides that a plebiscite need not be
held pending an agreement as to the disposition of the territory, the administrative
organization of the provinces shall not be disturbed” he deduces that “therefore, even in
the event that the Arbitrator had held Chile’s present possession unlawful, he would
have been without power to direct the evacuation of the provinces pending an
agreement as to the disposition of the territory”.
As a matter of fact, the relevant article of the Supplementary Act contemplated only the
possibility of not changing the administrative organization of the territory in the event
that the holding of the plebiscite would be decided against, clearly establishing thus the
fact that said administrative organization could be changed should the contrary occur,
namely, a declaration that a plebiscite should be held.
The aim of the Peruvian petition is to establish in the territory subject to the plebiscite,
a situation of at least relative equity, inasmuch as absolute justice would be an
impossibility after the acts of intimidation and terrorism of which the Peruvians have
been the victims and which have created a situation sui generis in the Provinces and
from which, in all fairness, the only way out would have been the return of the
Provinces directly to the rightful owner. Such a situation of equity is all that Peru asks
for and it is to be regretted that the Honorable Arbitrator, in all his wisdom and who
had and has unlimited powers to determine the conditions of the plebiscite, should have

considered it convenient not to use as yet precisely the most important of them all, thus
placing one of the parties in a dominant position and leaving the other in one of evident
inferiority. In view of the foregoing, Peru did not deem it necessary to specifically
request, in the presentation of her case, the evacuation of the territory because it relied
on the justice of the Arbitrator in the event of the rejection of the Peruvian thesis that a
plebiscite would not be in order owing to the time elapsed since it should have been
held, and owing also to the recalcitrant attitude of Chile and to the acts committed by
that country against the Peruvian population, that the Arbitrator would impose such
conditions for the plebiscite as would tend to compensate Peru for the evident injustices
committed against her during the unlawful occupation of her territory.
Our claim for guarantees arises from the unequal position of the two States in the
territories in dispute and tends to counteract the effects of the acts of violence and
injustice to which one of the parties has made a victim of the other and since the
Honorable Arbitrator established other conditions, it would seem reasonable to expect
that he would not forget the main feature that stands out above all others in modern
plebiscites, namely, that of removing the armed forces of both the interested parties as
well as the heads of their administrative bodies.
With reference to our petition regarding the right to vote of those who have been
expelled it should be stated that although Chilean and Peruvian residents are apparently
on an equal footing, it is a well known fact that the residence of the former has not been
interrupted while that of the latter has suffered interruptions at the hands of those
interested in eliminating them and who were powerful enough to do so. There is
besides the grave circumstance that Chile has been able to introduce into the provinces
as large a population as she has seen fit, while on the other hand the Peruvians have
been continually expelled, and thus unequal conditions leading to an evident injustice
have been created with the result that a Chilean with two years residence prior to July,
1922, can vote whereas a Peruvian born outside the territory of Tacna and Arica and
with an equal or even longer residence can not vote simply because the Chilean
authorities have expelled him.
As such a state of affairs would cause an exasperating inequality, the Peruvian
Government is reluctant to admit that this is the sense in which the Award should be
construed and trusts that the Plebiscitary Commission will take a similar view.
The Award admits that expulsions have taken place though not in a number sufficient to
warrant a ruling that the plebiscite would be out of order. It declares that it is far from
condoning such acts of violence, therefore condemning them, but the logical outcome
of such condemnation would appear to have been the provision of such conditions for
the plebiscite as would have restored the justice which has been outraged by one of the
parties and would to some extent have repaired the harm done to the other. Peru feels,
however, that its insistence on this point is now more than ever justified by the fact that

since the rendering of the Award, Chile has deliberately and systematically violated the
status created by the Award by removing several hundred natives and other Peruvian
residents of the Provinces under occupation and sending them south in order to deprive
them of their right to vote in the plebiscite. These removals have been denounced to the
Honorable Arbitrator and it should be noted that Chile has not attempted to deny them
but simply explains them as a “voluntary exodus of the natives who were attracted by
the high wages paid in the nitrate fields”, and since this concerns a relatively large
number of voters of which the party that wields force within the territory seeks
violently to deprive the other, it would appear to be within the right of the Honorable
Arbitrator to reestablish the balance thus disturbed, inasmuch as the Washington
Protocol has invested him with full powers which he has expressly reserved for himself
in the Award.
The Government of Peru with all due respect for the arbitral decision which has been
rendered, finds no reason to change the above opinions which have been expressed, and
will maintain in its integrity its claim concerning provision of those guarantees which
are absolutely indispensable for the holding of a true plebiscite, the execution and
results of which will be acceptable to the world at large and which Peruvian citizens
may attend on a footing of absolute equality with those of Chile so that the referendum
shall express the true popular decision contemplated in the Treaty of Ancon.
It is not to be supposed, and Peru in no way supposes, that it was the intention of the
Honorable Arbitrator to deny Peruvian residents expelled by the Chilean authorities the
right to vote, as the immediate result of such an interpretation would be to constitute a
precedent incompatible with the concepts of justice and leading to a continuation of the
acts of violence condemned by the Award.
Moreover, the agreement entered into, empowered the Honorable Arbitrator to decide
on all difficulties arising from the unfulfilled stipulations of Article III of the Treaty of
Ancon and should the occasion arise, to determine all the conditions of the plebiscite,
therefore the present arbitration confers on the Honorable Arbitrator far fuller
jurisdiction of powers than the mere deciding of whether the plebiscitary provision is in
force or has expired. To sum up, what Peru has sustained and sustains is that the entire
plebiscitary process must rest on the strictest principles of international justice and that
it would be a painful contrast for the juridic and moral conscience of the peoples of this
continent that, if in Europe, which has just immerged [emerged] from a devastating war
which left in its wake a host of violent passions, the peoples involved in the struggle
reacted immediately and rectified their frontiers decreeing plebiscites based upon these
precepts, [while] here in free America, without the pressure and passions of a recent
war, a plebiscite is decreed which differs but very little from those which were imposed
under a regime of bayonets to disguise the annexations and the conquests of the
victorious soldiers of the Napoleonic Wars.

Notwithstanding the foregoing observations which reflect, though imperfectly, the
feelings of the Peruvian people, the Government of Peru, whose high sense of duty
both for itself and its international obligations has prompted it to accept the Award,
takes note of the statements contained in the last communication from the Honorable
Arbitrator to the effect that “the foregoing observations, however, are without prejudice
to the exercise of the powers of the Plebiscitary Commission”, powers which
“guarantee to every qualified voter full assurance of personal protection as well as the
assurance that his vote may be freely cast and will be fairly counted”; that “the
plebiscitary commission shall have in general complete control over the plebiscite”;
that [it] will “prevent fraudulent voting”; which [that it”] has full powers “involving the
qualifications of voters and the prevention of fraud”; insisting also that “ample
provision is also made for appeal from the Plebiscitary Commission to the Arbitrator”,
and lastly that the Arbitrator “will leave nothing undone which scrupulous care and
attention on his part can accomplish in securing a fair election and equal justice to both
parties”.
The Government of Peru interprets these statements regarding its requests for
guarantees in the sense that the Honorable Arbitrator refers them to the Plebiscitary
Commission as the body which is empowered to grant them and which will grant them
if they prove to be necessary.
With due consideration of the foregoing appreciations of the matters herein dealt with,
the Government of Peru appoints Mr. Manuel de Freyre Santander as its delegate to the
Plebiscitary Commission.
The Government of Peru is confident that this decision arrived at, after mature
consideration, will be justified by the rigorous impartiality of the proceedings of the
Plebiscitary Commission.
I have [etc.]
HERNÁN VELARDE
47 Received by the Department in English only.

[Document 213]
The Secretary of State to the Permian Ambassador (Velarde)
WASHINGTON, June 30, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note, dated June 18, 1925,
together with its enclosure, a communication of the same date addressed by you to the
President, as Arbitrator in the Tacna-Arica arbitration, and to enclose a communication
from the Arbitrator, dated June 29, 1925, in reply thereto, for transmission to the
Government of Peru.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Enclosure]
President Coolidge to the Permian Ambassador (Velarde)
IN THE MATTER OF THE
TACNA-ARICA ARBITRATION
JUNE 29, 1925
The Arbitrator has had the honor to receive and carefully examine the communication
addressed to him under date of June 18, 1925, by the Ambassador of Peru and notes
with satisfaction the appointment of the Peruvian member of the Plebiscitary
Commission.
The Arbitrator adheres in all respects to his ruling of April 9, 1925, and is of the
opinion that this ruling leaves nothing to be said on his part in response to the present
communication of the Government of Peru.
A copy of the communication of the Peruvian Government and of this response is being
furnished to the Ambassador of the Government of Chile.
CALVIN COOLIDGE
Arbitrator

By the Arbitrator
Frank B. Kertocc
Secretary of State

[Document 214]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Department much disturbed by press reports regarding restrictions placed by Chilean
authorities on movement of Peruvians in Tacna and Arica and that these restrictions
have even been applied to Peruvian officials connected with the Plebiscitary and
Boundary Commissions.48 Please telegraph immediately substance of all restrictive
measures as well as full details of Ordoñez incident.
KELLOGG

[Document 215]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 12:20 a.m.]
From Pershing: Referring to Department’s cable of August 11, 3 p.m., to American
consul.
1. The restrictions to which the Department referred are embodied in two decrees, one
of Arica and Tacna, restricting it to the railway and the main highway; (2) regulates
travel within the Department of Nini, confining it to specified roads; (3) regulates
travel to Arica harbor, and [from?] Bolivia, and access to vessels in the harbor; and (4)
provides for further regulations by the Government of Arica. The second decree
regulates in greater detail travel within the Province of Arica; in substance, it requires
inhabitants of rural districts to travel to Arica along the main public road after having
obtained permits which are visaed by the police at certain points en route and are taken
up at the end of the journey, thus suspending direct transit from one rural community to
another. The regulations apply to everyone, but members of delegations are provided
with universal circulation cards. The confidential explanation of the Chilean
Commissioner is that the restrictions embodied in the decrees are necessary to protect
persons and rural property in view of the floating population which the coming
plebiscite will bring into the province, but he denies any attempt to control the
plebiscite. In my opinion the restrictions are unnecessary and are calculated to make a
free and fair election impossible. I have taken up the restrictions informally with the
Chilean Commissioner, and unless the matter is adjusted satisfactorily it will be
brought before the Commission for action.
The Ordoñez incident was regrettable but not important. Señor Ordoñez,49 after having
landed once and proceeded to Tacna, returned to the Peruvian transport and then
attempted to land again without the circulation card which had been furnished him, and
at the pier he was turned back by the police. As soon as the matter came to the attention
of the Chilean Commissioner full written apologies were made. Señor Ordoñez has
since returned to Tacna, and I regard incident as closed.

2. In regard to the general situation, the Peruvian member of the Commission on
August 10 proposed provisions for neutralization of the territory.

3. Chilean member holds that the Commission cannot even discuss the internal
administration of the territory. He offers to consider these matters privately with me but
he insists that the Commission is powerless to act. The issue on the Commission’s
authority must be made soon. There is no doubt of Chilean oppression and intimidation
of Peruvians. Members of my delegation have already discovered several cases. The
general attitude of the Peruvian population is one of abject fear.
Referring again to the matter of circulation, that is, of travel restrictions, the Chileans
hold it to be entirely within their authority, but they will submit decrees to me for
suggested changes. The Chilean attitude is very rigid and determined, although they
assert that they are ready to guarantee free and fair treatment to the Peruvians. I am
trying to keep the proceedings of the Commission confidential in order to avoid public
discussion in both countries. Under existing conditions a fair plebiscite is quite
impossible and it will be difficult task to bring the parties together, so bitter is the
animosity between them. Pershing.
VON TRESCKOW
49 Oscar H. Ordonez, Peruvian Commissioner on the Special Boundary Commission.

[Document 216]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: Your telegram, August 14, 11 a.m. The Department is greatly disturbed
by the conditions you report.
1. Although without opportunity for careful investigation, I am inclined to the
opinion that the decrees which you say make a free and fair election
impossible violate the decision of the Arbitrator within his authority under
the treaty and seem unnecessarily to restrict travel. Plebiscitary Commission
is given generally complete control over the plebiscite and, as found by the
Arbitrator, that power is sufficient to guarantee full protection to every
qualified voter.
2. In regard to your second and third propositions, the original award and
supplemental ruling of the Arbitrator on Peru’s petition held that the territory
was to remain in Chile’s possession, that question of evacuation of the
territory and the substitution of American authority and forces was not within
the scope of Arbitrator’s authority, but that this was without prejudice of
Commission’s power to guarantee full assurance of personal protection and a
free ballot to every voter. Provision is made in the award that it may be
implied that exercise of Chile’s legislative, executive, and judicial power
should not go to extent of frustrating provisions of the award. I incline to
opinion that it is within power of the Plebiscitary Commission to decide
whether any act of Chile’s administration of Tacna and Arica would obstruct
fair and free vote, for Chile’s administration must not be inconsistent with the
Arbitrator’s award.
3. I take it that the Plebiscitary Commission will consider these questions. Do
you wish me to take any action before matter is decided by Commission and
it comes to Arbitrator for decision on an appeal if one is made, or do you
wish me to make informal representations to the Government of Chile in
endeavor to support your representations to Chilean Commissioner?
4. I should be pleased to have opinion of Mr. Dennis50 on these questions.

KELLOGG
50 William Coy Dennis, general legal adviser to the president of the Plebiscitary
Commission.

[Document 217]
The President of the Plebiscitary Commission (Pershing) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 9:30 a.m.]
Department’s telegram of August 14, 6 p.m., has just been received and considered.
Your statements on the award and the supplementary ruling are precisely as they are
understood by Mr. Dennis and me. I do not think it advisable to make definite issue at
this time on the points in question, but I shall not hesitate to do so when the time
comes. [Modifications?] of the traffic restrictions as we deem necessary are promised.
Meanwhile there are confusing reports, accusations, denials. Absolutely necessary for
us to determine for ourselves exact facts about conditions throughout territory, and for
this purpose we have sent for American assistants from Panama Canal Zone who speak
Spanish and who later will serve on registration and election boards. These men will be
sent out with clerical force to study conditions. This action taken with approval of both
Commissioners. After I receive their reports I shall be able to determine what demands
to make to obtain fair and free election. Will hold other questions in abeyance for time
being as far as Commission action is concerned. I earnestly request that Department
make no representations to either Peru or Chile, or even to intimate that I have made
any report on conditions. Time may come later on to take that action, and if it does, I
shall not hesitate to call on Department for all assistance it can give me, but I hope
Department will take no action except upon my request. Problem is not one that can be
hurried and will require much patient and careful handling. Purpose of my telegram of
August 14 was to keep you advised; there would be great danger should Department
take action now.
PERSHING

[Document 218]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: Your telegram August 16, 8 a.m. I shall follow your suggestions strictly.
After I had received your telegram the Chilean Ambassador called at his own request. I
made no reference to him about these specific matters. The Ambassador, however, said
that he had heard rumors that the Arbitrator was going to order Chilean military forces
out of Tacna and Arica, and that he thought that this action was not within Arbitrator’s
authority. I replied that it was true that the Arbitrator had found that under Treaty of
Ancon the sovereignty and control of Tacna and Arica were to remain with Chile
during plebiscite, but that by this was not meant that Chile was to use that sovereign
power or her military authority in any way to interfere with a fair and free election, and
that in my opinion the President of the Plebiscitary Commission and the Commission
had the authority to prevent any action, even of a sovereign nature, which would
interfere with a fair and free election; that I had not received any request from you to
act, but that if I had I should certainly back you up; that I was much disturbed by
reports in the papers on conditions in Tacna and Arica; and that I hoped the
Government of Chile would appreciate how important it was that there be no
interference with proper elections. Ambassador Mathieu said that he expected us to
support General Pershing if his actions were in accordance with his powers. I replied
that I was confident that General Pershing had good lawyers, was well advised, and
would not ask anything unreasonable.
I did not give him to understand that I had had complaints from you, but that I had
gained many very disturbing things from press reports, and that I was not wholly
satisfied with attitude of Chile. I thought this would put him on his guard and evidently
it did.
KELLOGG

[Document 219]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 10:02 p.m.]
77. Last week rumors reached me that more than a hundred natives of Tacna were
detained prisoners here in Santiago in various barracks. I investigated immediately and
requested information from Minister for Foreign Affairs. He ordered inquiry and
several days later informed me that 120 men who had refused to report for military
service had been compelled to report and had been sent to various regiments here to
render the required service; that they were not detained, except that no soldier can leave
his regiment without being guilty of desertion, and that a list of these men would be
given Pershing through the Chilean Commissioner and to you through Mathieu; they
would be returned to Tacna for the plebiscite whenever Pershing desires. Shall I
communicate this information to Pershing? Minister for Foreign Affairs asserted that he
and President Alessandri knew nothing of matter and that the military authorities look
upon it as a customary application of the rules of military discipline; nevertheless, I
doubt that without my intervention these men would have been allowed to return to the
provinces to vote.
COLLIER

[Document 220]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
impartiality in connection with the Tacna-Arica Arbitration Award and wishes its
representatives carefully to refrain from taking any action which might be construed as
favoring one of the Parties. You are directed to make no representations to the Chilean
Government regarding matters bearing on the plebiscite without previous authorization
from the Department.
no information direct to the Plebiscitary Commission. Department has transmitted the
information to Pershing.
KELLOGG
51 Not printed.

[Document 221]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Received September 7—11 a.m.]
[From Pershing:] Have just telegraphed Edwards, who is in Santiago until
approximately September 14th, as follows:
“American Embassy, Santiago, September 6, 4 p.m. For Mr. Agustín
Edwards. Regret to advise you that situation here is becoming intolerable.
Civic organizations appear to have taken matters into their own hands.
Several Peruvians badly beaten yesterday. Consider it unsafe for Peruvians.
Decided hostility to Americans very much in evidence and therefore all
American observers withdrawn from activities. Local authorities seem
incompetent or unwilling to keep order. Senior member Chilean delegation
denies authority in the premises. Request Chilean Government take
immediate action before situation gets entirely beyond control.”
I believe that the inflammatory speeches delivered by the Presidents of Chile and Peru
since our arrival here partially responsible for the conditions which prevail here and
which if continued may render a fair plebiscite impossible. Suggest the advisability of
an appeal by the Arbitrator to the two Presidents not only abstain from everything
which could increase difficulties of the situation but to lose no opportunity to give calm
and pacific counsel to their peoples.
PERSHING
VON TRESCKOW

[Document 222]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: Your telegram of September 6, 4 p.m. Department has just received
following telegram from Ambassador Collier:
Pershing’s telegram to Edwards on intolerable situation in Tacna and
necessity for immediate action by Chilean Government was transmitted
Monday to Edwards.
Edwards yesterday requested the Embassy to send reply to Pershing,
asserting that courtesy required that he reply the same channels employed by
Pershing. I consented to send reply merely as medium of communication
without my action being regarded as report by me or as implying approval of
its contents. Since Pershing’s telegram was received, President Alessandri,
Mr. Edwards, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs have come to me to
complain that the Peruvians have adopted provocative policy deliberately
calculated to create disorder, and that General Pershing shows undue
sympathy with them and fails to appreciate Chile’s right to govern the
province. There are bitter complaints against the United States for allowing
Americans to form part of the Peruvian delegation and electioneer actively
for Peru. This is looked upon as inconsistent with impartiality and as creating
the impression that the United States favors Peru. Complaints also made that
General Pershing upholds Peru in the publication of a newspaper whose
articles slander the power that has right of provisional government and also
in its sale by methods which insult Chileans. Alessandri and Minister for
Foreign Affairs said that Chile has determined to maintain order but not to
yield any advantage which is secured to the occupying power by treaty and is
admitted by the award. Both stated that Peru was representing herself as
weaker nation in order to win Pershing’s sympathies, and was seeking to
force the United States to yield to her demands by threats of withdrawal from
the plebiscite. Mr. Edwards went so far as to say that Chile would withdraw
before she would waive any of her rights, and that this step would be
disastrous for Pershing’s prestige.

I replied to all of them that I was without specific instructions, but that the
impartiality of the United States was beyond question and that the honor of
the American Nation required guarantee of fairness to both Chile and Peru;
that I could make no report as I had no personal knowledge; that General
Pershing could give the Government of the United States full information and
that the Chilean Ambassador in Washington was the one to make such
representations as Chile wished to make to the American Government; that
Chile’s right to govern the territory carried with it the responsibility of
maintaining order; and that if either Chile or Peru withdrew from the
plebiscite, the step would be disastrous for it as it would be condemned by
the public opinion of the world.
President Alessandri has telegraphed most emphatically to the intendente to
maintain order at all costs and to safeguard the rights of the Plebiscitary
Commission, of its agents, and of every qualified voter; and he has
telegraphed an appeal to civic organizations to refrain from violence and
from retaliation for murder of two Chileans allegedly by two Peruvians, and
to give the Peruvian voters all their rights, etc. It is said that Alessandri is
once more considering advisability of going to Arica and inviting President
of Peru to join him there. Collier.
Referring to request in your telegram of September 6, do you, in the light of Collier’s
telegram, still wish me to make representations through Embassy at Santiago? I feel
that his telegram somewhat alters the situation and might make it advisable to wait to
see if Government of Chile takes action that President Alessandri has promised Collier
would be taken. If you still desire me to make representations, however, shall I cover
the whole ground of your message to Edwards and protest against the conditions in
Tacna and Arica which you say prevent a fair election, or do you wish me merely to
cover matter in your concluding paragraph, that is, to ask the President of Chile to
refrain from making inflammatory speeches, to abstain from anything by which
difficulties of situation would be increased, and to lose no opportunity to give calm and
pacific counsel to the people. I thought that if, perhaps, I limit myself to this statement,
your position might be weakened and Chilean Government will not get the idea that we
believe its action will prevent a fair election. In my understanding, however,
representations to the President of Peru should merely correspond to last paragraph
your telegram. In view of your telegram of August 16, 8 p.m., in which you request that
no representations be made without your approval, I hesitate to make any in present
instance without your further advice. I suggest also that whatever I do should be done
as Secretary of State rather than in the name of the Arbitrator.
KELLOGG

[Document 223]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
55. You are instructed, whenever a suitable occasion offers, to make it plain to
Americans in Chile that this Government hopes they will abstain from all activities
tending to favor one side in the Tacna-Arica controversy. Inasmuch as the President of
the United States has been chosen as Arbiter, it behooves Americans resident in both
Chile and Peru to maintain an absolutely neutral attitude toward this question and avoid
all expressions of opinion which may tend to inflame partisan feeling and further strain
the existing relations between the two countries.
You will also see that the sentiments of this Government as expressed above are fully
understood by the Government of Chile.
Repeated mutatis mutandis to Lima.
KELLOGG

[Document 224]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
ARICA, September 13, 1925—noon.
From Pershing:
In view of all that has taken place since my cable to you of August 6, I wish to
withdraw my suggestion that you make representations to Presidents of Chile and Peru.
I deem this action inadvisable at the present time. I deeply appreciate tone of your
cable which is most gratifying. Edwards will return to Arica on Tuesday, and some
improvement in situation may be brought about by his return. I think it best for you not
to take action until later on, when occasion will probably arise as a result of our
demands for creation of essential prerequisites to free plebiscite. I shall cable you later
on. Pershing.
VON TRESCKOW

[Document 225]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: Your telegram of September 13. The Department appreciates efforts you
are making to arrange for fair and free plebiscite and has utmost confidence in your
judgment and that you will accomplish all that is possible under the very trying and
disheartening conditions which confront you.
We must realize that ideal conditions cannot be obtained; that we can only strive to
approximate as nearly as may be practicable and not be inconsistent with terms of the
award.
You realize, of course, how unfortunate it would be were the Commission to be
compelled to withdraw without carrying out its mission, and I hope that the Chilean
authorities will be brought to see that interests of Chile demand the plebiscite be held in
manner which will convince world that Chile can be relied on to fulfill spirit as well as
letter of her international agreements and to accord justice and fair play to her
opponents.
KELLOGG

[Document 226]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
From Pershing: Secretary’s telegram of September 18, 6 p.m. The purpose of my letters
and cables has been to give you and the Arbitrator as far as is possible a clear idea of
the extraordinary and astonishing conditions which confront us here. My statements
and conclusions are based wholly on my own observations and those of my delegation.
The Chileans have pursued methods of violence, intimidation, and deportation,
persistently and relentlessly, to the extent that the numbers of the male Peruvians of
voting age have been materially reduced in the provinces. The greater part of those who
remain are so thoroughly cowed that they fear to acknowledge having Peruvian
sentiments. Those who have been forced to leave cannot safely return at this time,
notwithstanding any assurances Chileans might give for their personal protection.
It is extremely doubtful to my mind whether it will be possible to create even
reasonably fair conditions consistent with the award, but the Arbitrator can rest assured
that I shall spare no effort to that end. I should prefer infinitely to see the plebiscite fail
and the Plebiscitary Commission withdraw rather than to have our Government be a
party to an election conforming to present intentions of the authorities here. So far as
concerns me personally it may be understood that I would not for a moment be a party
to such a scandal.
I am fully convinced now that neither Department nor Arbitrator could have had
anything like a clear conception of situation here when award was written. In light of
my investigations, conditions were then same or worse. I quite appreciate serious
consequences should the Commission fail to complete its mission; but unless attitude
of Chile can be changed and honest assistance substituted for obstruction, then the
Commission must fail.
In endeavor to produce improvement in situation I shall present soon to Commission
certain demands covering prerequisites for free plebiscite which my advisers are
preparing and of which Arbitrator will be informed in advance. Pershing.

Von "Trescxow

[Document 227]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
From Pershing: After careful consideration of the conditions disclosed by such
observations and investigations as have been practicable under existing circumstances,
I am convinced that energetic action must be taken to create an atmosphere of freedom
and fairness that is consistent with fulfilment of the award and essential to the
plebiscite contemplated by the arbitration, and I propose to lay before Plebiscitary
Commission at early date following resolution: [Draft not printed; the text of resolution
adopted by the Plebiscitary Commission on November 2, differs only in minor textual
changes, and is printed infra, out of chronological order.]
I and my advisers have given prerequisites embodied in proposed resolution most
careful attention. We agree unanimously that fulfillment of these prerequisites or their
substantial equivalent absolutely essential to progress.
I am convinced that Commission in adopting the resolution will be acting well within
limits of the powers conferred by the award. In this opinion I am supported by Dennis
and Kreger54 who have prepared a written opinion that has my unqualified approval.
Following is synopsis of their opinion: (1) The authority of the Plebiscitary
Commission is derived from and limited by the opinion and award of the Arbitrator. (2)
The Arbitrator when deciding that a plebiscite was in order held that during the
plebiscite the territory should continue in Chile’s possession, subject to Chilean law
and authority, but that consequent control by Chilean Government is subject to the
limitation that Chilean laws and authority shall not be applied so as to prevent the
holding of a fair plebiscite. (3) Principle that during the plebiscite period Chilean
authority may not be so exercised as to prevent a fair plebiscite would follow as an
immediate corollary from the principle that the plebiscite is to be held in territory in
Chile’s possession as well as the fact that Chilean laws and authority even if limiting
principle had not been expressed [disallowed?] by Arbitrator. (4) Chile is not only
under a negative obligation not to exercise her powers in such way as to prevent a fair
plebiscite but is also under positive obligation to exercise her powers so as to render a
fair plebiscite possible. (5) The arbitral provision for the international commission to
have in general complete control over the plebiscite is inconsistent with any theory that

Chile’s power to govern the plebiscitary territory during the plebiscite is without
limitation. The Commission’s control can exist only in derogation of the power of
Chile to exercise authority within the plebiscitary territory, and to this derogation Chile
consented in agreeing to the supplementary act appended to the protocol of arbitration
by which the Arbitrator was empowered to determine the conditions of the plebiscite.
Were the authority of Chile unlimited, the Commission could have no control whatever
over the plebiscite. The Commission would have no function and there would exist no
reason for its establishment, [apparent omission] inconsistent with the high character of
the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator specifically mentioned certain matters requiring
regulatory action by the Plebiscitary Commission, in some instances adding
instructions as to how the regulatory power of the Commission should be exercised, but
manifestly he did not attempt to cover the whole ground and he provided for unknown
factors and unforeseeable emergencies by empowering the Commission in broad terms
to exercise complete control generally over the plebiscite, thus investing the
Commission with the power to deal with everything that is essential to a fair election
and equal justice to both parties, subject only to the terms of his opinion and award. (7)
The plebiscite looked to by the award is one fair not only in form but in substance. As a
corollary it follows that Chile is not entitled to any unfair or inequitable advantage by
reason of her right to possess and govern the territory during the period of the
plebiscite. Complete control over the plebiscite was given the Commission by the
Arbitrator for the very purpose of making certain that Chile should not use possession
and control of the territory subject to the plebiscite to obstruct or prevent it. (8) It is
well within the powers of the Commission to adopt the proposed resolution setting
forth certain prerequisites to a fair plebiscite in Tacna-Arica. Whether the
accomplishment of the reforms suggested in that resolution is essential to continuing
with the plebiscite is a question of fact addressing itself to the judgment and
accomplishments of the Commission rather than being a question of law.
The resolution represents a careful and successful effort not to overstep the line
between counteractive checking and forestalling misgovernment, on the one hand,
which tends to obstruct or prevent a fair plebiscite, all of which is within the
competence of the Commission, and taking over the plebiscitary territory, on the other,
which is not within the competence of the Commission. The resolution merely points
out some instances where it is necessary for Chile to take such action as will amount to
the observance of her obligations to exercise her control of the plebiscitary territory so
as not to interfere with or prevent a fair plebiscite but to facilitate one.
Doubtless Chile will contend that the Plebiscitary Commission can not lawfully adopt
the proposed resolution by arguing that the award invests the Commission with only
the limited powers specifically mentioned in the award and that under the award the
Commission is required to formulate at once regulations governing the plebiscite. This
position is untenable both practically and legally. A committee to formulate the election
and registration regulations has been constituted but it can neither carry forward nor

complete its labors satisfactorily until after the reforms demanded by the resolution
have been accomplished.
The resolution will not satisfy the Peruvian member of the Commission because it
comes far short of what he believes to be necessary, but I believe that he will vote for
it. Its adoption will most certainly be followed by Chilean appeal to the Arbitrator.
New developments taking place before the introduction of the resolution may render
certain modifications advisable. I am not committing myself absolutely to the
resolution as now cabled, but in the light of my previous communications it will serve
to indicate the nature of any modifications that may have to be made on short notice.
I have made the prerequisites as easy for acceptance by Chile as is consistent with
progress. If policy of obstruction be continued, the Commission will be compelled
more and more to exercise of its latent powers in order to carry out the award.
Pershing.
VON TRESCKOW
53 Telegram in two sections.
54 Col. Edward A. Kreger, legal adviser to the president of the Plebiscitary
Commission.

[Document 228]
Resolution Adopted by the Plebiscitary Commission on November 2,
192555
Resolved by the Plebiscitary Commission, Tacna-Arica Arbitration, That the
prerequisites to a fair plebiscite in Tacna-Arica hereinafter enumerated are essential at
the present time to further progress in the task with which the Commission is charged,
and should be accomplished:
ITEM 1. Removal from the plebiscitary territory of the Army now in that
territory, except a force approximately equal to the Army maintained by the
Peruvian Government in an area substantially equal in extent to the
plebiscitary territory and immediately to the northward, and except any
additional force the retention of which in the plebiscitary territory may be
deemed necessary by the Chilean Government and the presence of which is
not deemed, by the Commission, incompatible with a fair plebiscite.
ITEM 2. Transfer from the plebiscitary territory of the carbineers now in that
territory, except a force equal to that on duty in the territory on July 20,
1922,56 and except any additional personnel, either retained in the territory or
transferred thereto by way of replacement, the presence of which is deemed
necessary by the Chilean Government and not deemed, by the Commission,
incompatible with a fair plebiscite: Provided, however, that of the carbineers
now in the plebiscitary territory those individuals only shall be retained
therein whose retention is not considered, by the Commission, incompatible
with a fair plebiscite.
ITEM 3. Transfer from the plebiscitary territory of the police and secret service
personnel now in that territory, except a force of each equal to that on duty in
the territory on July 20, 1922,57 and except any additional personnel, either
retained in the territory or transferred thereto by way of replacement, the
presence of which is deemed necessary by the Chilean Government and not
deemed, by the Commission, incompatible with a fair plebiscite: Provided,
however, that of the police and secret service personnel now in the
plebiscitary territory those individual members only shall be retained therein
whose retention is not considered, by the Commission, incompatible with a
fair plebiscite.

ITEM 4. Relief of all Army, carbineer, police and secret service personnel from
duty as sub-delegates, district inspectors, and in general from duty in any
civil executive capacity whatsoever, in the plebiscitary territory; such
functionaries to be replaced during the plebiscitary period by civil officials
appointed by proper Chilean authority.
ITEM 5. Relief, upon request of the Commission, of each and every public
functionary in the plebiscitary territory, military, carbineer, police, secret
service, or civil executive,58 who, in the judgment of the Commission, has
used, is using, or pending the completion of plebiscitary operations shall use
his position or powers in a manner designed to repress or prevent legitimate
expression of views touching issues to be determined by the plebiscite; each
functionary so relieved to be replaced by another appointed by proper
Chilean authority.
ITEM 6. Transfer from the plebiscitary territory of every relieved sub-delegate,
district inspector, or other civil executive, who is a member of the military,
carbineer, police or secret service personnel and is not a native of the
plebiscitary territory.59
ITEM 7. Removal of all restrictions upon entering or leaving the plebiscitary
territory that may be inconsistent with the free return, presence, or departure
of persons claiming to be plebiscitary electors, and of such other persons as
may desire to engage in any legitimate form of propaganda, publicity, or
other form of electoral activity in the plebiscitary territory, in the interest of
either of the two candidates for ultimate sovereignty; and like freedom for
press representatives. This shall not be construed so as to preclude reasonable
supervision and limitation by the Chilean Government in a manner and for a
purpose not deemed, by the Commission, inconsistent with a fair plebiscite.
ITEM 8. Removal of all restrictions upon travel within the plebiscitary territory,
and modification of hotel and guest laws and regulations applicable in that
territory so that such laws and regulations may not interfere with the freedom
essential to a fair plebiscite. This shall not be construed so as to preclude
reasonable police and sanitary regulations prescribed by the Chilean
Government and not deemed, by the Commission, inconsistent with a fair
plebiscite.
ITEM 9. Establishment of equal opportunity and equal protection from
molestation or interference for public meetings, parades, addresses, and other
forms of legitimate public propaganda touching the plebiscite, as well as for
legitimate private discussion of plebiscitary issues, in the plebiscitary
territory, irrespective of whether the effort is made in the interest of Chile or

in the interest of Peru; and establishment of equal opportunity and equal
protection for the display, in the plebiscitary territory, by private persons and
by legitimate organizations, of the flag of either of the two candidates for
ultimate sovereignty. This shall not be construed so as to preclude reasonable
supervision and limitation by the Chilean Government in a manner and for a
purpose not deemed, by the Commission, inconsistent with a fair plebiscite.
ITEM 10. Removal of censorship from the cables and of any existing censorship
from the press, radio, telegraph, telephone and mails, within, to or from the
plebiscitary territory.
ITEM 11. Return to the plebiscitary territory60 by Chile at her expense of every
man within Chilean jurisdiction who either directly61 or through the Peruvian
Commissioner claims the right to vote in the plebiscite, alleges that he left
the plebiscitary territory involuntarily on or after April 13, 1924, and makes a
prima facie case, satisfactory to the Commission, of electoral right and
involuntary departure.
SECTION 2. That the President of the Commission be and he is hereby instructed to cause
an authenticated copy of this resolution to be presented to the Chilean Member of the
Commission, and that the Chilean Member of the Commission be and he is hereby
instructed to cause this resolution to be brought to the attention of the proper Chilean
authorities.62
The foregoing resolution was adopted by the Plebiscitary Commission, Tacna-Arica
Arbitration, on the second day of November, 1925.
JORDAN HERBERT STABLER
Secretary General
Tacna-Arica Arbitration
Plebiscitary Commission
JOHN J. PERSHING
President
55 Copy transmitted to the Department by General Pershing under covering letter of
November 7; received November 25. Footnotes have been used to indicate where the
text as adopted differs from the draft submitted by General Pershing.
56 The original draft provided that the carabineers then in the territory should be
replaced by others who had not served therein.

57 The original draft provided for replacement of police and secret service personnel in
the territory by others who had not served therein.
58 Here the original draft added “or of any other character.”
59 In the original draft provision was made for the “departure” (instead of transfer)
besides those listed, “of any other character neither a native nor a legal resident of the
territory.”
60 The original draft read “Return to Tacna Arica.”
61 “or indirectly” was here stricken from the original draft.
62 Section 2 was not in the original draft as telegraphed.

[Document 229]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: Your telegram September 24, 10 a.m. I have carefully considered with
former Secretary of State Hughes63 the legal questions and propositions in your
proposed resolution and submit the following for your personal information, not as a
ruling of the Arbitrator, but as personal opinion:
1. It is important that the Arbitrator should maintain his position strictly as
arbitrator and should not assume any different responsibility. President
Coolidge would not have consented to undertake to effect settlement between
Chile and Peru by use of armed forces. Forcible intervention for purposes
except protection of the interests of the United States and its nationals would
not have been within proper exercise of his authority. President Coolidge
consented to act as Arbitrator under definite terms of submission. He made
his award upon careful examination of the facts, and has thus demonstrated
his desire to obtain peaceable and just settlement. If his decisions within
scope of the arbitration are not carried out, responsibility will rest with those
who obstruct fulfillment of the award and not with him. Course of procedure
should be so determined as to make perfectly clear that responsibility, so that
all efforts to obscure it would be of no avail.
2. Chile is entitled to possession of the territory in dispute during holding of a
plebiscite, and her administrative authority continues while she thus retains
possession. The grounds of this conclusion are explicit in the award. The
decision rests upon provisions of the Treaty of Ancon which Arbitrator had
no authority to disturb. Right of Chile to remain in possession until the
plebiscite is not only derived from construction of the treaty but is supported
in terms of the submission to the Arbitrator which provide that, even should
Arbitrator decide that a plebiscite should not be held, the administrative
organization of the territory should not be disturbed until agreement should
be reached regarding the disposition of the provinces. Chile would not have
made an agreement divesting herself of possession and administrative
authority during plebiscite period, and cannot now be held to a course which
would violate her right under treaty and the terms of submission.

3. But Chile’s right to continue her administrative authority during the
holding of a plebiscite is no clearer than is her duty with respect to the
holding of plebiscite itself. Under Treaty of Ancon which, as Arbitrator held,
was still in effect, Chile not less than Peru was bound by provision for the
plebiscite. This provision manifestly implied fair opportunity for a plebiscite
through absence of coercion or intimidation which would frustrate purpose of
a plebiscite. The fact that Chile had the right to maintain administrative
authority during plebiscite period gave no color of right to permit coercion or
intimidation so as to destroy fair opportunity for a plebiscite, but on contrary
placed on her the responsibility of exercising her administrative authority in
such way as to provide fair opportunity and to protect from intimidation,
fraud, and oppression those who were entitled to vote. Chile’s very right to
retain possession of the territory in dispute is based on her agreement for the
plebiscite which implies necessarily use of her authority properly to
safeguard it. This duty of Chile’s is fundamental, underlying the award and
all proceedings under the award for the holding of the plebiscite.
4. As the Governments of Chile and Peru had not been able to agree upon
conditions of a plebiscite, the Arbitrator was empowered, should he find that
a plebiscite should be held, to establish these conditions for it. Purpose of the
submission to the Arbitrator of conditions of plebiscite was manifestly to
permit establishment of conditions which would permit fair plebiscite and not
merely to define details of a plebiscite which by means of intimidation,
coercion, or fraud would be plebiscite in form only and not one in substance
and truth as contemplated by the treaty. While Arbitrator was not empowered
to deprive Chile of her right under Treaty of Ancon to continue her
administrative authority during plebiscite period, he was empowered to
require use of that administrative authority for proper safeguarding of
plebiscite in such manner as to prevent coercion, intimidation, and fraud in
connection with it. As Chile’s retention of administrative authority was
conditioned by Treaty of Ancon upon holding of a plebiscite, her exercise of
administrative authority until and during the plebiscite was subject to the
conditions laid down by the Arbitrator, and these conditions could properly
embrace such requirements with respect to her administrative authority as in
opinion of Arbitrator were essential to fair opportunity for the plebiscite. It
was to this end that the Arbitrator provided that Chile and Peru should enact
appropriate legislation for protection of members of the Plebiscitary
Commission and of the registration and election boards in discharge of their
functions and for apprehension, trial, and punishment of persons guilty of
intimidation, bribery, fraud, or other offenses in connection either with
registration or with voting, or of interference with the Commission or of the
boards or of their members, etc. Not only was Chile bound by her agreement
for the plebiscite to use her administrative authority to protect voters against

practices of intimidation, fraud and oppression, but also if her existing
legislation was inadequate to provide punishment for aforesaid offenses,
Chile was required by award to enact such additional legislation as might be
needed to meet situation.
5. In defining conditions of the plebiscite, the Arbitrator provided for
constitution of Plebiscitary Commission for purpose of securing supervision
of plebiscite by competent and impartial authority. The powers of the
Commission are derived from the award, which provides that the
Commission “shall have in general complete control over the plebiscite.”
This general provision was not limited by subsequent particularization of
certain questions which Commission was authorized to determine. It is right
and duty of Commission to deal with any questions which relate to holding of
the plebiscite, and necessarily to deal with any questions arising from
attempts to interfere with plebiscite by coercion, intimidation, or fraud. The
Commission’s action in this regard must, of course, be consistent with terms
of the treaty. Commission could not require, any more than Arbitrator could
require, Chile to surrender her possession or her administrative authority
during plebiscite period, but Commission is entitled to require that Chile
exercise her authority in such a manner as to protect the plebiscite and take
all appropriate measures to prevent abuse of that authority by fostering or
permitting coercion, intimidation, or fraud.
6. You must determine, I think, the advisability of proposing this resolution.
It depends on state of the facts to which it is addressed; and, in view of your
knowledge of situation and in view of investigations which have been
conducted under your supervision, I assume that the conditions are as they
are reported and that the resolution is justified. I am of opinion that, subject
to reservations stated below, Plebiscitary Commission has authority to make
the requirements set forth in the resolution:
(a) I assume that army, carabineers, police, and secret service
are administrative officers within control of executive branch of
Chilean Government. I believe that such officials as those and other
administrative officers subject to executive control may properly be
subject of the resolution. I question whether resolution should be
made applicable to local judges or judicial officers who may have
status under Chilean Constitution which would make it impossible
for Chilean authorities to comply with resolution. I think care
should be taken not to introduce into resolution any officers who
are not subject to control of the Government of Chile under the
Constitution. I have had no opportunity to examine carefully new

Chilean Constitution; brief examination indicates that Constitution
promulgated September 18, 1925, promises in substance that
judges will remain in office during good behavior, but that the
lower judges will carry on respective functions for such time as law
may determine. Elsewhere in Constitution provision is made for
their appointment by President of Chile. I make this suggestion for
your careful consideration.
(b) I also think wisdom doubtful of providing for a determination
with respect to “reputation,” such as is provided in paragraph 5 of
resolution. It seems to me that without putting matter on basis of
“reputation,” it should be put, with qualifications stated above
regarding officers having constitutional status, upon basis of such
persons using or having used position or powers they hold in
manner hostile to fair plebiscite. Commission would have to get at
facts in order to establish reputation and these facts would probably
serve purpose in demanding transfer or removal.
(c) In regard to paragraph 10 of resolution which provides for
“removal of censorship if any exists,” I wonder if it would not be
better for Commission to determine whether such censorship exists
or not and its effect. Commission could demand freedom from
censorship if it has reason to believe that censorship exists.
7. I send this to you personally because Arbitrator should not prejudge any
question which may come before him in future. The broad right of appeal
exists and Arbitrator may review any action of Commission. It is, of course,
obviously important that I should be advised as far as practicable of
contemplated proceedings of Commission so that I may advise with you or
aid and assist you by representations to the Governments of Chile and Peru if
you think that step advisable. There is, I think, a distinction between the
Arbitrator’s advising these Governments upon disputed questions which may
be presented to him on appeal which may embrace questions of fact, and my
recognition in course of diplomatic interchanges of the clear principles laid
down by him upon which award proceeds and advisability of these
Governments doing everything possible to carry but fair plebiscite.
I should, for these reasons, like to have your views on whether or not you think that the
time has come for me to acquaint Chilean Government, through diplomatic channels,
with view that while the Arbitrator will render his decisions upon questions that come
to him in due course, it is quite inadmissible that Chile, after having invoked the
authority of the President of the United States as Arbitrator and after having insisted
upon recognition of her administrative authority under Treaty of Ancon during

plebiscite period, should attempt to use that administrative authority to thwart a fair
plebiscite. This is matter of broad international consequence and I feel there would be
ample justification for directing attention of Government of Chile to regrettable
character and consequences of such an attitude as it appears to have assumed. If any
question of fact is at issue, the Plebiscitary Commission is on the ground and can
determine it; but if Chile entertains any idea that she has right to use her administrative
authority not only so as not to prevent coercion and intimidation but actually to
countenance or to foster them, the Government of Chile should be disabused of this
notion.
Arbitrator’s award has sustained right to a plebiscite under the Treaty of Ancon and has
provided for the plebiscite; and if now Chile thwarts plebiscite by failing to use her
administrative authority properly to protect it and by refusing to accede to the
reasonable requirements of the Commission for such protection as is required, she will
be responsible for all the consequences.
It may be well to have in mind that one of these consequences may be not merely
failure of the present plebiscite and ordering of a new plebiscite, but a forfeiture of her
right to a plebiscite and with it of any right to the disputed territory; for, as award
indicates, one of conditions of Chile’s retention of the territory is that a plebiscite
should be held, with implication that neither Chile nor Peru should frustrate it.
Arbitrator has held that there was not sufficient evidence that Chile had frustrated it,
and that plebiscite should be held as stated in the treaty. But if now, with plebiscite
ordered and with Plebiscitary Commission on the ground, it appears that the
administrative authority of Chile is used in such a way as to frustrate the holding of an
appropriate plebiscite and that she refuses to take the reasonable measures essential to
that plebiscite, she may be exposed to the contention that she has forfeited any right to
the territory under the Treaty of Ancon.
I am not unmindful of provision in award for the ordering of new plebiscite and this
would appear to be appropriate if it appeared that objections which vitiated the first
plebiscite were not of such fundamental character as to void agreement for a plebiscite.
But if it appeared that Chile’s administrative authority had been exercised in way to
thwart purpose of the plebiscite or that she had refused to use that authority on request
of the Commission in way that would reasonably support a fair plebiscite, the logic of
the Arbitrator’s award might be turned against her and a court of arbitration might well
hold that Chile had been guilty of a prevention of performance of article III of Treaty of
Ancon and had lost her rights under it.
Upon the evidence presented to the Arbitrator in the case submitted, he was unable to
find Chile guilty of conduct frustrating the plebiscite. The Arbitrator was unwilling to
resort to disputable inferences in reaching such a grave conclusion. As he said in the
award, the plebiscite furnished an appropriate method of deciding the controversy; but

now award for the plebiscite is being carried out, and if the plebiscite under award is
prevented by Chile, this conduct can easily be put before the world in light which will
take from her all sympathy and will clearly demonstrate impartiality and justice of
position of the United States.
Please advise whether you wish me to make representations to the Government of
Chile, and, if you do, whether I shall wait until your resolution has been formulated and
presented to Plebiscitary Commission. It seems to me, if representations are made, that
they should be made at substantially same time your resolution is presented or else
immediately afterwards before they are rejected, and should be made on basis of your
resolution.
KELLOGG
advise and consult with Secretary Kellogg during the period of the plebiscite.

[Document 230]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
From Pershing: At the meeting of the Plebiscitary Commission held on October 8, I
introduced the resolution which was the subject of my cable Sept. 24, 10 a.m., and
suggested that it go over for consideration at meeting Oct. 10; suggestion was agreed to
unanimously.
Today I received a letter from Mr. Edwards in which, after referring to my resolution
and to the opinion of my legal advisers, which I read in support of resolution, the
Chilean Commission asserts that the gravity of the documents and their unexpected
scope make it imperative that he should wait for special instructions from his
Government, and he accordingly requested postponement of the meeting arranged for
tomorrow. Mr. Edwards closed his letter by saying that although he thought that his
Government would be willing to consider any reasonable suggestion to give every
qualified voter protection and freedom to which he is entitled, he was sure that it would
not surrender, however unfortunate might be the consequences, any of the rights which
Chile enjoys under Treaty of Ancon and arbitral award. Among these, he reminded me,
was right to full, unrestricted exercise of all the powers pertaining to sovereignty, a
right which the Government of Chile was determined to preserve undiscussed and
untouched through all the plebiscitary proceedings and which would only be
surrendered if and when the vote of the plebiscite shall have decided that it shall
terminate.
On receipt of Edwards’ letter and in accordance with procedure that the Commissioner
of Chile had suggested some time ago and has heretofore obtained, I sent one of my
staff to him with request that he call at my residence for consultation with me. He
declined to call but said that he would be at home all day.
I have informed Mr. Edwards in writing that I saw no reason for postponing
tomorrow’s meeting; that it might profitably be devoted to discussion of the resolution,
but that resolution will not be permitted to come to a vote at the meeting except with
his consent.

At the meeting tomorrow I expect to present results of observation and investigation by
me and by my staff, in support of my resolution.
The situation has not improved. Evidence continues to come in of repressive and
oppressive activities against Peruvians. Nothing less than is called for by my resolution
can be considered as a first step toward further progress with the plebiscite.
I believe that time for representations from the Secretary of State to the Government of
Chile has now arrived. Pershing.
VON TRESCKOW

[Document 231]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
61. You will please call immediately upon the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
Chief of State and read to them the following statement:
“The Secretary of State of the United States of America has received reports
concerning conditions in the provinces of Tacna and Arica which have
described the obstacles that exist under present condition[s] to a free and fair
plebiscite, in view of the course of conduct of the local Chilean authorities.
It appears to be maintained that the Treaty of Ancon and the Award provide
that the territory of Tacna and Arica shall be left in the possession and under
the administrative authority of Chile pending a plebiscitary vote to the
contrary and this being the case the Peruvians could not be considered on the
same plebiscitary status as the Chileans.
Mr. Kellogg desires to point out that while Chile is entitled to the possession
of the territory in dispute pending the holding of a plebiscite, and while she
thus retains possession her administrative authority continues, the right of
Chile to continue her administrative authority pending the holding of a
plebiscite is no clearer than her duty with respect to the holding of the
plebiscite itself. Under the Treaty of Ancon which, as the Arbitrator held, was
still in effect, Chile no less than Peru was bound by the provisions for the
plebiscite. This provision manifestly implied a fair opportunity for a
plebiscite through the absence of coercion or intimidation which would
frustrate the purpose of a plebiscite. The fact that Chile has the right to
maintain administrative authority pending a plebiscite gives her no color or
[of] right to permit coercion or intimidation so as to destroy a fair opportunity
for a plebiscite, but on the contrary places upon her the responsibility of
exercising her administrative authority so as to provide such an opportunity
and to protect those who are entitled to vote from intimidation, fraud and
oppression. Indeed, Chile’s right to retain the possession of the territory in
dispute is bottomed upon her agreement for the plebiscite which necessarily
implies the use of her authority properly to safeguard it. This duty of Chile is
fundamental and underlies the Award and all proceedings under the Award
for the holding of the plebiscite.

As the Governments of Chile and Peru had not been able to agree upon the
conditions of a plebiscite, the Arbitrator was empowered, in case he found
that a plebiscite should be held, to establish these conditions. The purpose of
the submission to the Arbitrator of the conditions of the plebiscite was
manifestly to permit the establishment of conditions which would permit a
fair plebiscite and not merely to define the details of a plebiscite which by
reason of coercion, intimidation or fraud would be a plebiscite only in form
and not one in substance and truth as contemplated by the Treaty. While the
Arbitrator was not authorized to deprive Chile of her right under the Treaty to
continue her administrative authority pending a plebiscite, he was
empowered to require the use of that administrative authority for the proper
safeguarding of the plebiscite and so as to prevent coercion, intimidation and
fraud in connection with it. As Chile’s retention of the administrative
authority was conditioned by the Treaty upon the holding of a plebiscite her
exercise of administrative authority pending and during the plebiscite was
subject to the conditions established by the Arbitrator. With this in view, the
arbitration provided that Chile and Peru should enact appropriate legislation
for the protection of the members of the Plebiscitary Commission and the
Registration and Election Boards in the discharge of their functions and for
the apprehension, trial and punishment of persons guilty of intimidation,
bribery, fraud or other offenses in connection with registration or voting in
the plebiscite, or of interference with the Plebiscitary Commission or the
Boards or the members of the Commission, et cetera (Award P. 49).64 Thus
not only was Chile bound by her agreement for the plebiscite to use her
administrative authority to protect voters from intimidation, fraud and
oppression, but if the existing legislation of Chile was not adequate to
provide punishment for such offenses, Chile was required by the Award to
enact such additional legislation as might be needed to meet the exigency.
It has been the cause of great disappointment to the Secretary of State to
learn that the laws have not been administered in such a manner as to give
reasonable assurances to the Peruvian voters that they will be unmolested and
permitted the free exercise of their suffrage as provided in the Award. In
defining the conditions of the plebiscite the Arbitrator provided for the
constitution of the Plebiscitary Commission for the purpose of securing the
supervision of the plebiscite by competent and impartial authority. The
powers of the Plebiscitary Commission are derived from the Award. This
provides (p. 44)65 that the Plebiscitary Commission ‘shall have in general
complete control over the plebiscite.’ This general provision was not limited
by the subsequent particularization of certain questions which the
Commission was authorized to determine. It is the right and duty of the
Commission to deal with any questions which relate to the holding of the

plebiscite, and necessarily to deal with any questions which arise as to
attempts by coercion, intimidation, or fraud to interfere with the plebiscite.
The Commission is entitled to require that Chile shall exercise her authority
in such manner as to protect the plebiscite and shall take all appropriate
measures to prevent the abuse of that authority by the fostering or permitting
of coercion, intimidation or fraud.
In expressing the most earnest hope that the Chilean Government will not
only issue adequate instructions for the conduct of Chilean officials in the
Provinces in dispute but will also see that they are faithfully carried out in
order that a free and fair plebiscite as contemplated by the Arbitrator’s Award
may be effected, Mr. Kellogg desires to add that it is quite inadmissible that
Chile after having invoked the President as Arbitrator, and having insisted
upon a plebiscite and upon the recognition of her administrative authority
under the Treaty pending the plebiscite should attempt to use that
administrative authority to thwart a fair plebiscite. It is hardly necessary to
allude to the regrettable situation that would arise should the Plebiscitary
Commission formally find, and the Arbitrator, on the matter coming before
him, should be compelled to hold, that, on account of the action of the
Chilean authorities in opposition to the terms of the Award, a free and fair
plebiscite could not be held.
The Secretary of State has also been informed that, in connection with the
work of the Special Commission on Boundaries, not only were adequate
penalties not being meted out to those officers guilty of molesting Peruvians
connected with the Boundary Commission but also that adequate measures
were not taken to see that they did not recur. Conditions were such that the
Peruvian members of the Commission were finally obliged to withdraw until
the situation should be remedied. Under the terms of submission the
Arbitrator was empowered to determine the claims pending with regard to
Tarata and Chilcaya, that is, to determine the northern and southern
boundaries of the territory in question. The Award of the Arbitrator sets forth
his decision as to the principle which should govern the delimitation of the
boundaries. The Arbitrator reserved the power to appoint a Special
Commission to draw the boundary lines of the territory covered by Article III
of the Treaty of Ancon in accordance with the Award. As the Arbitrator had
the authority to determine these boundaries, and it became necessary for the
purpose of this determination to ascertain the Peruvian provincial boundaries
of Tacna and Arica, it was competent for the Arbitrator to provide for an
agency to make investigation, draw the actual lines and report. The Special
Commission is the agency constituted for this purpose. The Arbitrator is still
in control of the proceeding; his work as Arbitrator is not finished and will
not be finished until the boundary lines are fixed. It was for this reason that

the Arbitrator reserved the authority to pass upon the report of the Special
Commission or to appoint a new Special Commission and pass upon its
report in like manner. Interferences with the Boundary Commission, or its
members, representatives or employees, while prosecuting their work under
the Arbitrator’s Award are interferences with the Arbitrator. They are
interferences with the discharge of the Arbitrator’s duty and with the exercise
of his authority under the terms of submission. Where such interferences
occur in territory under the Chilean administration, it is the obvious duty of
the Chilean Government to afford redress and prevent their recurrence by the
proper action of the authorities. If the Chilean Government should not do
this, if it should fail to afford protection to the Special Commission, its
representatives and employees, while they are at work under the decision of
the Award in territory under Chilean administration it would subject itself to
the responsibility of interfering with the Arbitrator and of violating the
essential conditions of the submission to arbitration. The Secretary of State
desires to express his confidence that the Chilean Government will not be
willing to disappoint the expectation of the just settlement of the long
standing controversy through the agreed submission to the Arbitrator and will
readily appreciate the importance of taking such action, in the discharge of its
administrative responsibility, as will assure a fair and free plebiscite, as
contemplated by the submission to arbitration and the Award, and adequate
protection to the Special Commission on Boundaries, its representatives and
employees, in the performance of the task assigned to it.”
You may leave a copy of the above statement with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
the Chief of State should they so request. At the same time you may orally call to their
attention that one of the consequences of a persistence of the Chileans in their present
attitude may be not simply the failure of the present plebiscite and the ordering of a
new plebiscite, but a forfeiture of Chile’s right to a plebiscite and with it of any right to
the disputed territory. For as the Award indicates, one of the conditions of Chile’s
retention of the territory is that a plebiscite should be held with the necessary
implication that neither party should frustrate it. The Arbitrator has held that there was
not sufficient evidence that Chile had frustrated it and that the plebiscite should be had
as contemplated by the Treaty. But if, now, with a plebiscite ordered, and with the
Plebiscitary Commission on the ground, it appears that the administrative authority of
Chile is used so as to frustrate the holding of an appropriate plebiscite, and that she
refuses to take the reasonable measures which are essential to such a plebiscite, she
may be exposed to the contention that she has forfeited any right to the territory under
the Treaty.
I am not unmindful of the provisions of the Award for the ordering of a new plebiscite
(p. 49) and this would be appropriate if it appeared that the objections which vitiated
the first plebiscite were not of such a fundamental character as to discharge the

agreement for a plebiscite. But if it appeared that the administrative authority of Chile
had been exercised so as to thwart the purpose of the plebiscite or that she had refused
to use that authority on the request of the Commission in a way that would reasonably
support a fair plebiscite, the logic of the Award of the Arbitrator might be turned
against Chile and it might well be held that she has been guilty of a prevention of the
performance of Article III of the Treaty of Ancon and had lost her rights thereunder.
Cable immediately when this message is delivered.65a
KELLOGG
65a Telegram not printed. The statement was read on October 13 to the Foreign
Minister, the Vice President, and the Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs.

[Document 232]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: I called in Chilean Ambassador today and read him my telegram to
Ambassador Collier of Oct. 10, 6 p.m. Ambassador Mathieu agreed with construction
of award and its legal effect as stated to Collier by me in telegram referred to, and
expressed gratification that I had authorized our Ambassador in Chile to make such
statement to Minister for Foreign Affairs. He then said that it was his opinion that
trouble had arisen from Peruvian agitators on the Ucayali who had fomented trouble,
and that great mistake of Chileans had been to respond in kind, and that they had done
so fourfold.
Ambassador Mathieu then said that in present political situation in Chile, for
Government to withdraw the Chilean forces from the province would be very difficult
if not impossible. The civil parties had at last all agreed upon a single candidate for
Presidency.66 Candidate of the military party had been withdrawn, showing that Chile
is succeeding in subordinating military to civil control. But situation is still very
delicate and military would deeply resent action of withdrawal as reflection upon them;
he felt that precisely same end could be reached by keeping army in the provinces but
by confining them to their barracks; then they could cause no difficulty.
The Ambassador referred to the carabineers, police, etc., stating that trouble lay not
with individuals of minor rank but with those higher in scale. He named two who were
certainly implicated in what had been taking place, and said that while they are good
fellows, they are only second or third-rate men, and desired to acquire credit for
themselves by winning plebiscite. He thought that if Chilean Government would
remove them and appoint first-rate men in their places who would have respect and
confidence of all concerned, trouble from minor officials would immediately cease.
The very fact that first-rate men should replace two high provincial officials would
show minor officials they would have to change their tactics, and new appointees on
taking office would also make fact plain to them. He said that of course these men
could not be thrown out of office in brutal sort of way, but should be permitted to
resign as of own volition stating that as they had lost confidence of Peruvians and of
American Commission they did not wish to stand in way of well-known desire of

Government of Chile to carry out free and fair election, and for that reason tendered
their resignations.
The Ambassador said he had already made this suggestion to Chilean Government, and
that the Government had appeared favorable to it; he said he would reiterate his views
and would suggest that Edwards make his proposal along above lines to you in answer
to and as counterproposition to your resolution. He said that on hearing from Santiago
that Edwards would do so, he would suggest that you give matter most careful
consideration. I said that I should be glad to do so.
I am transmitting this information to you before hearing from Ambassador Collier, as I
wish to afford you ample opportunity to think matter over. It seems to me that
Mathieu’s proposal offers possible way out. I am not familiar with conditions in
provinces, of course, and am not able to say whether this will give necessary
assurances that free and fair election be carried out. If it is your opinion that proposal
gives necessary assurances, I feel it would be well to accept suggestion. Fully
appreciate that Chilean Government should have acted on own initiative several weeks
ago. If Government acts at this time, however, it will be because resolutions you
presented have had necessary effect in making it clear you cannot be swerved from
your course, and my telegram of Oct. 10, 6 p.m., will have shown Chilean Government
that I consider your position legally sound. For these reasons, I feel that if aim can be
accomplished by palatable means, we shall gain in harmony and in peaceful and
unobstructed carrying out of plebiscite by accepting Mathieu’s suggestions.
Foregoing is solely for your information and no mention should be made to either
Peruvian or Chilean Commissioners. I do not know, of course, what action Government
of Chile will take on Mathieu’s recommendations.
KELLOGG

[Document 233]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
From Pershing: Secretary’s telegram October 12, 6 p.m. Agreement of Chilean
Ambassador with your construction of award and its legal effect may indicate attitude
of Government of Chile, but this view has not yet found expression here through
Chilean representatives. Commissioner Edwards takes ground that Plebiscitary
Commission does not have the authority which seems perfectly clear in your
construction. The Commission has not met since October 10, and I shall give Edwards
a reasonable time to receive instructions from his Government. Ambassador Mathieu is
wholly misinformed in placing cause of trouble on Peruvian agitators from the Ucayali.
Insofar as I am informed, Peruvians have in no instance provoked disturbances; but
whenever Peruvians, with exception of officials, have attempted to come ashore or to
visit their families or to circulate among their fellow countrymen almost invariably
they have been attacked and beaten up. Usually the Chilean police have stood by in
apparent approval. In the greater number of these assaults Peruvians have made
complaints before Chilean police courts, but in only one case has the Chilean offender
even been brought to judgment, and his fine was quite inadequate. No Peruvian would
dare to provoke a disturbance for fear of his life. Assertions similar to those made by
the Ambassador are constantly made here by Chilean authorities but are made merely
to shift blame. … Our investigations have proved that there have been 81 expulsions or
deportations since publication of the award, 5 of them on very day of my arrival in
Arica; there is also convincing evidence that at least 87 others were deported on or
about March 5. Responsibility for these deportations and other unlawful acts rests on
Chilean Government. …
The Ambassador’s suggestion that Chilean troops be confined to barracks instead of
being removed from the province is quite inadequate to meet situation. Impossible to
apply suggestion for necessary period and I would not trust promise to keep troops
confined unless they were under neutral guard. The presence of the troops is dangerous
menace to fair and free plebiscite; their removal will serve as outward and visible
expression of change of conditions. Responsible party cannot be allowed to plead
opposition of army itself, in order that this necessary prerequisite may be avoided.

There are now four times the number of carabineers here that were in the province less
than two years ago. The number of policemen has also been largely increased. These
forces together with present civil officials throughout the territory have with practically
no exceptions been involved in work of deportation, coercion, and intimidation. The
ratio of the combined forces of army, carabineers, and police to males over 20 years of
age in the territory is one to six.
Removals must be publicly announced and carried out to convince absent voters that it
will be safe to return. …
The demands contained in my resolution must, I think, be regarded as minimum and
any material modification cannot be accepted. They are necessary to give assurance on
Chile’s part of purpose to hold free plebiscite and to satisfy Peru that that is our
purpose. They are also necessary to remove as far as possible the agencies and the
conditions which have contributed to the present reign of terror. Further demands may
be made from time to time in assuring free and fair plebiscite. Any substantial
modification of position we have taken would destroy usefulness of Plebiscitary
Commission and make free plebiscite impossible. Pershing.
VON TRESCKOW

[Document 234]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: Your October 14, 6 p.m. I have considered the whole matter very
carefully. I do not desire to condone any acts of oppression and violence which tend to
destroy fair plebiscite, and any suggestions made in course of conversation with
Chilean Ambassador were not made with that intention. I had not heard from Mathieu
in reply to my note to Government of Chile, so I sent for him this morning and
discussed entire question with him. I read him Collier’s message to me which was
Edwards had made proposed suggestions to you. I did not read him your telegram of
October 14, 6 p.m., but told him that we had wholly reliable information of acts of
oppression and coercion, as you had reported, and that my information was not
received from Peruvian sources. I put it very strongly to him that Government of Chile
must give protection necessary to fair plebiscite and should comply substantially with
demands you set forth in your resolution, of which Mathieu had a copy; that both Chile
and Peru had urged the President of the United States to accept the arbitration; the
President had given his decision; the legal position in my note to Government of Chile
was undeniably correct; it was inadmissible for Chilean Government now to obstruct
election by means I had narrated. I did this in the hope that he would urge his
Government to comply with your request.
Not being on the ground I am unable of course to judge of necessary measures which
must be taken to insure fair election. My only desire is to call your attention to very
great importance of carrying out plebiscite. The Tacna-Arica question had been a long-
standing dispute and a menace not only to the peace of Chile and Peru, but also to the
peace of South America, and failure now will be not only of vital concern to both
countries but may involve them in serious conflict. Not only are future interests of
those two countries involved, but those of South America generally. I feel very strongly
that while interest of this Government is primarily to aid in settlement of this most
difficult question, it is most important that you should not withdraw from plebiscite and
should take every reasonable means to prevent either Chile or Peru from withdrawing,
but if anyone is to withdraw it should be one of the other two nations. Your withdrawal
would place this Government in most embarrassing position and would give Chile
opportunity to assert that we are responsible for the failure. Without condoning any

offense, every effort should in some way be made to arrange with Chile’s
Commissioner for necessary protection in carrying out election, and careful
consideration should be given any reasonable proposals.
Rather than to withdraw, suggest for your consideration and as last resort that, should
resolution be adopted by majority of the Commission and Chile refuse to appeal but
nevertheless continue to oppose thereby creating situation requiring attention of the
Arbitrator, he might under the first paragraph of subdivision D of the award entertain
an appeal on his own motion. If Arbitrator should determine that under the conditions
Chile refuses to take measures to afford proper protection to insure fair plebiscite,
Chile, by thus thwarting plebiscite and breaking condition on which she remained in
possession of the territory, would incur forfeiture of the territory. While Arbitrator held
that Chile’s acts had not been sufficiently proved to justify him in holding that Chile
had forfeited her right, if the Arbitrator again has question before him on the evidence
relating to plebiscite directed by the award, his determination would be conclusive as to
very foundation of Chile’s right of possession. I doubt that Chile would be willing to
face such very serious outcome. I think Ambassador Mathieu will cable his
Government strongly urging it to take action, but whether Government of Chile will go
to full extent of resolution I am unable, of course, to say. In meantime I shall lose no
opportunity to press on Chilean Ambassador necessity for proper action. I think most
careful consideration should be given any reasonable suggestion of Government of
Chile and I am sure you will appreciate gravity of situation.
KELLOGG
67 Not printed.

[Document 235]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: Ambassador Mathieu called on Mr. White at the Department this
afternoon, and stated that Señor Barros Jarpa entered upon his duties as Minister for
Foreign Affairs last Thursday; he is in complete agreement with Mathieu’s point of
view and has given Edwards instructions to comply with substance of your resolutions.
Army will be reduced to number you ask, or even fewer. Ambassador stated that term
of service of most of conscripts in Arica Province expires November 1, and that they
will then be discharged from service and sent out of the provinces. Their places will not
be filled by others. Administrative arrangements of similar nature will be taken to
reduce carabineers and police force. Full text of Edwards’ instructions have been sent
Mathieu who will show me copy as soon as decoded. I shall advise you after seeing
them.
I am sure you realize as well as I the importance of making any arrangements which
will spare amour propre of both parties concerned in arbitration. Neither Department
nor Arbitrator wishes to humiliate either party but does wish to obtain a fair election.
Your resolutions have had their effect in bringing about desired action. Any
arrangement which accomplished aim sought and spares feelings of either party is most
desirable. I feel sure that Chilean authorities now fully understand situation which they
had apparently not appreciated before, and for that reason I suggest that any action on
part of either of the parties to dispute that you may deem necessary be submitted
informally to that party, and that it be given ample time for compliance as of its own
volition before matter is formally submitted to Commission.
The Chilean Ambassador said that he understood resolutions will be brought to vote on
October 21 and he expressed hope that if Edwards asked for postponement of two or
three days it would be granted. I think it would be well to accede to this request.
KELLOGG

[Document 236]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
From Pershing:
(1) Edwards came to see me on the evening of October 19 to discuss in general way
substitute resolution he is preparing. He insisted that any recognition by Government of
Chile of authority of Plebiscitary Commission as we understand it would be impossible
and that Chilean Government would not agree to it. I took direct issue with him and
said that that recognition must be accorded and question must be decided very soon.
After some further talk he became quite confidential and said that he thought plebiscite
as contemplated by our construction of award was entirely impossible, that for some
time he had been of this opinion, and that he had telegraphed his Government apprising
them of his opinion. He said he did not mean any reflection personally, and that if he
were in my place he would do exactly as I was doing. Continuing, he said that it would
make no difference how many officials it might seem necessary to remove, their places
would have to be taken by Chileans and that all Chileans were alike in attitude toward
Peruvians. He pointed out that I had seen conditions here and could judge for myself,
and that Government could not control Chilean sentiments as they were outgrowth of
the past 45 years’ relations between the two peoples. He said no Chilean carabineer or
policeman could be expected to intervene in favor of Peruvians against his own people.
He repeated with emphasis that it was an impossible situation. He thought it possible to
postpone plebiscite 6 months to see if there might not be some other way to settle
differences and suggested that he, Freyre, and I might be designated by our
Governments to discuss matter here and try to find a solution.
I then said that if plebiscite were found impossible someone would probably be held
responsible and I asked him whether his Government would accept whatever blame
might attach to such a finding. He answered that it would be unnecessary to blame
anyone as situation was inherent in very nature of things. He suggested that I approach
Freyre and I said that I would think it over.
On October 21 I called to see him on another matter, but broached the subject only to
say that it did not seem expedient for me to speak to the Peruvian Commissioner, and
suggested that Chilean Government might take it up with the Secretary of State. He

made no reply but he said that we were coming to a deadlock, and that his Government
intended to adhere to its view on questions of Commission’s authority, and at next
meeting he would state his legal position and propose motion in substitution for mine
which would make no reference to Commission’s authority. He said that Chileans
would not appeal to the Arbitrator, and a deadlock would be created which I would
have to report to Arbitrator who would then have grounds for suggesting conversations
between Chile and Peru with view to settlement outside plebiscite. Edwards said he felt
they were building up a good case. I expressed no opinion except to say that if situation
was as he had outlined it and as it appeared to be, a plebiscite would be well-nigh
impossible.
(2) Chile has not made any serious effort on her own initiative to create situation in
which plebiscite could be held. On contrary she is actively engaged in effort to make
plebiscite impossible through continuation of methods reported again and again. I send
résumé of Edwards’ statements in paragraph (1) above merely for Secretary’s
information as indicating course Government of Chile may follow. No reference should
be made to this cable in communications to Chile or to Ambassador at Washington, nor
to fact that conversation reported has been held between Edwards and me.
At yesterday’s meeting of Commission, Edwards’ statement seemed to lay foundation
for action he had outlined to me in foregoing conversation. His proposals were so far
short of anything adequate as to be entirely unacceptable, especially as they refuse to
recognize authority of Commission and show no sincere attempt to meet demands.
Commission meets again tomorrow. Pershing.
VON TRESCKOW

[Document 237]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: This morning Peruvian Ambassador handed me memorandum69 stating
that your reports before Plebiscitary Commission at meetings of October 8 and 10 have
fully proved Peruvian contention of intense hostility of Chilean authorities and that
situation has fully justified Peruvian request for guarantees and has served as basis for
your resolutions. Government of Peru thinks guarantees are not enough and that
neutralization of the territory which was asked by the Peruvian Commissioner on
August 10 should at once be decided upon. Peru would, however, be disposed to accept
your resolutions on recognition of their preliminary character and with understanding
that, as they show themselves to be insufficient, request for complete neutralization
made by Commissioner Freyre will be granted. The memorandum concludes by saying
that Peru agrees to this course as proof of wish to be conciliatory and to cooperate in
execution of plebiscite, but without in any way changing policy which she firmly
decided to follow of taking part in plebiscite only if wholly legal and correct and with
as full and efficient guarantees for Peruvians as for Chileans. I presume Freyre has
handed you a copy of memorandum so I am not cabling text. I told Ambassador
Velarde that you were on the ground and that we relied on you to say what guarantees
are necessary; and that, as he had already been informed, Arbitrator has not power to
take over policing of provinces but that you and this Government are determined to do
all that is possible to carry out fair and free election.
KELLOGG
69 Not printed.

[Document 238]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received October 28—10 a.m.]
75. President Leguía and people of Peru are confident that General Pershing holding
deciding vote on the Plebiscitary Commission will proceed to hold the plebiscite under
fair conditions, as he has recently set forth, with complete protection of all voters.
Suggestion of compromise coming from our Government at this time, either
independently or acting as intermediary submitting propositions made by Chile, would
be distinct shock to Peru, would be misunderstood, and would cause much resentment.
Proper channel for such suggestions seems to be from Edwards to Freyre, between
whom, I assume, good personal relations exist. In my opinion there need not be any
difficulty in people of the two provinces living under one government justly
administered.
The universal interest of the Peruvians in the question is based on principle and
sentiment rather than on the intrinsic value of the provinces; and a division of the
provinces such as that reported as proposed by Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs
would not solve question, and I do not believe that Peruvian Government would
consider it. The Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs is quoted in Chilean papers as
repeating the statement he had made heretofore that article III of Treaty of Ancon was
merely intended as a “stipulated cession” of the provinces to Chile. It is this attitude of
Chilean Government which is resented in Peru, and which it is believed governs
Chile’s attitude towards the plebiscite.
I am of opinion that reports on remarks General Pershing as well as other members of
the Commission are alleged to have made, should be received with caution. The award
provides that it may be implied that exercise by Chile of legislative, executive, and
judicial power should not go to extent of frustrating provision for a plebiscite and that
the Plebiscitary Commission have been placed in general in complete control over
plebiscite. Should one member of Commission withdraw, award provides for filling the
vacancy. Any suggestion from our Government at this time which could be construed
as seeking to evade this responsibility practically vested in the President of the United
States would greatly injure prestige of our Government in Peru and, I believe, in other
countries as well. On the other hand, to adopt such measures as may be necessary to

support authority of President of the Commission would greatly enhance prestige of the
United States in general everywhere and in particular would bring about lasting
settlement of the Tacna-Arica question.
POINDEXTER

[Document 239]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
From Pershing: Referring to diplomatic settlement of Tacna- Arica question, when
Chilean Commissioner returned from Santiago he was very positive that his
Government would not consider division of the territory; Peruvian Commissioner was
very doubtful whether Government of Peru would ever consider division; and so
discussion was dropped. During course of conversation with Freyre in August he
expressed opinion that situation might arise when Arbitrator could say that plebiscite
was impossible and could then suggest diplomatic settlement. Between that time and
present, change in plebiscitary situation has no doubt raised Peruvian spirits. Situation
and probable outcome as I have reported them and as Edwards has frankly stated in
conversation, seem fully appreciated by Government of Chile, as proposition to
compromise indicates. Chilean attitude toward plebiscite no doubt partially due to
serious difficulty Chile would find in yielding to our construction of award, and she
does not care to face consequences of refusal to accept that construction. It is unlikely,
however, that Chile will go much further in plebiscite, and certainly she will not unless
she can retain sufficient control to assure her of victory.
After careful study and consideration of situation confronting us here, I am forced to
conclusion that, with Chile in control of local government, establishment of conditions
favorable to holding of plebiscite having even semblance of fairness is impossible. If
any reasonable basis can be found by Arbitrator upon which to abandon plebiscite and
initiate diplomatic negotiations, it would be wise to adopt it as best way out of
dilemma. Regardless of my own convictions on situation, Arbitrator may rest assured
that I and my advisers will continue most earnest efforts to complete task assigned us.
Pershing
VON TRESCKOW

[Document 240]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: The Chilean Ambassador called at Department today and left copy of
instructions he had received from Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs which is in
substance as follows:
Popular feeling in Arica is excited and ripe for a rupture. This state of mind is
caused by General Pershing’s suggestion to reduce number of troops in way
considered vexatious. This is also sentiment in Chilean delegation. If
immediate instructions were given to accept, no matter under what
reservations, General Pershing’s plan would have unpleasant effect on
populace, and without doubt would have bad effect on timid or wavering
element in province. It seems advisable to Chile to employ time as factor in
directing her action in Arica or to afford opportunity for opening way to
conciliatory solution. Government of Chile proposes to call Edwards to
Santiago and in consultation with him there to seek conciliatory solution. The
Government of Chile needs an assurance that during Edwards’ stay in
Santiago, session of Commission will not be called, and Mathieu was
instructed to ascertain if suggestion to this end could be made to Pershing by
Department. In meantime, Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs was willing
to give some practical evidence of accepting guarantees by making some
changes in provincial authorities and by reductions in number of carabineers
and police force. He desired immediate answer from Mathieu as Pershing had
intimated advisability of meeting on Saturday.
Mathieu requested that I suggest to you that you give assurance asked for, and that he
thought Edwards would not be absent more than 10 or 12 days. He said that Minister
for Foreign Affairs has precisely same view as he himself holds, that your resolutions
must be complied with, but that Barros Jarpa has not yet been able to bring Edwards
around to it.
This is reason why he is sending for him to come to Santiago, and he hopes that
outcome of Edwards’ visit there will be clarification of situation. The Ambassador was
informed that I could make no promises whatever, that you were on ground charged
with carrying out plebiscite, and that you are the one in position to judge what is

necessary. Only thing I could promise would be to transmit Minister’s telegram for
your consideration.
KELLOGG

[Document 241]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
From Pershing: Edwards called on me this morning and reasserted position of Chilean
Government on statement I made before Commission on reduction of troops by
discharge of conscripts. I had stated that Chile should reduce proportionate number of
officers and noncommissioned officers, announce that she was making reduction
herself in order to demonstrate desire for free plebiscite, discharge native-born Tacna-
Aricans and return others, and move these troops in public manner and notify
Commission of the proposed movements.
Edwards said that his Government could not accede to these conditions as they
infringed Chile’s sovereignty. Thus we were forced back to difference of views on
construction of award. Edwards said that Chile would not yield her position on that
construction, and I said that recognition of Commission’s power was vital to the
plebiscite. He then said that he hoped we could come to some agreement, and asked
why we should not make it a juridical deadlock instead of my continuing to insist on
passage of my motion for which at last meeting Peruvian Commissioner had said he
would vote.
I said that situation had been studied, and that the demands which had been made were
thought to be absolutely necessary; this action on my part had brought forward question
of Commission’s authority for decision which sooner or later would have to be made.
Edwards then said that this action would place Chile in difficult position toward any
consideration of diplomatic settlement, and again said that plebiscite was absolutely
impossible, even though we might be able to resolve the present impasse. He stated that
Chilean Government had cabled to Mathieu suggesting suspension of plebiscite.
Edwards also thinks that any Commission which might be got together to discuss
diplomatic settlement should meet in Washington.
Edwards then asked if there would be any objection to my calling off Saturday’s
meeting which had been planned but not announced. I asked him about his delayed
legal argument and his statement in answer to my presentation of facts and he said he
had been promised them for Saturday. I wanted to comply with his request that no

meeting be held Saturday, and, with the additional reason in mind that my advisers
would have opportunity to examine Chilean case, therefore I agreed to call off meeting.

I think Edwards’ request for delay was made in hope that it would be possible
eventually to prevent further consideration of my resolution, and that Chile would thus
be able to extricate herself from present situation without serious consequences. She
would then be in position to say that she had always been ready to do all that had been
asked if and when question of her refusal to comply with Arbitrator’s interpretation
should arise. It is my opinion, strongly supported by my advisers, that an early meeting
should be held and motion passed. Should motion not be passed and plebiscite should
be suspended at this point, our position would be seriously weakened as no direct issue
has yet been made and there are no grounds for appeal by Chile to Arbitrator even if
she should decide to do so, nor is there any issue or default by either Government on
which Commission could go to Arbitrator.
Another reason for early meeting and passage of motion lies in fact that otherwise Peru
would be left entirely without guarantees; and I greatly fear that we should forfeit
confidence and support of Peruvian delegation and that Peru would withdraw, leaving
field free for Chile and making my position impossible.
Action on our demand, moreover, would have salutary effect on Chile, not only in
regard possibly to inducing change of attitude on her part but also in regard to her
proposals for a diplomatic settlement. The risk that Peru will be so encouraged as to
become unreasonable is, I think, less than risk she will not prosecute negotiations in
earnest if we weaken and fail to pass motion. Passage of motion will not increase
Chile’s present embarrassment materially but it will make clear that we are in earnest.
Anyway, Peru’s attitude toward any compromise is very doubtful.
I have ventured to cable at this length only because of representations I know will be
made to you at Washington by Chile; I think that I should advise you of my views in
advance, so that if you agree with me, you will be able to reply to Chilean Ambassador
in such a way as greatly to strengthen my position. Pershing.
VON TRESCKOW

[Document 242]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
The following has just been received from Ambassador Collier dated October 30, 1
This morning Minister for Foreign Affairs informed me that Chilean Cabinet
yesterday decided to make every sacrifice necessary to avoid rupture of
plebiscite; that wide divergence of views exists between Edwards and
Government; that Edwards will be summoned to Santiago at once; and that if
he does not then agree with Government’s policy he will be replaced.
Minister also informed me that, as General Pershing had expressed opinion
that Chile ought to have no officer in province of higher rank than colonel,
present commanding officer would be called to Santiago very soon and
would not be sent back to Tacna. Minister also said that present intendente
would probably be replaced this coming week and would probably be
succeeded by former Minister for Foreign Affairs, Jorge Matte. The Minister
strongly requests that you instruct General Pershing to postpone action on
proposed resolutions for week or so until Government of Chile can carry out
foregoing program. In deference to difficult situation of Government here
and its manifest desire to carry the award into effect honorably, and also in
view of its difficulties with jingoistic element and with extreme national
sentiment of population of Arica, I sincerely hope that you can grant
Minister’s request.
Today at noon I replied to Collier that you are on ground with full knowledge of local
conditions and with authority to carry out fair and free election as provided in award;
that you possess my full confidence and that of Arbitrator; that it is impossible under
the circumstances for me to give you instructions and directions about details of
manner in which award is to be carried out; and that I will transmit for your
information and careful consideration the request of Chilean Minister for Foreign
Affairs.
KELLOGG

[Document 243]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)73
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: The following is my view of the suggestions Chile has made for
diplomatic settlement outside plebiscite, and the policy I propose to follow: The
President should keep perfectly clear his position as Arbitrator. He has accepted a
submission and is dealing with matter within terms of the submission and of his award.
Difficulty of having a fair plebiscite will not be because he has failed to give proper
attention to terms and condition of award. Arbitrator provided for a Plebiscitary
Commission with complete control over terms and conditions of plebiscite subject to
the award. He has appointed a citizen of outstanding ability and impartiality as the
American member of the Commission. If it should now prove impossible to hold a fair
plebiscite, it will be because of character and attitude of the population or because of
failure of Chile, which under Treaty of Ancon has administrative authority over
territory during plebiscitary period, to comply with the requirements of the award.
It is necessary, for above reasons, that in every step taken responsibility for prevention
of a fair plebiscite constantly be kept where it belongs. General Pershing will attend to
requirements which are necessary to safeguard plebiscite. If any question arise
regarding propriety of these requirements or of authority of Commission to impose
them, the Arbitrator then, on his own initiative if it is necessary, can render an opinion
construing the award which will settle any question of that sort. Responsibility will
then rest upon Chile to comply and if her authority is not fairly and adequately
exercised accordingly, and for that reason plebiscite fails, the responsibility will be
hers.
The danger existing in taking up measures for some outside solution in view of
difficulty of obtaining fair plebiscite, is that positions of Chile and of this Government
may be obscured or misconstrued. For that reason use of good offices of this
Government will be granted only at request of both parties. I will not be bearer of
Chilean proposal regarded as means of getting rid of the plebiscite. If negotiations
between the Governments of Chile and Peru or any of their representatives, however
informal or unauthorized technically these may be, reach point where both are ready to
invite the helpful offices of the Government of the United States, there may be chance
to perform great service in bringing those two Governments to an accord. In meantime

President will confine himself to role of Arbitrator, sustaining power of Plebiscitary
Commission to make reasonable requirements under the award and making clear the
obligation of Chile as administrator of the territory to provide fair opportunity for
plebiscite, in this way making clear to both Chile and Peru fairness and impartiality of
his intention and procedure. Meanwhile both those countries, contemplating possible
failure of plebiscite for one reason or another, may find ways to negotiate for a definite
settlement. There can exist an attitude on my part permitting such a course but not
going to extent of submitting or favoring an alternative plan. Case is not yet ripe
enough for suggestions by me regarding nature of an alternative settlement. If
negotiations between Chile and Peru, or any of their representatives, progress far
enough to be promising, I am likely to receive hints if not requests from Governments
of both that my good offices are desired. Should that happen, I would be in strong
position and could ascertain from each party what it is willing to do, and I might be
able to assist in helping them to reach agreement. But this will come about only at their
invitation and with reasonable prospect of success; otherwise plans for plebiscite
should continue. If they fail, party responsible must accept all the blame.
KELLOGG
73 The same to the Embassy in Chile as Department’s No. 69, and to the Embassy in
Peru as Department’s No. 63.

[Document 244]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 11:20 p.m.]
117. Within last three days I have been visited several times by Peruvians who have
been expelled from the Provinces of Tacna and Tarapaca and who are now held in
Santiago against their will but are permitted freedom within the city limits and are
maintained decently here at expense of Chilean Plebiscitary Bureau. Only few are from
Tacna or assert that they are qualified voters in the plebiscite, but all are Peruvians.
They told me that many persons are similarly situated in Santiago and in neighboring
cities and they have given me many names and residences. They allege that 300 natives
of Province of Tacna who have completed the ordinary period of military service are
still held in Chile. These may be men referred to in my telegram No. 77, August 20.
Does Department wish me to take any steps to inquire into these or similar charges that
may hereafter be made? I believe that the Chilean Foreign Office would not refuse
request for information, indeed, that it would suggest inquiry by us were complaints
even mentioned to them. Does Department desire that any representations be made or
that any assurances be asked of Government of Chile? Delay may mean practical loss
of rights to Peruvians. It is possible that present Ministry of Foreign Affairs knew
nothing about these matters until very recently, but the officer in charge of the
Plebiscitary Bureau here had personal charge of those detained and administered funds
for their maintenance.
COLLIER

[Document 245]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
information contained in your telegram. I hesitate somewhat to ask you to take up
matter with Chilean Government as there is already much bitterness felt by Chilean
officials and I wish to avoid giving slightest impression that this Government is acting
as advocate of one of parties to the arbitration. It is of importance that the Government
of the United States maintain its absolutely impartial attitude, and not take any action
which might be thought more favorable to one side than to the other. I also fully
appreciate that to take no action at all might lay Department open to charge that it was
aiding Chile by suppressing important information. For that reason, before determining
on any course of action I wish to know (1) whether there are any obstacles placed in
way of direct communication between the Peruvians involved and their Government or
their Plebiscitary Commission, and (2) your views on attitude that Government of Chile
would take should you take up matter informally with it. You will appreciate that I may
have to call upon you to make further representations to Government of Chile on behalf
of the President’s representative on Plebiscitary Commission and it is important,
therefore, that your effectiveness to this end should not be impaired.
KELLOGG

[Document 246]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
Office of Peruvian complaints made to me, and the Ministry sent the Counselor to see
me. He volunteered following information: Few of those maintained by the
Government are from Tacna, and these will all be repatriated at expense of Government
before date of plebiscite if they desire to be. Greater part of those brought here from
Tarapacá were brought because of Government’s desire to protect them from popular
violence arising from suspicion that Peruvians had promoted disorders. All are
maintained at Government expense. Minister of Foreign Affairs was not aware of this
until Peruvians made complaints. He says this was stupid use of funds and states that
police and administrative authorities were permitted to do it because no other funds
were available. All who wished would be sent back; but it was believed that, being well
cared for, they will prefer to stay here. Conclusion of Counselor’s statement.

This version of Chilean Government’s action has since been confirmed by Minister for
Foreign Affairs, who expresses willingness to have Government of the United States
make inquiries, and asserts his desire to give information on any complaint that may be
brought to his attention. Since first call at the Embassy, Peruvians have come here daily
to say that they were not molested by neighbors in the north and needed no protection
from them; that they are remaining here involuntarily; but that since first complaint was
made to me they have been required to sign statements to contrary and upon refusal
have been threatened with repatriation, but without indemnification or the opportunity
to earn a living.
These cases I have not discussed with the Foreign Office. Writer of first complaint to
me said that he addressed me because numerous letters to Plebiscitary Commission had
apparently been intercepted.
I am convinced that practically all of these deportations were unjustified and are related
to the plebiscite, and that charges of communistic activity are pretexts. …

I respectfully submit my view, in answer to your request. It is quite apparent that our
duty requires us not to ignore any fact which affects the plebiscite, or any relevant
statement if it is not inherently improbable. Our diplomatic and consular officers in
Chile should be free to take statements from all who assert that rights granted them by
award are being violated or whose liberty appears to be abridged because of their
lawful activities in connection with the plebiscite. Diplomatic and consular officers, at
least under the present circumstances, should avoid everything susceptible of being
construed as espionage or police investigation or interference with administrative
action; but they should be free to hear complaints and, after previously consulting with
the authorities, even to visit places of residence or detention, and their interviews with
complainants should be private to avoid fear of later punishment by complainants.
Impartiality, in my opinion, requires that after complaint has been received, then
Chilean authorities should be fully informed and given opportunity to explain or to
refute. …
I am confident that if I bring these complaints to the attention of the present Minister
for Foreign Affairs, he will accept and probably suggest course of procedure I have just
outlined. I believe it even possible to obtain his promise to give complete list of all
natives of Tacna now in Chile with their present residence and changes of residence in
future and to acknowledge the right of unrestricted correspondence and interview
between them and American diplomatic, consular, or plebiscitary representatives.
Embassy and consulates should keep in touch in order to ascertain reliability of
statements made, and especially to ascertain that the repatriated really get home.

… I believe bitterness which Chileans feel against our observers in Tacna, and in
certain places against our consuls, arises from Chilean belief that they conduct ex parte
investigations, encourage Peruvian complaints, and do not give Chile chance to explain
or refute.
COLLIER

[Document 247]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
matter in friendly informal way with Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs. This will
give him opportunity of his own volition to correct the existing abuses. Continue to
keep Department informed.
KELLOGG

[Document 248]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, November 20, 1925—[noon].
For Pershing: Reference … my telegram October 31, 2 p.m., to you, Collier, and
Poindexter outlining policy of this Government on question of good offices in settling
Tacna-Arica controversy. …
… On October 27 Poindexter telegraphed as follows:
[Here follows text of Ambassador Poindexter’s telegram No. 75, printed on page 404
[Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 238].]
I do not wish to change attitude of this Government as set forth to Collier and
Poindexter in my telegram of October 31 which was that I am not in position to offer
good offices; and I entirely approve your attitude in not opening negotiations with the
Peruvian Commissioner, more particularly as Chile’s memorandum states that she is
not willing to have proposition made as coming from her. Do you think there is any
way whereby you can ascertain what Peru’s attitude would be, without compromising
us or making suggestions as coming from you or me? I am sending this because Chile’s
second proposition, which is evidently authentic, is more specific and flexible than was
the first. Of course I shall discuss entire matter with you when you come to
Washington.74 Inform me before your departure is made public, so that it can be
announced simultaneously in both places and can be specifically stated to press that
you are merely coming for short time on leave because of private business, or
something of that nature. I should also like your suggestions on public statement; the
press will be very inquisitive.
KELLOGG
74 General Pershing had informed the Secretary that ill health made it desirable that he
return temporarily to the United States for medical treatment. On Dec. 29, 1925, he
announced his intended departure from Arica, and sailed from that port on Jan. 27,
1926.

[Document 249]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
From Pershing: Yesterday morning before meeting of the Commission, Mr. Edwards
sent me letter in which he stated that he had communicated agenda that day to his
Government and had received instructions to state that hereafter Chile will abstain from
participating in any meetings of Commission, or of its subsidiary agencies, unless
directly and closely concerned with registration and election regulations and with
providing for fixed dates for the registration and voting, which in judgment of Chilean
Government constitutes fundamental precept of award and primary duty of
Commission itself. He further stated that the Chileans have plain instructions to ignore
each and every one of the decisions of the Plebiscitary Commission, or its subsidiary
agencies, which may require their cooperation until the registration and election
regulations shall have been enacted and the dates for registration and the holding of the
plebiscite shall have been fixed.
Edwards’ action is in accord with Chilean contention that plebiscite does not start to
run until registration of voters begins. His opinion and mine on the matter have already
been expressed. Position taken is entirely inconsistent with situation regarding law and
order in province which Chileans have been urgently requested to establish on basis
that would guarantee equality to both contestants. Chileans hold that somehow
enactment of election regulations would transform state of fear and terror existing in
minds of opposing electorate into feeling of assurance. Most of these have been
violently driven from territory; before they can safely return to vote, confidence must
be restored in sincerity of Government of Chile to afford them protection, and this
seems improbable when we consider fact that policy of terrorism is continuing.
It is my positive opinion that as long as offenses are committed against entire opposing
electorate, as long as no security of life and property exists, as long as Chilean idea
prevails that plebiscite must if necessary be won by force, and as long as Chilean
Government remains unwilling to put an end to these conditions, then just so long will
it be necessary to defer any attempt to conduct fair registration or to hold honest
election.

Tuesday I shall call up for final action motion presented yesterday calling for departure
from the province of officials who have been removed from public office unless they
have Commission’s permission to remain. There has been merely formal compliance
with demands for removal of officials, who have been uniformly honored and in some
instances have been promoted to higher civil positions and in others have been retained
for service in the province. Presence of officials guilty of acts inimical to fair plebiscite
cannot be permitted if purpose of their removal is not to be completely frustrated.
Pershing
VON TRESCKOW

[Document 250]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Extract—Paraphrase]
For Pershing:
In view of attitude of Chilean Commissioner that decisions of Plebiscitary Commission
will be ignored until registration and election regulations have been enacted, I suggest
for consideration feasibility of taking them at their word and enact election rules and
regulations as early as you can, but give notification that compliance with decisions of
Commission is expected. … Plebiscitary Commission would not lose its power to insist
on noninterference with a fair election merely by its enactment of rules and regulations.
Object of above suggestion is that Chile seems to be basing her withdrawal on failure
of Commission to promulgate these rules and regulations, and is evidently trying to put
Commission in false position in view of award, wherein it is provided that Commission
shall proceed at once to formulate rules for its own procedure and regulations
governing plebiscite, etc.
I do not recognize Chile’s right to say she will not comply with your demands for
protection of the voters until you have promulgated election rules and regulations, but
if you do promulgate and Chile does not thereafter comply, you can, of course, change
dates, times, and places for holding registrations and election. If you should take this
course it might be well for you to give out Edwards’ communication that Chilean
authorities in Tacna and Arica have been instructed to ignore each and every decision
of Plebiscitary Commission until regulations have been enacted, and give out at same
time copy of your statement to Commission or reply which might be along these lines:
Plebiscitary Commission does not accept Chilean view that compliance with
rulings of the Commission cannot be required until rules and regulations have
been published, but interpreting communications of Chilean Commissioner to
mean that Chilean authorities in Tacna and Arica will be instructed to carry
out each and every one of decisions of Plebiscitary Commission when
registration and election regulations shall have been enacted and dates for
registration and holding of plebiscite shall have been fixed, the Plebiscitary
Commission will now take up this matter, and as soon as regulations shall

have been enacted and dates for registrations shall have been fixed, the
Commission will expect the wholehearted cooperation of the Chilean
authorities.
While I understand perfectly reasons you give for not issuing rules and regulations at
this time, the general public is not so well informed and might accept Chilean
contention that there was undue delay, in view of provisions of award that Commission
shall proceed at once to formulate its rules, etc. Chile will be deprived of any possible
technical justification by your promulgation of rules and regulations as suggested
above, and the responsibility for compliance will be placed squarely upon her.
KELLOGG

[Document 251]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
For Pershing: Following telegram, dated November 24, noon, just received from
Collier:
“Santiago papers daily devote pages editorially and in despatches as to
impasse. All contend that Chile can make no further guarantees nor
participate further until Commission ‘begins to do that for which it was
established, namely, enacts election law and proceeds to hold plebiscite’.
[Here follows a summary of newspaper opinion which has been omitted.]
[Paraphrase]
I know, nevertheless, that many Chileans feel that Chilean Government has
made a mistake and that it should give every reasonable guarantee of
fairness; it is felt by all that Commission should not delay holding plebiscite,
that Peruvians should not be allowed to provoke incidents, and that
Americans who accompany Peruvians should be sent home at General
Pershing’s request. As long as they are there, although they are private
citizens, it will be impossible to make Chileans believe that our Government
is impartial.
President of Chile and Minister for Foreign Affairs have both given out
statements that Chile will adhere to position she has taken unless and until
Commission shows desire to hold plebiscite promptly. Both state with
evident seriousness their desire to retain friendship of America; and I believe
that bad as situation is, it can be saved by firmness and consideration. Recent
speech of President of Peru on occasion of receiving new Bolivian Minister
in which he offered Peru’s help to Bolivia to recover Province of
Antofogasta, has created bad impression here. Utterances of this sort are
cause of police surveillance of Peruvians in Tarapacá and of deportations
from that province.
The Brazilian Ambassador, the Uruguayan Minister, and the Colombian
Chargé have come to see me about recent developments. In talking with them
I said that I had no instructions but that General Pershing was animated
solely by desire to hold absolutely impartial plebiscite, and that I regretted

Chile’s action but that I was confident that Chile would never be willing to
incur the universal condemnation of the American Republics which I felt
would certainly follow an action that must be interpreted as an unwillingness
to accept suggestions intended merely to secure just and honest plebiscite. I
think these diplomats will express this view to their Governments and will
talk this way to Chilean Government if it sounds them out. Still, to obtain
approval of other American Republics it may be well to avoid further delay in
the plebiscitary proceedings which to many of them seems unnecessarily
long and which all realize only gives additional opportunity for passions to
become more inflamed.
I have reliable information that ex-President Alessandri is returning here to
urge the Government to maintain its present position or refuse to continue
with plebiscite on ground that proceedings to date have been violation of
award and usurpation of power by Pershing. He and Barros Jarpa are being
denounced by many for getting Chile to arbitrate, and others talk loosely of
great violence being done them if outcome is unsatisfactory; on other hand,
Edwards is receiving much criticism for having angered Pershing.
The desire for a political settlement with division of the territory is evidently
growing; foreign diplomats often speak of it as the only solution that offers
possibility of restoring harmony.”
KELLOGG

[Document 252]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
From Pershing: Department’s telegram, November 23, 6 p.m. The situation here has
become tense, and Chilean Commissioner has demanded a meeting of the Commission
on Saturday to consider his motion for promulgating regulations and fixing dates for
the plebiscite. After careful consideration I have prepared a reply to Edwards reviewing
entire situation, restating the conditions which have caused delay in framing and
promulgating regulations but reiterating my readiness to proceed with work on
regulations as rapidly as possible, and expressing belief, but not committing myself
absolutely, that they can be reported out of committee in about 30 days and
promulgated about middle of January; I pointed out that no delay will be caused in
plebiscite provided Government of Chile henceforth cooperates in good faith in
carrying out prerequisites resolution and other steps for making fair plebiscite possible.
My reply departs from your suggestions on two points only: (1) in restating the
conditions which have caused delay—I think restatement essential in order to fix
responsibility in event of a break; (2) in calling upon Chilean Government to change
orders instructing Chilean officials not to cooperate with the Commission while
awaiting promulgation of regulations. Latter point is vital, partly because weakening
under present conditions would end usefulness of American delegation but chiefly
because if changes in present conditions are to be postponed, result would be not only
to postpone plebiscite but to defeat it. Impossible to remake conditions here overnight.
A reasonable time must elapse for changes to operate before fair election is thinkable,
much less possible. Delay would cause irreparable loss to Commission’s prestige, and
would irrevocably deprive electorate of any confidence that fair registration and
election could ever be held. Furthermore, there is possibility that Peru may withdraw if
Chile is allowed to disregard prerequisites resolution. All my advisers are in agreement
with me that in proposed reply we have gone as far as we can go in making concessions
to Chile. Because of doubt about my right to postpone meeting under the rule I feel
obliged to hold meeting Saturday morning and to read my reply. Pershing.
VON TRESCKOW
75 Telegram in two sections.

[Document 253]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: Your telegram of November 26, 10 p.m. I called Chilean Ambassador to
Department this afternoon and impressed upon him necessity of complying with your
position as you state it in your reply to Edwards. Mathieu is telegraphing Chilean
Government urging that instructions be sent Edwards before meeting if possible to
comply with your demands, and to discuss electoral law afterwards, and to accept your
proposal that regulations be reported from committee in about 30 days and that
registration begin on or about January 15. If you can possibly advance these dates, it
would, I think, be helpful.
I informed Mathieu of abusive press campaign and he said he would try to have it
stopped.
KELLOGG

[Document 254]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
For General Pershing: Following telegram received from Collier at Valparaiso dated
November 25, 4 p.m.
“Am in receipt of a letter signed by citizens of Valparaiso to which I have not
replied but whose substance I communicate because expressive of universal
opinion here: The employment of Americans by Peruvians in Tacna is
intentionally calculated to produce friction between their country and Chile.
America is thus made a party to the conflict instead of a judge. This causes
the Chilean masses to distrust America’s fairness and to take action
expressive of their resentment. All is designated by Peru to create incidents
and hatch complications yet up to date no blood has been shed except that of
very few Chileans who have been assassinated. Chileans cannot be expected
to maintain Christ-like resignation in the face of premeditated provocation.
End of résumé.
Chileans feel that American Government is responsible since mere hint by
Pershing to the Peruvian Commission that employment by them of
Americans was distasteful to him because of natural inference that it
indicated sympathy by the American people with Peru, would undoubtedly
result in Peru sending them away. I think presence of these Americans has
done more than anything else to destroy Chilean belief in our impartiality.
Mathieu was called to the Department today and told that I greatly regret the policy
which the Chilean Government is pursuing in its newspaper campaign of vilification
against the American Plebiscitary Commission. It was pointed out to him that delicate
negotiations cannot be conducted through the medium of the press and that therefore
this Government and the American Commission have carefully avoided any action
which might render the situation more difficult and which might make more difficult
Chile’s compliance with the essential requirements for the holding of a plebiscite and
that it has therefore caused great surprise to the Department that Edwards’ letters to
Pershing should be published at practically the same time that they are delivered to
him. They are quoted verbatim in the American press. He was told that if the Chilean
Government or Chilean Commission argues its case in the press this Government must

reserve the right for itself and the American delegation to make clear in the same
manner its position. The action of the Chilean Government and Commission leads
almost inevitably to the conclusion that the Chilean Government does not desire a
plebiscite and is taking action which will almost necessarily make the holding of an
election impossible. It is therefore much to be hoped that the Chilean Government and
Commission will desist from such action and in the future will loyally cooperate in the
efforts now being made to hold an election. It was explained that this does not mean
that this Government objects to publicity regarding the action of the Plebiscitary
Commission on the contrary it welcomes it but it does object to publicity in a manner
which brings about recrimination in the press which will so excite public opinion as to
make it well-nigh impossible for the Commission to carry on its work. It was added,
however, that this Government very strongly resents the implications made and the
campaign carried on against the members of the American delegation.
KELLOGG

[Document 255]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
[Received 10:25 p.m.]
From Pershing: At meeting of the Commission this morning Chilean Commissioner
read lengthy statement. He said that he wished to believe that the Peruvian
Commissioner and the President of the Commission were acting with best and loftiest
intentions, and then proceeded in a recital of proceedings of the Commission to make
deliberate and disingenuous attempt not only to misrepresent those proceedings but to
impugn motives and attack character of his colleagues on the Commission, especially
my own. Object is doubtless to confuse the issue and bring proceedings of Commission
to an end in such a way as to enable Chile to escape her just responsibility. I shall
endeavor to take care that he does not succeed.
Edwards stated that under instructions from his Government his statement would be
made public in press tomorrow. I told him that this would be violation of our
agreement. I shall make no statement to press except that if Chilean Government is
dissatisfied with proceedings of the Plebiscitary Commission, it has right to appeal to
Arbitrator.
Pershing
VON TRESCKOW

[Document 256]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
123. Powerful influences outside the Government are working to obtain diplomatic
settlement of the Tacna-Arica question on basis of division of territory or even of sale
by both Chile and Peru to Bolivia of all their rights in the province, in hope that large
sum will be paid which it is believed that the United States might be disposed to lend to
Bolivia. It is rumored that President-elect of Chile favors this solution. I have stated
that the Government of the United States has only one thought, namely, the discharge
of duty it has assumed at request of both Chile and Peru to preside over absolutely
impartial plebiscite. I have given no encouragement to idea of any other mode of
settlement, but I report, for your information, that it is my belief that the two peoples
can never live in harmony except by cession to Bolivia or by division of the territory.
COLLIER

[Document 257]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, December 1, 1925—noon.
information. In order that you may have background in any future conversations, I wish
Nothing would be more gratifying to me than to have a diplomatic settlement of Tacna-
Arica question, and there has never been time when I would have hesitated to advise
both parties to make settlement of that sort. How to approach them is the difficult
question. I am not aware how I could do it without being asked by both parties, as I
indicated in my telegram No. 69, and without running great risk of criticism. As soon
as both parties ask my good offices, I am willing to advise settlement and to lend my
aid in every way.
KELLOGG

[Document 258]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
126.
I saw Minister for Foreign Affairs on Monday afternoon and expressed to him your
regret and resentment over publication in Chilean press of articles impugning motives
of Arbitrator and his representatives and calculated to inflame ill-feeling. I read
paraphrase of your telegram No. 76.77 Minister expressed regret and said that Edwards’
speech had been given to press by former [latter?] without consulting Minister, and
that he first learned of it by telegram from Edwards stating that when General Pershing
first requested him not to publish speech, Edwards replied it had already been given to
Buenos Aires papers. Minister said he had begun cable to Edwards disapproving action
and requesting not to publish in Santiago papers, but before he had finished he was
shown copy of Santiago evening paper belonging to Edwards containing Edwards’
speech. Minister said he then cabled Edwards his regret at publication, but mentioned
inutility of instructions under circumstances.
The Minister continued that some days before he had called director of the Edwards’
press to the Ministry and had requested discontinuance of articles against Pershing and
the United States and had stated that as Edwards was on the Commission articles such
as these were especially embarrassing to the Chilean Government and made Edwards’
position almost untenable. I asked whether, in view of the unauthorized publication of
Edwards’ speech since then, he would remain on the Commission. The Minister replied
that he hardly dared remove him, his influence was so great. He added in a joking way
that if the United States would remove General Pershing, Chile would withdraw Mr.
Edwards; that both men had become nervous and irritable.
I replied that General Pershing enjoyed your confidence, had given out no speeches,
and had not impugned the motives of the Chilean head of the State. Minister replied
that on the contrary General Pershing at session of Commission on November 21 had
made a speech, admittedly prepared before Commission had received Edwards’ note of

that date,78 in which Chilean authorities, even the highest, were charged by General
Pershing with fraud and violence, imputing base motives to all, including Edwards. I
said that this speech had not been given to press. Minister admitted that it had not, but
said he was going to send copy of speech to the Embassy as perhaps Pershing had not
communicated it to you, and that it was such an unwarranted document and so clearly
showed that General Pershing had no intention of even registering the voters and
holding plebiscite, that Edwards’ speech of November 28 had been inspired by it. …
COLLIER
Collier as Department’s telegram No. 76.
78 Neither printed; for substance of speech, see penultimate paragraph of telegram of
249]; for substance of letter, see first paragraph of the same telegram.

[Document 259]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
continuing to abuse General Pershing and to impugn motives of the United States
touching its Latin-American policy. I am glad to learn that Minister for Foreign Affairs
had not authorized publication of Edwards’ letter; but Edwards stated to Commission
that he was directed by his Government to publish it, and I do not understand how it
happened to be telegraphed to all chancelleries of the world.79

I have not been informed what General Pershing said in his speech to Commission on
November 21. It is true that Pershing, replying to Edwards’ letter of November 21,
wrote him long communication stating reasons for delay and setting forth in detail acts
of violence, intimidation, and deportation of Chilean authorities in Tacna and Arica.
General Pershing did not publish this answer, although Edwards published his of the
21st. I have given no statements to press as I was desirous of not adding anything to
bitterness which now exists and which Edwards seems bound to foment.
You are entirely justified in your statements to Minister for Foreign Affairs in way I
feel about these publications. Do not, however, make any further suggestion about
removal of Edwards as that is matter for Chilean Government to decide. Likewise it
would be better not to make further reference to presumption that Pershing had taken
no important steps without being convinced that he represented ideas of Arbitrator. I
would not again open subject; and I have kept the President out of it entirely, because,
while he has greatest confidence in Pershing, he must maintain detached position, and
will, of course, pass on any question brought before him on its merits, I desire to thank
you for all that you have done in this matter. I do not know where it is going to end.
Should be glad to receive any suggestions you care to make.
KELLOGG
letter had been sent to the chancelleries was now stated to be erroneous and was

probably caused by confusing the speech with the informative material given out in

[Document 260]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
From Pershing: …
I propose to call a meeting of the Commission next week, at which I shall reply to
Edwards’ statement of November 2880 and present a motion in substitution for his. My
motion will set forth briefly unsatisfactory conditions in Tacna-Arica, the steps taken to
remedy them, the correspondence between the Chilean Commissioner and the President
of the Plebiscitary Commission since November 21, and will fix tentatively the
schedule of dates for the plebiscite, which will be the same as previously suggested
except that it will be necessary to postpone all dates two weeks to make up for delay
caused by Chile’s action, thus carrying the voting up to May 1; motion will also call
upon Chile to cooperate immediately in putting the prerequisites resolution into effect,
as well as other resolutions passed in support of it. …
… Your information on Mathieu’s attitude is very interesting and I regret that I deem it
impracticable to advance dates to show appreciation, but he may be sure that I shall
look forward to his visit with genuine pleasure, and shall be read$ to cooperate with
him in every way. I may add, incidentally, that Edwards asserts his course and even the
tone of his recent address was and is dictated by Chilean Government. Pershing.
VON TRESCKOW

[Document 261]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: I am greatly disappointed over suggested postponement of election, and
wish to emphasize solicitude President feels touching possibility that delay may furnish
ground for complaint. Of course you will understand that there is no desire that
proceedings should be expedited at expense of their integrity or of making appropriate
arrangements for holding of plebiscite, but we do desire that there should be no delay
in formulation and promulgation of regulations and holding of registration and election
beyond what is absolutely necessary. In your letter to Edwards,83 a statement was made
that committee on registration and election regulations should “with good will all
around” be able to report to Plebiscitary Commission by end of December. In view of
length of time that committee has had matter under consideration would it not be
possible for committee to report at earlier date? Could not a week, or perhaps two, be
saved this way? I notice also that it is suggested that Commission might be able to
adopt and promulgate regulations on or about January 15, assuming report by
committee by end of December. Would it not be possible after committee’s report is in
to expedite proceedings preliminary to adoption and promulgation of regulations? By
bending considerable effort to that end, could not whole matter of adopting regulations
be disposed of early in January? Assuming that registration should begin within
approximately 30 days after promulgation of regulations and that equal period be
allowed for registration, could not hearing of appeals be so expedited that, with time
that might be saved in promulgation of rules, holding of election might be brought to
early part of April? I do not desire to suggest any course that is impractical, but I am
sure you will desire to hasten proceedings as much as possible in interest of all
concerned. It seems quite clear to me that promulgation of regulations which must be
complied with, will not only make impossible any complaint for delay, but will afford
standard of action which will be helpful in all future proceedings. In view of fact that
Commission can change dates if advisable, is it not desirable that initial dates be fixed
for as early date as is consistent with assembling voters for purposes of registration and
with expeditious hearing of appeals?
I do not desire in slightest to underestimate your personal interest or interest of all who
are doubtless hard at work with you, but importance of speeding up matter is so great

that I am sure you will give careful consideration to suggestions I have made,
especially in view of President’s solicitude in matter.
KELLOGG

[Document 262]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
From Pershing: Secretary’s telegram December 8, 9 p.m. Under circumstances any
attempt to fix dates for registration and election is guess work, more or less.
Suggestions I have made were to help us out of what appears to be a deadlock. No one
can be more anxious than I to make this effort a success, but it must not be done at
sacrifice of reasonably free plebiscite. Your telegrams make me feel that existing
situation here may not be entirely understood. There has been no improvement in
conditions here in past four months. Law and order from plebiscitary point of view do
not exist. Chile maintains grip on population and does not intend to release it. I regret
that Mathieu was not told exactly reasons why we have been unable to fix dates earlier.
… In deference to your suggestions I am willing to fix dates as I have indicated, but it
is certain that we shall not be able to live up to them. … It must be remembered that we
are dealing with a population which has never voted before. In addition, the ill feeling
between the two elements of the population inflamed by the contest, Chile’s
determination not to allow Peruvians to vote, and the consequent obstruction and
interference by both sides, gives you a partial picture of the problem. I do not think that
anyone who has not been here can even begin to understand it. So, Mr. Secretary, you
may accept the best judgment of those who have been sent here for the purpose.
Neither Chileans nor Peruvians have any conception of meaning of an election, even of
simplest sort, and their estimates of time required, even though sincere, are worthless.
Pershing
VON TRESCKOW

[Document 263]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8:35 p.m.]
142. The Minister for Foreign Affairs has made public statement that:
“Owing to the impossibility of securing a change of the opinion formed by
the President of the Commission, based upon information that Chile
considers erroneous, concerning the expediency of holding the plebiscite
without greater delay, Chile has been obliged to exercise the right of appeal
given to it by the award against the resolutions voted in the session of
Wednesday last. It believes that a detailed exposition before the Arbitrator of
the manner in which the majority of the Commission proposes to apply the
award will bring about a modification of the proceedings which, to Chile’s
regret, have caused a suspension of the Commission’s activities in Arica. The
exercise of the right to appeal is not unusual in legal proceedings. It gives the
opportunity to defend national interests without implying disrespect for the
Arbitrator. It is a fortunate circumstance which the Government notes with
pleasure that the taking of this appeal may produce a truce in the plebiscitary
activities that will offer to the government of Señor Figueroa the opportunity
to take the course that he considers most consonant with national interest.”
COLLIER

[Document 264]
The President of the Plebiscitary Commission (Pershing) to the Secretary of
State
ARICA [undated].
For the Arbitrator: Pursuant to instructions from the Plebiscitary Commission the
following is communicated.
PART I. THE PLEBISCITARY COMMISSION, TACNA-ARICA ARBITRATION
Resolved by the Plebiscitary Commission, Tacna-Arica Arbitration, that the
portion of the “dissenting opinion and request for certification on appeal” of
His Excellency the Chilean member, dated December 11, 1925, read,
delivered and filed on December 14, 1925, which sets forth a dissent and
appeal from the action of the Commission, on December 9, 1925, in
substituting for a resolution to fix the date of the plebiscite introduced by the
Chilean member, a resolution on the same subject introduced by the President
of the Commission,84 and in adopting the latter, be and hereby is certified to
the Arbitrator under the provisions of the second sentence of paragraph D,
page 45 of the award, as presenting a “question of general importance in
relation to the holding or result of the plebiscite”; and that all other portions
of said “dissenting opinion and request for certification on appeal” be
transmitted to the Arbitrator for such consideration as he may deem proper,
on his own motion, under the provisions of the first sentence of said
paragraph D.
Section 2. That the President of the Commission be and hereby is
instructed to cable to the Arbitrator this resolution; the aforesaid
“dissenting opinion and request for certification on appeal”; the
containing a draft of a resolution to fix the date of the plebiscite,
the substitute for said resolution introduced by the President and
adopted by the Commission; and the Chilean member’s; notes
December 7, 1925; and also to forward to the Arbitrator by mail a
copy of each of said documents.85

Section 3. That after His Excellency the Chilean member of the
Commission shall have delivered to the Secretary General for
transmission to the Arbitrator a complete file of all documents,
including all the minutes of the meetings of the Commission,
which the Chilean member has made a part of his “dissenting
opinion and request for certification on appeal” such file shall be
transmitted by mail to the Arbitrator by the President of the
Commission: provided, that any document included by the Chilean
member in the file to be transmitted to the Arbitrator which is not
included in the minutes so to be transmitted shall be filed in
quadruplicate, one copy to be transmitted to the Arbitrator, one for
the President of the Commission, one for the Peruvian member, and
one for the Secretariat.
Section 4. That the President of the Commission be and hereby is
authorized to request the Secretary of State of the United States to
transmit to the Arbitrator a copy of the letter dated November 27,
1925, addressed to His Excellency the Chilean member by the
President of the Commission, and copy of the remarks made by the
President at the meeting of December 9, 1925, in introducing a
substitute for the Chilean member’s resolution to fix the date of the
plebiscite; that His Excellency the Chilean member of the
Commission be and hereby is authorized to request his Government
to instruct the Chilean Ambassador in Washington to deliver to the
Secretary of State of the United States, for transmission to the
Arbitrator, a copy of the Chilean member’s address delivered at the
meeting of November 28, 1925, and a copy of the memorandum
read and filed by the Chilean member at the meeting of December
14, 1925, respecting the resolution to fix the date of the plebiscite
introduced by the President of the Commission in substitution for a
resolution on the same subject introduced by the Chilean member;
and that His Excellency the Peruvian member of the Commission
be and hereby is authorized to request his Government to instruct
the Peruvian Ambassador in Washington to deliver to the Secretary
of State of the United States, for transmission to the Arbitrator, a
copy of the Peruvian member’s statement read in the 7th session of
the Commission, analyzing the conditions existing in the
plebiscitary area; a copy of the remarks of the Peruvian member
and a statement of the status of the cases respecting offences
committeed against Peruvian citizens for which complaints have
been lodged in the Chilean courts, which were read during the 14th
meeting of the Commission, on November 21, 1925; as well as a
copy of the remarks made by the Peruvian member during the

course of the 17th and 18th meetings of the Commission, on
Section 5. That in view of the provisions of the third and last
sentence of paragraph D, page 45 of the award, the Commission
respectfully recommends that the Arbitrator communicate to the
Commission by cable his determination as to the time and manner
in which, and the record upon which, the instant appeals of His
Excellency the Chilean member shall be submitted to the
Arbitrator.
Section 6. That the Commission respectfully recommends that the
Arbitrator communicate to the Commission by cable his ruling as
to the effect of the instant appeals upon the past, current, and future
proceedings of the Commission and its agencies, with special
reference to the question whether or not, pending disposition of the
instant appeals, the parties are bound to cooperate with the
Commission in carrying out its decision with respect to certain
matters or all matters.
The foregoing resolution was adopted by the Plebiscitary Commission, Tacna-Arica
Arbitration, on the 16th day of December 1925.
Sections 1 to 5, both inclusive, were adopted by unanimous vote of the three members
of the Commission. Section 6 was adopted upon the affirmative vote of the President
and the Peruvian member, the Chilean member abstaining from voting and formulating
the following reservation:
“Section 6 of the resolution could be interpreted in the sense that the
members of the Commission are to cooperate in carrying out each and every
decision adopted by the Commission: but as the Commission has adopted,
and may adopt in the future, resolutions affecting, or which may affect and
even undermine, the laws and jurisdiction of Chile which prevail in these
territories in accordance with the Treaty of Ancon and recognized by the
Arbitral Award, I am compelled to abstain from voting on this section 6 and I
make formal reservation of the rights of Chile.
“I wish to state at the same time, that in every matter outside these referred
to, and particularly in the enactment of the registration and election
regulations, the Commission can count on the cooperation of the Chilean
member”.
[Here follow the texts of the documents referred to in section 2 of the resolution.]

JOHN J. PERSHING
84 Text of resolution of December 9 not printed; under it, the date of the plebiscite was
dates 15 days. All dates were subject to change by the Commission.
documents mentioned, see El proceso de Tacna y Arica (1925–1927): reseña de los
principales sucesos …, pp. 122–150.

[Document 265]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
For Pershing: Arbitrator by order allowing appeal, which is being cabled to you
tonight,86 has provided that until further order or determination by him, the Plebiscitary
Commission shall proceed with performance of its duties under the opinion and award
of March 4, 1925. In the circumstances, I suggest advisability of confining all activities
and proceedings to work of preparatory nature necessary to avoid loss of time, and to
make possible eventual carrying out of schedule embodied in Commission’s resolution
of December 9, should decision of Arbitrator affirm the resolution of December 9. I
should not think it wise, however, to undertake any new measures likely to aggravate
the situation during the appeal period which, probably, will be very brief. It is hoped
that Arbitrator will be able to dispose of the certified appeal by January 15, 1926.
KELLOGG
86 Arbitrator’s order not printed.

Boundary disputes

Contents

Colombia and Nicaragua
[266] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Nicaragua (Thurston)
Washington, March 21, 1925.
[267] The Chargé in Nicaragua (Thurston) to the Secretary of State
[268] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Colombia (Piles)
Washington, September 24, 1925.
[269] The Minister in Colombia (Piles) to the Secretary of State

[Document 266]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Nicaragua (Thurston)
WASHINGTON, March 21, 1925.
No. 212
note from the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua88 to the Secretary of State, in
which the Minister of Foreign Affairs requested the good offices of the Secretary of
State to persuade Colombia to submit to arbitration the question of the ownership of the
San Andrés Archipelago, there is transmitted herewith a reply from the Secretary of
State to be delivered by you to the Nicaraguan Minister of Foreign Affairs.89 An extra
copy of the reply is transmitted for the files of the Legation. A translation of the note
from the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State is also
transmitted for the files of the Legation.
You will observe that the Department has not considered it advisable to accede to
Nicaragua’s request to recommend to Colombia an arbitration dealing solely with the
ownership of the San Andrés Archipelago. The Department considers that the proposal
already made by Colombia in accordance with which Nicaragua would keep the
Mosquito coast and the Corn Islands, and Colombia would keep the San Andrés
Archipelago, would offer an equitable solution of the controversy. The Department
will, therefore, be glad to have you discuss informally with the Nicaraguan
Government the desirability of terminating this long-standing diplomatic controversy in
this manner. Please report the outcome of this discussion to the Department.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
[Enclosure]
The Secretary of State to the Nicaraguan Minister for Foreign Affairs (Castrillo)
WASHINGTON, March 21, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your predecessor’s note of
December 29, 1924,90 in which he informed me of the present situation of the
controversy between the Governments of Nicaragua and Colombia relating to the

ownership of the Mosquito coast and the adjacent islands, including especially the Corn
Islands and the San Andrés Archipelago. I note that after failing to settle the
controversy by diplomatic negotiations your Government accredited a legation to the
Government of Colombia with instructions to lay before the Colombian Government
the draft of a convention, a copy of which accompanies your predecessor’s note;91 that
this draft was not accepted by Colombia; that Colombia has now proposed a settlement,
leaving to Colombia the San Andrés Archipelago and to Nicaragua the Mosquito coast
and the Corn Islands;92 that the Nicaraguan Government has rejected this latter
proposal; and that the Nicaraguan Government now finds itself constrained to request
the good offices of the United States Government in order that the Government of
Colombia may consent to refer to arbitration the question of the ownership of the San
Andrés Archipelago.93
In reply I have the honor to inform you that the request of the Government of
Nicaragua has received the most careful and friendly consideration. It would of course
be inappropriate for this Government to express an opinion as to the force and validity
of the arguments advanced by the Governments of Nicaragua and Colombia in the
course of the diplomatic negotiations between them, especially as it does not have at
hand all of the information necessary for a full consideration of the question. From
such information as is now in the possession of this Government, however, it would
appear that the Spanish colonial legislative and administrative dispositions, the
interpretation and validity of which are in question, referred equally to the San Andrés
Archipelago and to the Mosquito coast and the Corn Islands. It would thus appear that
a decision in favor of either party based solely upon the uti possidetis juris of 1810
might be expected to apply with equal force to all of the territory in dispute. Under
these conditions this Government does not feel that it could consistently urge upon the
Government of Colombia the submission to arbitration of the question of the ownership
of a portion only of this territory with the consequent relinquishment of whatever claim
Colombia may have to the remainder.
This Government understands that the Archipelago of San Andrés has been occupied
by Colombia since 1822, whereas Nicaragua has exercised jurisdiction on the Mosquito
coast since the declaration of independence from Spain and has occupied the Corn
Islands since about 1890. The proposal of the Colombian Government, which would
recognize the sovereignty of Nicaragua over the Mosquito coast and the Corn Islands
and the sovereignty of Colombia over the San Andrés Archipelago, would therefore
make permanent a situation which has existed in fact, so far as the more important
portions of the territory in dispute are concerned, practically since the achievement of
the independence of the two Republics. Such an arrangement, furthermore, would set at
rest any question as to the sovereignty of Nicaragua over the east coast of that Republic
and the Corn Islands, territory which is obviously infinitely more valuable to Nicaragua
than the San Andrés Archipelago. Without committing itself at this time to the
expression of any opinion as to the intrinsic merits of the controversy, the Government

of the United States is inclined to feel that a settlement on the basis indicated would
afford an equitable solution of the matter. I need not say that this observation is made in
the most friendly spirit and solely in the hope of promoting an amicable settlement on
terms advantageous to both parties.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
87 Not printed.
88 José Andrés Urtecho.
89 Salvador Castrillo. His occupancy of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was brief, Dr.
Urtecho resuming charge of the Ministry upon his removal.
90 Not printed.
91 Printed in Nicaragua y Colombia: Ultimas comunicaciones sobre la cuestion
Mosquita entre el Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y la Legacion de Colombia
([Managua?], Tipografia Progreso, 1925), p. 115.
93 For a statement of Nicaragua’s case, see Memorandum Explicativo de la
Controversia entre Nicaragua y Colombia sobre el Dominio de las Islas de San Andrés
(Managua, 1924); also Alcance al Memorandum Explicativo, etc. (Managua, 1924).

[Document 267]
The Chargé in Nicaragua (Thurston) to the Secretary of State
MANAGUA, April 20, 1925.
[Received May 8.]
No. 19
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s instruction number 212, dated March
21, 1925, concerning the controversy between Nicaragua and Colombia with respect to
the ownership of the San Andrés Archipelago, and to report that the note of March 21,
1925, from the Secretary of State which accompanied it was delivered to the
Nicaraguan Minister of Foreign Affairs on April 14, 1925.
The Minister, Dr. Urtecho, appeared to be greatly disappointed by Mr. Kellogg’s note,
and indicated an unwillingness to discuss the desirability of terminating the controversy
by accepting the proposal made by Colombia.
I have [etc.]
WALTER C. THURSTON

[Document 268]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Colombia (Piles)
WASHINGTON, September 24, 1925.
No. 831
SIR: With reference to the dispute between Colombia and Nicaragua with regard to the
ownership of the [San] Andrés Archipelago, Great and Little Corn Island and the
Mosquito Coast, which has been the subject of previous correspondence between the
Department and the Legation, you are informed that the Minister of Nicaragua called
recently at the Department and stated that his Government was desirous of submitting
this question to the mediation of the Department of State and, if possible, to arbitration.
He added that the Colombian Government had refused to accept arbitration but might
be prepared to accept mediation. He hoped the State Department would take a friendly
interest and endeavor through its influence to arrange for a friendly settlement of this
question.
The Department advised the Minister that it would be glad to be of such assistance as
might be possible in any way which would be acceptable to both Nicaragua and
Colombia and at the invitation of both parties.
You may, if you deem it advisable, discuss this matter informally with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and endeavor to ascertain the views of the Colombian Government
with regard to the possible mediation of the United States, looking to the ultimate
arbitration of this dispute.
It should be distinctly understood that this Government would require as a condition
precedent to the submission of this dispute to arbitration through the good offices of the
United States that both parties would agree that the award would be final and without
appeal.
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 269]
The Minister in Colombia (Piles) to the Secretary of State
BOGOTÁ, November 19, 1925.
[Received December 12.]
No. 769
in regard to the dispute between Colombia and Nicaragua, concerning the ownership of
the San Andrés Archipelago, Great and Little Corn Islands and the Mosquito Coast, I
have the honor to inform the Department that immediately following the receipt of this
instruction, I called at the Foreign Office and, in the course of an informal
conversation, acquainted Dr. Restrepo Sáenz of the desire of the Government of
Nicaragua to submit the question of dominion over the above-mentioned territory to the
mediation of the Department of State, with a view to ultimate arbitration of the dispute.
I indicated that my Government would take a friendly interest in the matter and should
both parties request its interposition, would endeavor to arrange a friendly settlement of
the question, on the understanding that should arbitration be accepted, the parties must
agree to consider the award as final and without appeal.
Dr. Restrepo accepted my representations in a friendly spirit but has not subsequently
commented upon them.
I have [etc.]
SAMUEL H. PILES

Colombia and Peru94
[270] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[271] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[272] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[273] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[274] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[275] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

[276] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[277] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[278] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[279] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[280] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[281] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[282] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)

[283] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[284] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[285] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[286] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[287] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[288] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[289] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State

[290] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[291] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[292] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[293] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[294] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[295] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[296] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)

[297] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[298] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[299] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[300] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[301] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[302] The Secretary of State to the Permian Ambassador (Velarde)
Washington, March 4, 1925.
[303] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)

[304] The Permian Ambassador (Velarde) to the Secretary of State
Washington, March 10, 1925.
[305] The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde)
Washington, March 24, 1925.
[306] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
Washington, July 3, 1925—noon.
[307] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[308] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With the
Colombian Minister (Olaya), October 31, 1925
October 31, 1925
[309] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State

[Document 270]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[Paraphrase]
On December 12 Senhor Gracie, the Brazilian Chargé, left a confidential memorandum
Colombia and Peru,97 and expressed the desire of his Government that the American
Government lend its good offices to have treaty modified or replaced by another
arrangement in which the interest of Brazil would not be affected.
This subject was informally discussed with the Colombian Minister who, acting upon
instructions from his Government, has suggested the following as a basis of settlement:
1. That Brazil withdraw its memorandum to Peru protesting against Peru’s
ratification of the Colombia-Peru boundary treaty.
2. That the above treaty be ratified.
3. That Brazil and Colombia settle this boundary between Apaporis and
Tabatinga.
Regarding this last point the Colombian Government presented the following for
consideration:
The Apaporis-Tabatinga line represents, and has always represented, Brazil’s
maximum claim in this boundary dispute. An equitable solution would be to
recognize as belonging to Colombia a section of territory east of this line.
The Apaporis-Tabatinga line could, for instance, be divided into two sections:
the first from Apaporis to the Putumayo River, and the other from the
Putumayo to Tabatinga. The Government of Colombia would accept either
the one or the other.
Colombia also desires to stipulate that if an agreement is reached on the
boundary line between her and Brazil, the free navigation of the Amazon, the

Putumayo, and the Caquetá Rivers must be established in perpetuity as well
as in general all the rivers common to the two countries.
I handed to the Brazilian Chargé on January 6 a memorandum95 embodying the
Colombian suggestion and stating that, animated by the sincerest desire to be of service
to both Governments in arriving at a satisfactory solution of the present difficulties, the
Government of the United States would be glad to transmit the views of the
Government of Brazil in the premises to that of Colombia, should this action be the
desire of the Brazilian Government.
I read this memorandum to the Brazilian Chargé and asked him if he knew what his
Government’s attitude would be toward establishing the boundary by recognizing a
section of land east of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as Colombian territory. Senhor
Gracie answered no, but said that he would cable to his Government for instructions.
I added that I took for granted that any settlement of this question would involve the
withdrawal of Brazilian opposition to the Colombian-Peruvian treaty and I then stated
confidentially that should the Government of Brazil decline to recognize as Colombian
any territory east of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line, and should Brazil be willing to grant
freedom of navigation of the rivers mentioned in perpetuity to Colombia, as was
granted for 10 years by the Treaty of Commerce and Navigation signed on August 21,
1908, at Rio de Janeiro between Brazil and Colombia, I should be disposed to use my
good offices to obtain Colombia’s recognition of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as had
been done by the Colombian Executive in the unratified treaty of 1853 between Brazil
and Colombia.
The Chargé assured me that he would regard my statement as strictly confidential and
would not transmit it to his Government; you may, therefore, should the matter be
discussed between the Brazilian authorities and yourself, state as your personal opinion
that the Government of the United States might be disposed to use its good offices,
should the Government of Brazil express its readiness to grant freedom of navigation of
the rivers in question, to have the Apaporis-Tabatinga line recognized by Colombia.
You will cable fully all developments.
HUGHES
95 Not printed.
95 Not printed.
97 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. LXXIV, p. 9.
95 Not printed.

[Document 271]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
Affairs, and if necessary to the President, that as I am leaving office on March 4, it
would be very gratifying to me should it be possible to settle the boundary question
with Colombia before that time.

While this Government is acting as a means of communication between interested
parties, it is a medium of communication which is also profoundly interested in a just
and prompt settlement. Please endeavor to have the matter given prompt consideration.
HUGHES
98 Not printed.

[Document 272]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[Paraphrase]
5. The Colombian Minister has advised the Department that he has been authorized by
his Government to accept a settlement of the Colombian-Brazilian boundary along the
Apaporis-Tabatinga line on the following conditions:
1. Brazil to withdraw her opposition to ratification of the Colombian-
Peruvian boundary treaty.
2. The boundary treaty to be ratified.
3. Brazil to grant to Colombia freedom of navigation in perpetuity of Amazon
and the other rivers common to both countries.
The Department is not of the opinion that it should communicate officially to the
Government of Brazil the willingness of the Government of Colombia that the
boundary question be settled on the basis of the above conditions until some reply has
been received on the Colombian proposal transmitted in its telegram No. 1, January 7,
4 p.m. Referring to the last paragraph of that telegram, you may, however, make the
suggestion contained therein, and urge a prompt settlement on that basis.
HUGHES

[Document 273]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 7:05 p.m.]
7. I have fully complied with instructions contained in Department’s telegrams No. 1 of
my opinion the Government of Colombia would accept the Apaporis-Tabatinga line.
The stumbling block appears to be the embarrassment that would be occasioned Brazil
by having formally to withdraw her opposition to Peru’s ratification of the Peruvian-
Colombian boundary treaty.

The Minister has recovered from his illness but the President has been away from the
Capital since last week and will probably not return until the end of January.
MORGAN

[Document 274]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[Paraphrase]
opposition manifested by Brazil to the ratification of the Peruvian-Colombian boundary
treaty arose from the feeling that Brazil’s rights in the territory east of the Apaporis-
Tabatinga line would be prejudiced thereby. Peru recognized Brazil’s rights in this
region by the treaty of 1851.2 If now, by agreement with Colombia to establish the
boundary on the Apaporis-Tabatinga line, Brazil obtains final recognition of her rights,
the raison d’être of her protest would disappear and the Department cannot understand
why Brazil should oppose withdrawing her objection, having obtained her object in
opposing the ratification of the boundary treaty.
One document could cover all the points; namely, a procès-verbal of a meeting of the
Brazilian Chargé, the Colombian Minister, and the Peruvian Ambassador in the office
of the Secretary of State. At this meeting the Secretary would refer first to the matter
under discussion and to the fact that all three Governments had requested his good
offices to bring it to a settlement, and then would suggest as a way of solving the
difficulty (1) the withdrawal of Brazil’s opposition to ratification of the boundary
treaty, (2) the ratification of the treaty by Peru, and (3) the signing of a convention
between Brazil and Colombia establishing the boundary between those countries along
the Apaporis-Tabatinga line, Brazil granting to Colombia the right of free navigation of
the Amazon and other rivers common to both countries. Then the Brazilian Chargé
would state that his Government had instructed him to inform the Peruvian
Ambassador that Brazil withdraws its opposition to the boundary treaty between
Colombia and Peru on the understanding that, immediately upon the ratification of that
treaty by Peru, Colombia will sign a convention fixing the Brazilian-Colombian
boundary on the Apaporis-Tabatinga line and that, in the same convention, Brazil is
ready to grant freedom of navigation on the rivers in question to Colombia. Then the
Colombian Minister would state that he was gratified to learn Brazil had withdrawn her
objection to the Peruvian treaty and that, upon ratification of the treaty by Peru, the
Colombian Government would immediately conclude a treaty with Brazil to establish
the boundary on the Apaporis-Tabatinga line on the conditions specified, that is, Brazil
to grant freedom of navigation to Colombia on the Amazon and the other rivers
common to both countries. Then the Peruvian Ambassador would state that his

Government authorized him to say that, in view of the withdrawal of Brazil’s protest
against the treaty, the Government of Peru would immediately urge upon the Peruvian
Congress the ratification of the boundary treaty with Colombia. There would then be
drawn up a procès-verbal of the meeting in four copies which would be signed by the
Secretary of State, the Brazilian Chargé, the Colombian Minister, and the Peruvian
Ambassador. This procedure would follow the method used to bring about the
establishment of diplomatic relations between Colombia and Panama and the
settlement of the boundary between those countries.3
As this method appears to offer an appropriate way of disposing of this difficulty, the
Department trusts that it will be satisfactory to the Brazilian Government and hopes
that you will be able to obtain the prompt agreement of that Government. Cable results
of your efforts.
HUGHES
2 British and Foreign State Papers, vol. XLII, p. 1308.

[Document 275]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
RIO DE JANEIRO, February 6, 1925—noon.
[Received 2:47 p.m.]
10. The Foreign Office has accepted the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as establishing the
boundary between Brazil and Colombia, and will agree to the free navigation of the
Amazon and the other rivers common to both countries. This information will be
officially transmitted to the Department as soon as the President gives his approval. It
is requested that no announcement be made at present.
MORGAN

[Document 276]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
15. Brazilian Chargé this morning left a note at the Department4 stating that Brazil
would have no reason to oppose Peruvian-Colombian treaty if Peru would assure Brazil
that in any arrangement for settlement of its boundary question with Colombia it will
make as a condition recognition of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line established by the
Treaty of 1851 and the consequent dominion of Brazil over the territory to the east of
that line. The note added that if Colombia recognizes the above line Brazil will be
pleased to grant Colombia freedom of navigation on the rivers common to the two
countries. The Department therefore suggests a meeting in the Secretary of State’s
office between the Secretary of State, the Peruvian Ambassador, the Colombian
Minister and the Brazilian Chargé, a Procès Verbal of the same to be drawn up in the
following terms:
“Doctor Hernán Velarde, Doctor Enrique Olaya, and Mr. Samuel de Sousa
Leão Gracie, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Peru, Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Colombia, and Chargé
d’Affaires ad interim of Brazil, respectively, having on the invitation of the
Secretary of State of the United States, met with him in his office at the
Department of State, Washington, at . . . . . o’clock on February . ., 1925:
Mr. Hughes stated that he had invited Messrs. Velarde, Olaya and Gracie to
his office to discuss the boundary treaty between Colombia and Peru signed
in Lima March 24, 1922, against the ratification of which formal protest had
been lodged in Lima by the Brazilian Government. Mr. Hughes stated that
the three Governments concerned had requested his good offices in the
settlement of this question and, after carefully considering the matter, he
desired to suggest as a solution of the difficulty the following:
First. The withdrawal by the Government of Brazil of its objection
to the ratification of the boundary treaty between Colombia and
Peru;
Second. The ratification by Colombia and Peru of the above
mentioned boundary convention;

Third. The signing, immediately after the ratification of the above
convention, of a convention between Brazil and Colombia by
which the boundary between those countries would be agreed to on
the Apaporis-Tabatinga line, Brazil agreeing to establish in
perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of navigation on the
Amazon and other rivers common to both countries.
Mr. Gracie then stated that he was authorized by his Government to accept
the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State had just made and that in
consequence he was instructed by his Government to inform the Peruvian
Ambassador that Brazil withdraws its opposition to the Colombian-Peruvian
treaty above mentioned on the understanding that Peru will make as a
condition in settling its boundary question with Colombia, the recognition of
the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as described by the treaty of 1851 and in
consequence Brazilian dominion over the territory to the east thereof. Mr.
Gracie added that should Colombia agree to recognize the above mentioned
Apaporis-Tabatinga line Brazil was ready to agree in the same convention to
establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of navigation on the
River Amazon and other rivers common to both countries.
Doctor Olaya then stated that he was authorized by his Government to accept
the friendly suggestion just made by the Secretary of State. Doctor Olaya
added that he was authorized to state that on the condition that the treaty of
March 24, 1922, between Colombia and Peru, should be ratified by the
Government of Peru the Government of Colombia would agree to conclude
immediately thereafter a treaty with Brazil recognizing as the frontier
between the two countries the village of Tabatinga, and from that place to the
north the direct line until it meets the River Yapurá at its junction with the
Apaporis, and in consequence Brazilian dominion over the territory to the
east thereof, it being understood that Brazil in the same treaty would agree to
establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of navigation on the
Amazon and other rivers common to both countries.
Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his Government to
express its acceptance of the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State
had just made and that as a consequence of the assurance just given by the
Colombian Minister that, immediately upon the ratification of the boundary
treaty of March 24, 1922 by Peru, Colombia would conclude a treaty with
Brazil recognizing as the frontier the Apaporis-Tabatinga line described by
the treaty of 1851 and in consequence Brazilian dominion over the territory
to the east thereof, thus meeting the condition upon which the Brazilian
Government withdrew its protest to the ratification of the Colombian-
Peruvian treaty of March 24, 1922, his Government would immediately

advise the Peruvian Congress thereof, repeating at the same time its
recommendation that it approve the boundary treaty with Colombia.
The Ambassador of Peru, the Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé
d’Affaires ad interim of Brazil then stated that they desired to express the
gratitude of their respective Governments for the good offices of the
(Secretary of State exerted in such an amicable manner in the interest of
harmony between the three interested Republics in order to adjust the
questions considered in the meeting recorded by this Procès Verbal.
This Procès Verbal of the meeting, drawn up in quadruplicate, was signed by
the Secretary of State, the Ambassador of Peru, the Minister of Colombia,
and the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Brazil. One copy will be retained by
the Secretary of State, who will send of the remaining three copies, one each
to the Ambassador of Peru, the Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé
d’Affaires ad interim of Brazil, respectively.”
Please communicate this text immediately to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
express the hope that he will find it possible to send instructions to the Brazilian
Chargé in Washington without delay to take part in the meeting in the manner set forth
above and to sign the Procès Verbal.
HUGHES
4 Not printed.

[Document 277]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)5
2. The Department has recently held conversations with the Peruvian Ambassador, the
Colombian Minister and the Brazilian Chargé regarding the settlement of the situation
created by the Brazilian protest against the ratification of the Colombian-Peruvian
boundary treaty. The Colombian and Peruvian Governments appear to be in virtual
accord but the Peruvian Ambassador has not yet received instructions from his
Government. Department very anxious to conclude matter before March 4, and
suggests a meeting in Secretary of State’s office between the Secretary of State, the
Peruvian Ambassador, the Colombian Minister and the Brazilian Chargé, a Procès
Verbal of same to be drawn up in the following terms: [Here follows the text of procès-
Ambassador in Brazil, supra.]
Please communicate this text immediately to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
express the hope that he will find it possible to send instructions to the Peruvian
Ambassador in Washington without delay to take part in the meeting in the manner set
forth above and to sign the Procès Verbal.
HUGHES
5 The same, except for substitution of the words “Colombian Minister” for “Peruvian
Ambassador” in the last paragraph, to the Minister in Colombia (file No.

[Document 278]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Received February 24—9 a.m.]
saw the President immediately and informed him fully, leaving written memorandum.
President stated he would send instructions Minister to return at once and would
inquire whether Peruvian Foreign Office had any communication from Brazil on the
subject. President stated withdrawal by Brazil of its protest would remove only
objection he had to ratification of the treaty; that arrangement as stated in proposed
procès-verbal seemed a happy solution of the question and that if such an agreement
were reached he would be glad to advise the Peruvian Congress to that effect and
repeat recommendation that the pending treaty be ratified on condition as stated in
proposed procès-verbal.
The President desired to consult with Minister of Foreign Affairs but indicated he
would cable instructions to Peruvian Ambassador in Washington as suggested. I called
his attention especially to need of quick action in order dispose of matter before March
4th.
POINDEXTER

[Document 279]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5:15 p.m.]
impossible to take action until he can hear from Rio de Janeiro. Says Peru has been
having conversations with Brazilian Government on this subject and cannot suddenly
break them off without consultation. Expects to be able to give definite answer
tomorrow.
POINDEXTER

[Document 280]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9:20 p.m.]
16. Conversed with Minister for Foreign Affairs this afternoon regarding text of procès-
Dr. Pacheco6 showed me copy of telegram sent last night to Gracie approving the said
procès-verbal but containing suggested verbal changes of which the following are the
most important: In paragraph two of the procès-verbal he wishes that “consider” be
substituted for “discuss” and that “formal protest” shall be replaced by the English
translation of the Portuguese “ponderações de caracter amistoso.” Pacheco also wishes
that this same phrase be employed in the seventh paragraph of the procès-verbal after
the words “to inform the Peruvian Ambassador that Brazil withdraws” and in the ninth
paragraph where the word “protest” is also employed. He suggests that there be a more
explicit description of boundaries to be included in the proposed treaty between
Colombia and Brazil and that instead of the phrase “perpetuity” in paragraph six the
description included in the Brazilian-Peruvian treaty of 1909 shall be employed. Brazil
wishes especially to eliminate the impression that she “protested” against the
ratification of the Peruvian-Colombian treaty.
MORGAN
6 Brazilian Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[Document 281]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
yesterday afternoon. He was told that the minor modifications including change of
“formal protest” to “observations of a friendly nature” would be submitted to
Colombian Minister and Peruvian Ambassador and if acceptable to them would of
course be acceptable to the Department. As regards modified description of boundary
and navigation rights it appeared that this would require submission to Bogotá and
Lima and hence would delay matter to such an extent as to make conclusion before
March 4, impossible. He telegraphed to this effect last night and this morning received
cable from his Government stating that it did not desire to cause any delay and would
accept the Procès Verbal as drawn up but would like to have “formal protest” modified.
Colombian Minister and Peruvian Ambassador this morning accepted the minor
modifications proposed and Gracie is telegraphing this afternoon for authorization to
sign. Colombian Minister has received authorization. Ambassador at Lima reports
Peruvian Government waiting word from Rio before sending instructions. Please
endeavor to have instructions to Gracie expedited and if possible to have Brazilian
Minister in Lima so informed for information of Peruvian Government.
Please express to Minister for Foreign Affairs Department’s appreciation of his
cooperation in withdrawing modifications of boundary line and navigation rights.
HUGHES

[Document 282]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Procès Verbal. Brazilian Chargé was instructed to request certain modifications of form
especially changing reference to Brazilian “formal protest” to read “observations of a
friendly nature”. These modifications being purely matters of form have been accepted
by Colombian Minister; Peruvian Ambassador also expresses his agreement therewith.
Department is encouraged to believe that instructions will be sent Brazilian Chargé
tomorrow to sign agreement. Please endeavor to have instructions sent without delay to
Peruvian Ambassador to sign Procès Verbal.
HUGHES

[Document 283]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
Gracie has been instructed by telegraph to sign procès-verbal and that instructions are
being sent to Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires in Lima to inform Peruvian Government and
American Ambassador there of this fact.
Minister for Foreign Affairs appreciates the Secretary’s courtesy in accepting minor
modifications in the procès-verbal including alteration of words “formal protest” and in
understanding Brazil’s reasons therefor.
MORGAN

[Document 284]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
together. President expressed surprise at news that Brazilian Government was reported
as favorably inclined to agreement outlined in procès-verbal since Peruvian
Government was unable to get corroboration of this from Brazil though request had
been made by Peruvian Government by cable to Rio de Janeiro for answer of Brazilian
Government. He stated that proposed formal change in procès-verbal was satisfactory
though as a matter of fact Brazil had made formal protest on account of which
ratification of the treaty had been suspended by Peru. President promised he would
immediately press Brazil for reply and stated further that latest advice from Brazil was
that Brazil would not agree to establish free navigation of Amazon and other rivers
common to the two countries in favor of Colombia except on condition that strip of
land bordering the Amazon allocated to Colombia by pending treaty be retained by
Peru. Foreign Minister stated his latest information from Rio de Janeiro was Brazil
would not instruct its representative to sign procès-verbal and expressed surprise at
news from Washington. Foreign Minister stated further that Peru could not decide the
question of instructing Ambassador Velarde until he had heard from Brazilian
paragraph, page 7.8 I beg to suggest that Department approach Brazilian Government
through Ambassador at Rio de Janeiro as to Peruvian representations.
Both President and Minister for Foreign Affairs expressed surprise at statement that all
three countries had requested friendly offices of the Department and stated that no such
request had been authorized by Peruvian Government.
POINDEXTER
7 Peruvian Minister for Foreign Affairs.
8 The paragraph to which reference is made, has been omitted from the telegram as
printed in Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, p. 296.

[Document 285]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
4. Ambassador Rio telegraphs instructions being sent Brazilian Chargé to sign Procès
Verbal and that Brazilian Minister in Lima is also being advised to this effect for
information of Peruvian Government. Colombian Minister already authorized to sign.
Please endeavor to have instructions sent Peruvian Ambassador so that Procès Verbal
may be signed Saturday9 if possible.
HUGHES
9 February 28.

[Document 286]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, February 27, 1925—noon.
[Received 2:17 p.m.]
6. Minister for Foreign Affairs Salomón promises to send instructions to Ambassador
Velarde today with modifications changing the words “repeating at the same time its
recommendation that it approve” to “allow to take its constitutional course in
Congress”. Minister of Foreign Affairs stated further that even though the President
should recommend to Congress the approval of the treaty as it stands Congress would
refuse to do so. He stated there was great intensity of feeling against that portion of the
treaty giving to Colombia the tract of land bounded by the Amazon on the south, the
Amazon-Tabatinga line on the east, the Putumayo on the north and the line established
by the pending boundary treaty on the west. He further states that if Colombia would
agree to a modification of the treaty so as to leave this tract of land under Peruvian
dominion and to fix instead the Putumayo River to the Tabatinga-Amazon line as the
boundary between the two countries, the Peruvian Congress, he felt sure, would ratify
the treaty within 15 days and that the Peruvian Executive Government would use all
means in its power to bring that about. The Minister stated that he would cable
Ambassador Velarde to call this suggestion to your consideration informally. He further
stated that his latest advices from Brazil were to the effect that the latter country would
not establish free navigation of the Amazon in favor of Colombia if the Peruvian-
Colombian treaty should be ratified as it now stands, but that Brazil would agree to
establish such free navigation in favor of Colombia if the modification in the treaty
suggested above should be made. The Minister expressed the deep appreciation of the
Peruvian Government for the friendly offices of the Secretary of State in attempting to
bring about an agreement in this matter.
POINDEXTER

[Document 287]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
he has instructions to sign Procès Verbal. Chargé also informed by his Government that
it is telegraphing this information to Brazilian Chargé in Lima. You will please advise
President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of above. Peruvian Ambassador has received
telegram from his Government saying it has been advised from Rio that he (Velarde)
has accepted Procès Verbal and asking explanation. In order to avoid any possible
misunderstanding please endeavor to have Brazilian Chargé accompany you to
President and Minister for Foreign Affairs and advise them that his Government has
instructed Brazilian Chargé in Washington to sign the agreement. Cable when this is
done.
Your last paragraph. Peruvian Ambassador called on Secretary of State on December
explaining that Brazil had taken exception to Peruvian-Colombian treaty on the ground
that it affected her rights. He stated that Peru was very desirous that the whole matter
should be harmoniously adjusted and knowing the wish of the Government of the
United States to do all in its power to promote friendly relations in Latin America the
Ambassador asked if the Secretary would look into the question and see if some
suggestion could be made which would provide a harmonious solution. The Secretary
of State said that he greatly appreciated the Ambassador’s suggestion; that the
Government of the United States did not desire to interfere in matters in which it was
not concerned, but that the Government was always desirous to aid by its friendly
offices in the settlement of differences when other governments so desired. The
Secretary said that he would look into the matter with which he was already to some
extent conversant and that within a short time he would ask the Ambassador to come in
and talk it over. The Ambassador expressed his appreciation.
The Colombian and Brazilian Governments formally requested this Government’s good
offices11 and on the basis thereof the proposal was made which is now before the
Peruvian Government.
The Peruvian Ambassador today confirmed the above statement, as made under explicit
instructions from his Government. This Government is therefore much surprised at and

at a loss to under, stand statement of President and Minister for Foreign Affairs that
Peru had not requested the friendly offices of the Department.
objection to the treaty and disinclination of Peru to take any action which might be
distasteful to Brazil was only cause of Peru withholding ratification of the treaty. Your
withdrawal by Brazil of its protest as removing his only objection to the ratification of
the treaty and that arrangement as stated in Procès Verbal seemed a happy solution of
the question and that if such an agreement were reached he would be glad to advise the
Peruvian Congress to that effect and repeat recommendation that the pending treaty be
ratified. Now that this condition has been met by the withdrawal of Brazil’s opposition
you will please recall to President Leguía his views as expressed in your telegram
above mentioned and point out that in carrying out the agreement he will be complying
with the desires of the two neighboring Republics of Brazil and Colombia and will be
contributing to the satisfactory solution of two more South American boundary
disputes. Please request prompt instructions to Ambassador Velarde to sign the Procès
Verbal as Department is most anxious to conclude matter before March 4.
HUGHES
10 For memorandum by the Secretary of State of the conversation with the Peruvian
Ambassador, see Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, p. 303.

[Document 288]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
modification of the Peruvian-Colombian treaty. This was signed by the Peruvian
Government, has been submitted to the Congresses in both Colombia and Peru and has
been approved by the Colombian Senate. The whole arrangement depends upon the
ratification of this treaty by Peru. The Brazilian Government has definitely accepted to
give Colombia navigation rights in question and has never made any proposal to this
Government in the negotiations leading up to the acceptance of the present Procès
Verbal to have the Colombian-Peruvian treaty modified. However any discussion on
this point is now unnecessary as Brazil has definitely accepted the Procès Verbal as
drafted.
Please call upon President Leguía immediately recalling to him the statement that he
of its protest would remove his only objection to the treaty; that arrangement as stated
in proposed Procès Verbal seems a happy solution of the question and that if such an
arrangement were reached he would be glad to advise the Peruvian Congress to that
effect and to repeat recommendation that the pending treaty be ratified on conditions
stated in Procès Verbal. You will make every proper endeavor to have instructions sent
to Señor Velarde to sign the Procès Verbal as drafted.
HUGHES

[Document 289]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9 a.m.]
He expressed regret for statements made by Minister for Foreign Affairs Salomón
reported in my 6, February 27 and stated that statements suggesting modification of
treaty, etc., of Minister for Foreign Affairs were made without consultation with him
and that he (the President) did not approve of them but on the contrary he had always
been in favor of the ratification assigned without modifications and was still of the
same opinion. He further stated the Minister for Foreign Affairs had no means of
knowing what the action of Congress would be. The President suggested some changes
in the language of the proposed procès-verbal which he said he regarded as mere
formalities for the purpose of protecting the sensibilities of the Peruvian Congress, that
the draft of his instructions to Ambassador Velarde authorizing him to sign the procès-
verbal and stating the proposed modifications therein would be ready Saturday
forenoon and would then be immediately cabled to the Ambassador. Congratulations
upon your splendid efforts in this matter and the great measure of success you have
attained.
POINDEXTER

[Document 290]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Received 1:30 p.m.]
instructions will be cabled Velarde before 1 p.m. today.
POINDEXTER

[Document 291]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5:45 p.m.]
of the President handed me a copy of his proposed instructions to Ambassador Velarde.
Upon examination I found the second paragraph of the proposed procès-verbal omitted,
namely: “the ratification by Colombia and Peru of the above-mentioned boundary
convention” and also omitted from the third paragraph the words “immediately after
the ratification of the above convention.” After much conversation and insistence I
finally secured an agreement from the Minister, after he had consulted with the
President, to reinsert in his instructions to the Peruvian Ambassador the aforesaid
second paragraph of the suggestions of the Secretary of State as I pointed out that that
was the essential feature of the entire negotiations.
Both the President and the Minister for Foreign Affairs were insistent upon changing
the paragraphs of the procès-verbal containing the remarks of Peruvian Ambassador so
as to read as follows:
“Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his Government in
view of the withdrawal by Brazil of its friendly observation upon which
consideration of the treaty was suspended to express his acceptance of the
friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State had just made, in the sense
that consideration of the treaty by the Peruvian Congress would be resumed
and it would take its regular constitutional course before that body.”
Both the Minister and the President stated that the greater part of the language
eliminated from Dr. Velarde’s remarks was a repetition and mere recital and that as it
refers to matters purely relating to Brazil and Colombia with which Peru had no
concern, they preferred to make no mention of it. Both were quite fixed in making the
change reported in my number 6, February 27 noon by which “take its constitutional
course” is substituted for “recommendation that it approve”.
POINDEXTER

[Document 292]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
8. Peruvian Ambassador has received instructions to sign Procès Verbal with following
modifications:
1. In the third suggestion of the Secretary of State omit the words
“immediately after the ratification of the above treaty.”
2. In statement of Colombian Minister the words “should be ratified by the
Government of Peru” to read “should be ratified by both Governments”.
3. In the statement of Doctor Velarde delete whole paragraph and substitute
following: “Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his
Government in view of the withdrawal by Brazil of its friendly observations
upon which consideration of the treaty was suspended to express its
acceptance of the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State had just
made in the sense (and to state that (?)) consideration of the treaty by the
Peruvian Congress would be resumed and it would take its regular
constitutional course before that body.”
Colombian Minister definitely refuses first modification as this was a sine qua non of
his Government. He gladly accepted second and cannot accept third without
communicating with his Government to whom he is sure it will not be acceptable.
Brazilian Chargé is unable to accept any modifications without referring matter to his
Government. He thinks it possible that second suggestion might be acceptable but
greatly doubts whether the others will be.
Please call upon President Leguía and point out to him that of the three countries
concerned Peru is asked to do the least. Colombia is asked to give up its pretensions to
land east of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line; Brazil to grant Colombia freedom of
navigation on Amazon and other rivers common to both countries. All Peru is asked to
do is to take part in this meeting to receive the withdrawal of Brazil’s observations
against the Colombian-Peruvian treaty on certain conditions, to hear Colombian
Minister say his Government is willing to meet those conditions and then for Peruvian
Ambassador to state that in view thereof his Government will advise its Congress of
this fact repeating the recommendation that Congress approve the boundary treaty with
Colombia already signed by Peru and submitted to its Congress. There appears to be

nothing in the Procès Verbal that injects any new element into the situation as far as
Peru is concerned. The insistence of the Peruvian Government on the modifications
will make it necessary to re-open negotiations with Bogotá and Rio thus making it
impossible to sign the Procès Verbal by March 3. You will please explain to him again
the desire if possible to bring about this amicable settlement before I leave office on
March 4, which means the Procès Verbal must be signed not later than Tuesday
afternoon, March 3. In case all Governments were in agreement it had tentatively been
arranged to sign on Monday afternoon at 4 o’clock. Should the President feel that he
can instruct Señor Velarde to sign the Procès Verbal it will be appreciated if instructions
to that effect could be sent on Sunday in order that it may be signed on Monday.
In a telegram to the Peruvian Ambassador sent yesterday, which was superseded by
instruction above mentioned, Señor Salomón informed Velarde it would be contrary to
the Peruvian constitution to recommend to Congress the approval of the treaty. Should
this contention again be advanced you will call attention to the statement made to you
by Minister for Foreign Affairs reported in your No. 6, February 27, noon, that should
Colombian–Peruvian treaty be modified as he suggested “the Peruvian Congress, he
felt sure, would ratify the treaty in 15 days and that the Peruvian Executive
Government would use all means in its power to bring that about.” If the Executive can
make the recommendation in one case there would appear to be no constitutional
reason why it cannot do it in the other.
You may also point out that the agreement of the Executive as provided in the Procès
Verbal to renew its recommendation of approval would appear to be an undertaking
well within the province of the Executive and in no manner interfering with the
prerogatives of the legislative branch whereas the third modification suggested by the
Peruvian Government that “consideration of the treaty by the Peruvian Congress would
be resumed” is a definite undertaking on the part of the Executive for the legislative
branch.
You will please state to President Leguía that the Department is making this last effort
to bring about a friendly agreement between the three countries concerned and that it
would very much regret to have to inform Brazil and Colombia that the Department’s
good offices had been unfruitful because of the apparent disinclination of Peru to
accept the friendly suggestion proposed.
HUGHES

[Document 293]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:45 p.m.]
was granted an interview with the President and had a long conversation with him in
which I urged all points suggested by you and presented fully advantages to Peru to
lend aid in composing the differences between the three countries.
In respect to the third modification of the procès-verbal contained in the instructions of
the Peruvian Government to Doctor Velarde the President agreed to substitute the
following:
“Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his Government to
express its acceptance of the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State
had just made and that as a consequence of the assurances just given his
Government would immediately advise the Peruvian Congress thereof—
repeating at the same time its recommendation that it approve the boundary
treaty with Colombia.”
The President was immovable in his insistence upon the first and second modifications
of the procès-verbal and I was unable to persuade him to make any other change in his
instructions the [to] Ambassador Velarde except that in the third modification of the
procès-verbal just stated.
In the course of his conversation the President stated several times that if the procès-
verbal should be signed by the representatives of the three countries in the modified
form proposed in his instructions to the Peruvian Ambassador it was his intention to
repeat his recommendation for the approval of the treaty and urge it upon the Peruvian
Congress.

The President urges that if the language “immediately after the ratification of the above
treaty” should be retained in the third suggestion of the Secretary of State as set forth in
the proposed process-verbal it would immediately make Peru the object of pressure
both by Brazil and Colombia and deeply involve her in the conflicting interests of those
two countries. …

The President with a great gesture of earnestness and sincerity stated that he was
willing to sign with Colombia and Brazil an agreement to submit all of the matters
involved in the proposed procès-verbal to the Washington Government (meaning, I
presume, the President) and stated that he was willing to sign for that purpose any
protocol drawn up by the Secretary of State and emphasized again his trust and
confidence in the Washington Government and his leadership in the policy of
submitting South America[n] international differences to the arbitration of that
Government.
I urged upon the President [omission?] maintaining that signing by the representatives
of Brazil and Colombia under explicit instructions from their Governments of the
agreement contained in the proposed procès-verbal would make it impossible for either
of them to embarrass Peru in the manner pointed out by him or to involve Peru in the
pressure of conflicting interests between those countries if Peru really desired the
ratification of the treaty which had been signed by the Executives of the Peruvian and
Colombian Governments. The President again asserted his desire that the treaty should
be ratified and stated emphatically it was his intention to repeat his recommendation to
that effect to the Peruvian Congress but reiterated his assertion that he could not
possibly agree to the procès-verbal without the modifications stated above and I believe
his position in this respect unalterable.
The possibility occurs to me of a supplementary and separate agreement between the
representatives of Colombia and Brazil in respect to the matters affecting the rights
only of those two countries, in view of the fact that President Leguía is agreeing to the
only action required of the Peruvian Government by the procès-verbal, namely, to
advise the Peruvian Congress of the withdrawal of the objections made by Brazil to
renew his recommendation that Congress approve the pending treaty with Colombia.
POINDEXTER

[Document 294]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
17. Peruvian Government will accept Procès Verbal only on following condition:
1. That in third proposal of Secretary of State the words “immediately after
the ratification of the above treaty” be deleted.
2. In the second sentence of the declaration of the Colombian Minister that
the words “should be ratified by the Government of Peru” be changed to read
“should be ratified by both Governments.”
3. That the following be substituted for the declaration of the Peruvian
Ambassador: “Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his
Government to express its acceptance of the friendly suggestion which the
Secretary of State had just made and that as a consequence of the assurances
just given his Government would immediately advise the Peruvian Congress
thereof, repeating at the same time its recommendation that it approve the
above mentioned boundary treaty with Colombia.”
Colombian Minister definitely accepts on behalf of his Government second and third
modifications and also the first modification on the understanding that in the note of
the Secretary of State transmitting to the representatives of Brazil, Colombia, and Peru
the Procès Verbal it be stated with reference to the third suggestion of the Secretary that
it is of course understood that the signing of the Brazilian–Colombian convention will
follow the ratification by Colombia and Peru of the above mentioned treaty. The note
would add that the Colombian Minister has repeated to the Department the assurance
given by him in the Procès Verbal that his Government is ready to sign the Brazilian–
Colombian treaty immediately after the ratification by Peru of the Peruvian-Colombian
treaty.
Gracie unable to accept without instructions from his Government for which he is
cabling. As he may be delayed in sending his cable on account of luncheon at Pan
American Union in honor of Secretary of State followed by a meeting of the Board of
Governors of the Pan American Union, please communicate above as soon as possible
to Minister for Foreign Affairs. Department hopes that he will authorize Gracie to sign
on above conditions. It may be pointed out that while Peruvian Ambassador’s statement
omits reference to Brazilian condition for withdrawal of its objections to Colombian-

Peruvian treaty, Brazil would appear to be fully covered by the direct assurance given
by the Colombian Minister that his Government agrees to conclude immediately after
the ratification of the Colombian–Peruvian treaty the treaty with Brazil recognizing the
Tabatinga–Apaporis line and Brazilian dominion over the territory to the east thereof.
Peru’s objection to making reference to this in its statement is that matter is one that
concerns Brazil and Colombia only.
For your information it may be said that there has been a very ample exchange of
telegrams between the Department and the Embassy in Lima during the last few days
and the above represents the most that it has been possible to obtain from Peru. Procès
Verbal should be signed tomorrow afternoon. Please endeavor to expedite Brazilian
Government’s reply.
HUGHES

[Document 295]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:50 p.m.]
my advice as to whether he should advise his Government to authorize signing of
procès-verbal as modified according to latest proposals of Peruvian Government, as
reported in my above cablegram. I answered him that in view of his question I was of
the opinion that it would be advantageous to his Government to instruct the signing of
the modified procès-verbal.
POINDEXTER

[Document 296]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
from his Government merely stating that President of Peru had explained to you why it
was impossible for him to change his opinion regarding the withdrawal of his first
objection. Nothing was said about the second objection nor regarding the substitution
for his third objection of the text transmitted in the third paragraph of your telegram.
[Paraphrase.] If instructions are sent as outlined in your No. 10, the Department will be
able to obtain the consent of Brazil and Colombia. Do not mention this at present to the
Peruvian Government but endeavor to have it send instructions authorizing the
substitute statement of the Peruvian Ambassador. [End paraphrase.]
HUGHES

[Document 297]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
RIO DE JANEIRO, March 3, 1925—noon.
[Received March 3—11 a.m.]
Foreign Affairs this morning. Foreign Office on reading telegram considers Grade’s
instructions already adequate.
MORGAN

[Document 298]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, March 3, 1925—noon.
[Received 12:48 p.m.]
12. Your last cable. Peruvian Government promises to forward immediately following
modifications procès-verbal as substitute for Dr. Velarde’s proposed statement:
“Dr. Velarde then stated that he was also authorized by his Government to
accept the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State had just made in
the sense that his Government would immediately advise the Peruvian
Congress thereof—repeating at the same time its recommendation that it
approve the boundary treaty with Colombia.[”]
Instructions in other respects to remain as previously given.
POINDEXTER

[Document 299]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:08 p.m.]
13. Supplementing my 12,13 yesterday I addressed a note to President Leguía asking
him if he had forwarded the instructions to his Ambassador agreed to in my
once received a request to call from the Minister for Foreign Affairs. Complying at
once I was astonished when he told me that the President, after consulting with him,
was unable to give the instructions referred to. He stated that when the President
agreed, he, the President, had overlooked the fact that the second suggestion of the
will remember that the first proposal of the President and Minister for Foreign Affairs
was to omit this in their instruction and that it was reinserted at my instance. I
expressed surprise at this statement of the Minister informing him that I had already
advised you that the President would cable Dr. Velarde the aforesaid instructions and
then adverted to many inconsistencies in the various positions taken by the Peruvian
Government.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs immediately after my conversation with him visited
the President and informed him thereof. As a result the Minister for Foreign Affairs
again requested me to call and I have just returned from the Foreign Office. He
expressed great embarrassment, going at length into the contention of Brazil, and
attempted to show that the situation [in] regard to the subject matter of the treaty had
changed since it was signed, all of which I will report at length by next pouch.
However, he concluded by promising to send at once to Ambassador Velarde the
instructions as described in my previous telegram 12, of which I have from him a
written copy.
POINDEXTER
13 Supra.

[Document 300]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
telegram. The words “in the sense that” are objected to on behalf of Colombia as
conducive to misunderstanding and cannot be accepted without specific instructions.
There is thus serious risk of breakdown of negotiations at critical moment without
compensating results to Peru. There will be an opportunity to sign through tomorrow
afternoon and it is earnestly hoped Peruvian Government will agree to delete the words
objected to. The statement in the third paragraph of your undated telegram No. 10,16
would be acceptable as would any of the following three alternatives: 1.
“Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his Government to
express its acceptance of the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State
had just made and that as a consequence his Government would immediately
advise the Peruvian Congress thereof, repeating at the same time its
recommendation that it approve the boundary treaty with Colombia.”
2. Same as No. 1 through words “had just made” and then the, following words “and
that his Government would immediately advise the Peruvian Congress thereof,
repeating at the same time its recommendation that it approve the boundary treaty with
Colombia.”
3. Same as No. 1 through words “had just made” then following “and that his
Government would repeat to the Peruvian Congress its recommendation that it approve
the boundary treaty with Colombia.”
Department unable to understand this multitude of changes. If the Peruvian
Government does not desire to enter into the Procès Verbal Department would prefer to
have it say so frankly. If it does desire to do so Department hopes it will send
instructions this evening if possible to the Peruvian Ambassador to accept one of the
formulae above proposed.
HUGHES
293].

[Document 301]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 7:01 a.m.]
Government as suggested in the last paragraph of your telegram might lead to rejection
of the entire procès-verbal or to fatal delay. I have had the greatest difficulty in arriving
at the present status, and I am satisfied that negotiations for still further changes would
be seized upon by Salomón as an opportunity to delay further as he is unfriendly to the
proposition. I have just had a lengthy consultation with the Colombian Minister who
agrees with me that to reopen negotiations with the Peruvian Government would be
hazardous; he is of the opinion that all parties should seize the opportunity to sign the
procès-verbal immediately in accordance with the instructions last sent Dr. Velarde, and
that the words “in the sense that” cannot be construed so as to have any material effect
upon the agreement. About 1 p.m. he telegraphed this opinion to the President of
Colombia.
It is obvious that Salomón has been and is sparring for time.
POINDEXTER

[Document 302]
The Secretary of State to the Permian Ambassador (Velarde)
WASHINGTON, March 4, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to enclose herewith for your Government original copies in
English, Spanish and Portuguese of the Procès Verbal signed in my office today by you,
the Colombian Minister, the Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires ad interim and me.
With reference to the third suggestion made by me that Brazil and Colombia sign a
convention by which the boundary between those countries would be agreed to on the
Apaporis-Tabatinga line, Brazil agreeing to establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia
freedom of navigation on the Amazon and other rivers common to both countries, I
have the honor to inform you that it is of course understood that the signing of this
convention will follow the ratification by Colombia and Peru of the boundary treaty of
March 24, 1922, between them.
In this connection I have the honor to inform you that the Colombian Minister has
renewed to me the statement made in today’s meeting that his Government will
conclude the above treaty with Brazil immediately after the ratification by Peru of the
Colombian- Peruvian boundary treaty.
A similar note is being sent by me to the Colombian Minister and to the Brazilian
Chargé d’Affaires.17
Accept [etc.]
CHARLES E. HUGHES
[Enclosure]
Procès-Verbal of a Meeting Between the Secretary of State, the Permian Ambassador (Velarde), the Colombian Minister (Olaya), and the Brazilian Chargé (Gracie), March 4, 1925
Doctor Hernán Velarde, Doctor Enrique Olaya, and Mr. Samuel de Souza Leão Gracie,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Peru, Envoy Extraordinary and
Minister Plenipotentiary of Colombia, and Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Brazil,
respectively, having on the invitation of the Secretary of State of the United States of
America, met with him in his office at the Department of State, Washington, at five
o’clock on March 4, 1925.

Mr. Hughes stated that he had invited Messrs. Velarde, Olaya and Gracie to his office to
consider the boundary treaty between Colombia and Peru signed in Lima March 24,
1922, in respect to which observations of a friendly nature had been made to the
Peruvian Government by the Brazilian Government. Mr. Hughes stated that the three
Governments concerned had requested his good offices in the settlement of this
question and, after carefully considering the matter, he desired to suggest as a solution
of the difficulty the following:
First. The withdrawal by the Government of Brazil of its observations
regarding the boundary treaty between Colombia and Peru;
Second. The ratification by Colombia and Peru of the above mentioned
boundary treaty;
Third. The signing of a convention between Brazil and Colombia by which
the boundary between those countries would be agreed to on the Apaporis-
Tabatinga line, Brazil agreeing to establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia
freedom of navigation on the Amazon and other rivers common to both
countries.
Mr. Gracie then stated that he was authorized by his Government to accept the friendly
suggestion which the Secretary of State had just made and that in consequence he was
instructed by his Government to inform the Peruvian Ambassador that Brazil
withdraws its observations regarding the Colombian-Peruvian treaty above mentioned
on the understanding that Peru will make as a condition in settling its boundary
question with Colombia, the recognition of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as described by
the Treaty of 1851 and in consequence Brazilian dominion over the territory to the east
of that line. Mr. Gracie added that should Colombia agree to recognize the above
mentioned Apaporis-Tabatinga line Brazil was ready to agree in the same convention to
establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of navigation on the River
Amazon and other rivers common to both countries.
Doctor Olaya then stated that he had instructions from his Government to accept the
friendly suggestion just made by the Secretary of State. Doctor Olaya added that he
was authorized to state that on the condition that the treaty of March 24, 1922, between
Colombia and Peru, should be ratified by both Governments the Government of
Colombia would agree to conclude immediately thereafter a treaty with Brazil
recognizing as the frontier between the two countries the village of Tabatinga, and from
that place to the north the direct line until it meets the River Yapurá at its junction with
the Apaporis, and in consequence Brazilian dominion over the territory to the east of
that line, it being understood that Brazil in the same treaty will agree to establish in
perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of navigation on the Amazon and other rivers
common to both countries.

Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his Government to express its
acceptance of the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State had just made in the
sense that his Government would immediately advise the Peruvian Congress thereof,
repeating at the same time its recommendation that it approve the boundary treaty with
Colombia.
The Ambassador of Peru, the Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé d’Affaires ad
interim of Brazil then stated that they desired to express the gratitude of their respective
Governments for the good offices of the Secretary of State exerted in such an amicable
manner in the interest of harmony between the three interested Republics in order to
adjust the questions considered in the meeting recorded by this Procès Verbal.
This Procès Verbal of the meeting, drawn up in quadruplicate in English, Spanish and
Portuguese, was signed by the Secretary of State of the United States of America, the
Ambassador of Peru, the Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of
Brazil. It is understood that in case of doubt the English text will be binding. One copy
in each language will be retained for the files of the Department of State by the
Secretary of State, who will send of the remaining three copies, one each, in each
language, to the Ambassador of Peru, the Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé
d’Affaires ad interim of Brazil, for their respective Governments.
CHARLES E. HUGHES
HERNÁN VELARDE
ENRIQUE OLAYA
SAMUEL DE SOUZA LEÃO GRACIE
17 Notes not printed.

[Document 303]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)18
11. Procès Verbal signed today. Much appreciate your able cooperation.
HUGHES
18 The same to the Ambassador in Brazil; first sentence, only, to the Minister in

[Document 304]
The Permian Ambassador (Velarde) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, March 10, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have received the note which Your Excellency’s honorable predecessor was
pleased to send me on the 4th of this month with authenticated copies in Spanish,
English and Portuguese of the procès-verbal, signed in the Department of State by the
above mentioned predecessor of Your Excellency, by the Minister of Colombia, the
Chargé d’Affaires of Brazil and the undersigned; and it behooves me to express thanks
for that paper as I now have the pleasure to do.
In the above mentioned note, Mr. Hughes says that with reference to his third
suggestion in the sense that Brazil and Colombia should sign a convention under which
the two countries would recognize the Apaporis-Tabatinga line and Brazil agree to
establish forever in favor of Colombia free navigation of the Amazon and other
common rivers, he regards it as understood that the signing of that convention would
follow the ratification by Colombia and Peru of the boundary treaty signed by the two
countries on March 24, 1922.
The Honorable Mr. Hughes adds that the Minister of Colombia renewed to him the
declaration he had made in the course of the conference held on the same day of the
signing of the procès-verbal in the sense that his Government would conclude with
Brazil the convention above mentioned immediately upon the ratification by Peru, of
the Peruvian-Colombian boundary treaty.
I greatly regret my inability to concur with the understanding of the Honorable Mr.
Hughes or with the change which appears in the declarations of the Minister of
Colombia, as both points were subjects for my remarks in the course of the negotiation,
and the precise acceptance of those and other remarks made by me having been made a
previous condition for the signing of the procès-verbal on the part of Peru.
In the draft of the procès-verbal which was presented to me by Mr. White, Chief of the
Latin-American Division in charge of the negotiations in behalf of the Department of
State, there was seen indeed at the beginning of the third suggestion of the Honorable
Mr. Hughes this sentence: “The signing immediately after ratification of the said
convention, etc.”, but that sentence was noticed by me and deleted by Mr. White and
this third suggestion was finally worded in the original language as follows: “The

signing between Brazil and Colombia of a convention etc.” This, therefore, was a point
that had been disposed of and the procès-verbal stood worded and signed thus.
Neither can I agree for identically the same reasons to the change in the terms of the
procès-verbal, referring to the declarations of the Minister of Colombia, which the
Honorable Mr. Hughes sends me restoring, without change, the form in which they
appeared in the original draft. In that draft it was said in that part to which I am
referring, that “if the Treaty between Colombia and Peru of March 24, 1922, were
ratified by the Government of Peru, the Government of Colombia etc.”
On account of my remarks and on account of their being accepted by Mr. White who
was surely authorized thereto by the Minister of Colombia, since it is so recorded in the
procès-verbal, as signed, the above copied sentence was changed as follows: “If the
Treaty between Colombia and Peru of March 24, 1922, were ratified by both
Governments, the Government of Colombia, etc.”
It is with genuine regret that I find myself constrained to offer the foregoing remarks.

I take note that a communication identical with that sent to me has been received by the
Minister of Colombia and the Chargé d’Affaires of Brazil.
I have [etc.]
HERNÁN VELARDE

[Document 305]
The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde)
WASHINGTON, March 24, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of March 10, 1925,
acknowledging the receipt of my predecessor’s note of March 4, transmitting to you
original copies in English, Spanish, and Portuguese of a Procès Verbal signed at the
Department of State on that day by Your Excellency, by the Minister of Colombia, by
the Chargé d’Affaires of Brazil, and by my predecessor.
You state that you regret that you cannot concur with the understanding expressed by
Mr. Secretary Hughes that the signing of the convention between Brazil and Colombia
would follow the ratification by Colombia and Peru of the boundary treaty signed by
the two countries on March 24, 1922, nor with what you consider a change in the
declaration of the Minister of Colombia that his Government will conclude the above
mentioned treaty with Brazil immediately after the ratification by Peru of the
Colombian-Peruvian boundary treaty.
The original proposal made by my predecessor in the discharge of the good offices
requested by the three Governments concerned in the settlement of this question
contemplated three steps:
1. The withdrawal by the Government of Brazil of its observations regarding
the boundary treaty between Colombia and Peru;
2. The ratification by Colombia and Peru of the above mentioned boundary
treaty;
3. The signing immediately after the ratification of that treaty, of a
convention between Brazil and Colombia by which the boundary between
those countries would be agreed to on the Apaporis-Tabatinga line, Brazil
agreeing to establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of
navigation on the Amazon and other rivers common to both countries.
On the basis that the third step in the proposal of the Secretary of State was a matter
exclusively between Colombia and Brazil your Government requested several
modifications in the Procès Verbal as originally drafted, bearing on that question.
Changes were requested in the statement to be made by Your Excellency in the meeting
and your Government also requested that the words “immediately after the ratification

of the above treaty”, which referred to the boundary treaty between Colombia and Peru,
should be omitted from the third part of the proposal by the Secretary of State thus
leaving that part to deal with matters exclusively between Brazil and Colombia. This
was agreed to and the Procès Verbal was signed in that sense. However, in order that
there might be no misapprehension on the part of those concerned that the various steps
in the proposal of the Secretary of State were to be carried out in the sequence
mentioned, my predecessor made this clear by stating in his covering note that the third
proposed action would be taken after the carrying out of the second step. It was
likewise the understanding that Mr. Secretary Hughes’ second suggestion would not be
carried out until the first suggestion had been complied with but it was not necessary to
mention this in the covering letter as his first suggestion was complied with in the
Procès Verbal itself wherein the Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires informed Your Excellency
of the withdrawal by Brazil of its observations regarding the Colombian-Peruvian
treaty.
There is thus no change whatsoever in the Procès Verbal as signed. The Procès Verbal
is itself clear and the covering note merely sets forth what is obvious in the Procès
Verbal that the settlement proposed by the Secretary of State is to be accomplished in
three steps in the order mentioned.
With reference to Your Excellency’s remarks regarding Mr. Secretary Hughes’
reference to the renewal by the Colombian Minister of his statement made in the
meeting on March 4, that his Government will conclude the treaty with Brazil provided
for in the third portion of the Secretary of State’s proposal, immediately after the
ratification by Peru of the Colombian-Peruvian boundary treaty, I have the honor to
reply as follows: In the Procès Verbal as originally drawn up it was provided as Your
Excellency remembers that the Colombian Minister would say that he was authorized
by his Government to state that should the treaty of March 24, 1922, between
Colombia and Peru be ratified by the Government of Peru the Government of
Colombia would conclude immediately thereafter the treaty with Brazil provided for in
the third step of the proposal of the Secretary of State. Although this step of the
proposal provided for action only by Colombia and Brazil, those Governments agreed,
at the request of your Government, to change the words “by the Government of Peru”
for the words “by both Governments”.
It is manifest that this change, while it could benefit none of the three Governments
concerned, might conceivably cause a delay to the prejudice of Brazil by requiring one
extra step, namely the ratification by Colombia of the treaty of March 24, 1922,
between Colombia and Peru, before the third step in the Secretary of State’s proposal,
which relates only to action by Brazil and Colombia, would be carried out. The
Colombian Minister therefore spontaneously addressed a note to the Secretary of State
on March 4, before the signing of the Procès Verbal, which made it clear for the benefit
of the Brazilian Government, the one principally concerned in this matter, that the

Colombian Government would conclude with Brazil the convention stipulated in the
third step of the Secretary of State’s proposal immediately upon the ratification by Peru
of the boundary treaty between Peru and Colombia signed March 24, 1922. In other
words this was an assurance from Colombia to Brazil that although under the changed
wording of the Procès Verbal, which was made to meet the desire of your Government,
Colombia need not conclude the convention with Brazil until the boundary treaty
between Colombia and Peru had been ratified by both those Governments, it would
nevertheless do so upon the ratification of that treaty by Peru thus obviating the delay
which might occur should the Colombian Congress not then be in session. This was a
friendly act on the part of the Colombian Government which, I feel sure you will
concur with me, not only does not change the Procès Verbal in any way, especially in
so far as Peruvian interests are concerned, but is in the nature of an additional act of
comity and friendship beyond the strict requirements of the Procès Verbal.
Your Excellency will thus see that there are no changes in the Procès Verbal which I am
glad to feel forms an equitable basis for the settlement of the questions pending
between the three countries concerned in the matter of boundaries. As said before the
suggestions of my predecessor consist in three steps. The first one has now been
complied with and I feel confident that Your Excellency’s Government and the
Government of Colombia will very shortly comply with the second and that the
Brazilian and Colombian Governments will in due course comply with the third thus
definitely disposing of the matter.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 306]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
WASHINGTON, July 3, 1925—noon.
47. The Brazilian Ambassador called on the Secretary some time ago to discuss the
carrying out of the Procès Verbal signed March 4. He called again on July 2. The
Secretary told him that the Colombian Minister had recently informed him that the
Colombian Congress would be in session on July 20, and that he is reasonably sure that
it will then approve the Boundary Treaty of 1922 with Peru. The Secretary told the
Ambassador that the situation does not seem favorable for any representations in Lima
by the American Embassy; that the Secretary is of course most interested in the final
carrying out of the Procès Verbal and that should the Brazilian Government desire to
discuss with the Peruvian Government the early ratification of the Colombian-Peruvian
Boundary Treaty he would have no objections thereto. It was pointed out to the
Ambassador that the ratification of the Treaty by Peru had been held up on account of
the Brazilian démarche and Brazil would therefore appear to be in the favorable
position, should it so desire, to reopen the matter with the Peruvian Government now
that the objections of Brazil had been fully met.
The Secretary informed the Ambassador that he would advise you of his conversation
with him in order that you might discuss the matter with the Minister for Foreign
Affairs. The Ambassador is also cabling.
GREW

[Document 307]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
62. Department advised by Colombian Minister that Colombian Government has
ratified Colombian-Peruvian Boundary Treaty of 1922, thus complying with its
In the course of conversation today on other matters I informed the Peruvian
Ambassador of the above intimating that information that the Peruvian Congress had
done likewise would be received with pleasure. You may in your discretion say to
President Leguía that the definite termination of this matter would cause gratification to
this Government.
KELLOGG

[Document 308]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With the
Colombian Minister (Olaya), October 31, 1925
October 31, 1925
The Colombian Minister called and notified me of the ratification of the Colombian-
Peruvian Boundary Treaty and to thank the United States for its generous and helpful
attitude in relation to this matter and all South American matters. He left a formal note,
in Spanish,20 which should be translated and answered.

I told him that I had suggested to the Peruvian Ambassador yesterday that he urge his
Government to have the Treaty ratified. I told him confidentially that the Special
Representative of the Ecuadorian Government (Elizalde), now in Washington, called on
me the other day and wanted a copy of the Peruvian-Colombian Boundary Treaty and I
told him that I could not give it to him because it would not be published until it was
ratified; that I thought there was nothing secret about it. He seemed to understand the
terms and protested that it was contrary to Ecuadorian interests because it gave Peru the
territory to the north of Ecuador and would make it more difficult for Ecuador to agree
with Peru as to the boundary between Ecuador and Peru. I told him that it seemed to
me that the question of whether Peru conceded territory to Colombia or Colombia to
Peru was a question purely between those countries; that I could not see how it could
legally affect Ecuadorian interests; that the territory belonged to those countries and
they had a right to settle their disputes. He said that Ecuador had conceded certain
territory to Colombia but did not expect Colombia to give it to Peru. I told him I could
not see that this would make any difference. If the territory belonged to either one of
those countries, they were at liberty to agree on their boundaries as they saw fit. In any
event, I told him the United States could not interpose or offer its good offices to settle
any dispute unless all the countries involved should request it and that it was not a
matter in which we had a right to interfere. I told him he could convey this information
in a confidential manner to his Government.
20 Not printed.

[Document 309]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, November 30, 1925.
[Received December 16.]
No. 477
SIR:
… I called at the Palace on November 23d, according to appointment, and expressed to
President Leguía the gratification of the United States Government at the favorable
action which had been taken by the Congress of Colombia in the ratification of the
Boundary Treaty and suggested to the President that it would likewise be a source of
gratification to my Government if like favorable action should be taken by the Peruvian
Congress, especially in view of the active share which the former Secretary of State
had, at the request of the three interested governments, in the formulation and
agreement to the Procès Verbal which had been celebrated by Brazil, Colombia, and
Perú on the 4th of March, 1925, and on account of the deep interest which the United
States, as a friendly American power, feels in the solution of questions which give rise
to controversies and disagreements between its neighboring American Republics.
President Leguía informed me that he had just had a conversation with Señor
Mariategui, the President of the Chamber of Deputies, and Señor Piedra, the President
of the Senate, on this subject, and that he was advised by them that it would be
difficult, if not impossible, to secure the favorable action of the Peruvian Congress on
the treaty until the Tacna-Arica Plebiscite had been disposed of. However, the President
stated to me that in view of the representation which I had just made and of the friendly
and neutral interest of the American Government in the matter, he would see the
presiding officer of each House of Congress again, and that he would bring whatever
pressure to bear he was able to, looking towards favorable action by Congress upon the
treaty. He stated, however, that he was far from convinced that it was feasible to secure
such favorable action at this time. I expressed to the President my appreciation of his
offer to bring the matter forward and took the liberty of suggesting to him that in my
personal opinion the ratification of the treaty by Perú, thus settling in one act long-
standing subjects of controversy with two of her neighboring nations,—namely; Brazil
and Colombia,—would create a very widespread favorable impression throughout
America as an indication of the substantial progress which Perú would be making in

the adjustment of the questions of dispute which she had pending with the neighboring
republics. President Leguía thanked me for my frank expression and assured me that he
was heartily in favor of the ratification of the treaty and would proceed to secure it at
the earliest practicable moment.
Thereafter Señor Focion Mariategui, who is also the leader of the Government party as
well as the Presiding Officer of the Chamber of Deputies, called at the Embassy by
appointment on November 25th, and advised me that the President had consulted with
him subsequent to my interview with the President on the subject referred to. Señor
Mariategui, however, expressed the opinion that while the sentiment of Congress was
growing more favorable to the Colombian Boundary Treaty, yet if it were presented for
action at this time, a bitter debate would be precipitated and that he had grave doubts of
the success of such a motion. He stated that he believed that in view of the increasing
strength of the Leguía Government and of the favorable developments in the Tacna-
Arica plebiscite which had been sponsored by President Leguía, sentiment would
continue to grow still more favorable with reference to the treaty and that later on when
the Plebiscite had made further progress or had been disposed of, favorable action
could be obtained.
I have [etc.]
MILES POINDEXTER

Costa Rica and Panama
[310] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
[311] The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
[312] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
[313] The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
[314] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)
[315] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)

[316] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)
[317] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
[318] The Chargé in Panama (Munro) to the Secretary of State
[319] The Minister in Costa Rica (Davis) to the Secretary of State
[320] The Chargé in Panama (Munro) to the Secretary of State
[321] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)
[322] The Minister in Costa Rica (Davis) to the Secretary of State

[Document 310]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
10. You will please say to the Panaman Government that this Government has been
approached by the Costa Rican Government with a view to the delimitation of the
boundary between Panama and Costa Rica. This matter has been dragging on for a
number of years now without any advance having been made in its final determination.
The Costa Rican Government is naturally anxious to have this matter settled in order to
avoid disagreeable and regrettable frontier incidents. Now that there are new
administrations in both Panama and Costa Rica since the regrettable occurrence of
1921,21 it should be possible for this matter to be disposed of without further friction.
This Government would therefore be happy to have Panama appoint its engineer to
delimit, in conjunction with those appointed by the arbitrator and by the Government of
Costa Rica, the boundary as set forth in the arbitral award.
The matter has been discussed informally with Señor Alfaro22 who harps back to the
old Panaman contention that the Chief Justice exceeded his authority and that his award
is null and void. This Government cannot reopen that matter it having been carefully
considered and the Department’s views thereon were very clearly stated in its notes to
the Panaman Government in 1921. In this connection see especially the Department’s
of your representations.
HUGHES
22 Ricardo J. Alfaro, Panaman Minister in the United States.

[Document 311]
The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
PANAMA, February 2, 1925.
[Received February 13.]
No. 628
herewith a copy of a note dated January 29, 1925 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
in which is set forth the attitude of the Panaman Government with regard to the
settlement of the Costa Rica boundary question. A translation of the above note is also
inclosed.
This morning I received a note dated January 30, 1925, a copy and translation of which
are enclosed, informing me that the Government of Panama considers it essential that
some agreement along the lines specified in the communication of January 29th be
reached, before Panama can name its engineer to proceed with the demarcation of the
boundary line.
I have [etc.]
J. G. SOUTH
[Enclosure 1—Translation25 ]
The Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs (Alfaro) to the American Minister (South)
PANAMA, January 29, 1925.
MR. MINISTER: I have received Your Excellency’s kind note No. 310 of the 20th [sic] instant
in which you inform me, pursuant to instructions from your Government, that the
Government of Costa Rica has approached the Department of State with a view to the

demarcation of the boundary between Panama and Costa Rica. Your Excellency states
that this matter has been pending for many years without any advance having been
made in its final determination, and that the Government of Costa Rica is naturally
anxious to settle it in order to avoid disagreeable and regrettable frontier incidents.
Your Excellency suggests that now that there are new administrations in both Panama
and Costa Rica, since the painful incidents of 1921, it should be possible to dispose of
this matter without further friction.
Finally Your Excellency states that your Government would be happy to have Panama
appoint its engineer to delimit, in conjunction with those named by the arbitrator and
by the Government of Costa Rica, the frontier as set forth in the arbitral award.

In reply I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that Panama also earnestly desires
to end forever the boundary question with Costa Rica; but as the Republic of Panama in
1921 was the victim of an unjustifiable aggression which at that time obliged it to make
heavy expenditures, my Government feels that the settlement of the pecuniary claim
should be considered a question precedent to the demarcation of the frontier.
Once this question has been settled the Government of Panama would be disposed to
proceed with the delimitation, in accordance with the line fixed in the arbitral award,26
from the mouth of the Sixaola River to the point near the ninth degree of north latitude
beyond Cerro Pando, and would accept the rest of the delimitation as far as the Pacific
coast, it being always understood that in making this delimitation of the territory a just
line will be established which protects the interests of the Panamans who live or hold
properties in the region in controversy, permitting, as far as may be practicable, the
lands of the said inhabitants or owners to remain within the frontiers of Panama. This
could be done by the mere signing of a protocol in which would be incorporated the
instructions which could be carried out by the Boundary Commissioners. The proposed
solution does not involve any new feature inasmuch as the President of France, in
explaining his decision at the request of Costa Rica, declared that the lines of the award
were general, and that they remained subject to the changes which the Boundary
Commissioners might consider necessary to make when setting the landmarks, taking
into consideration the best interests of the two countries.
To carry out the proposed solutions along the lines above described, Panama is
disposed to enter into direct negotiations with Costa Rica as soon as possible. My
Government wishes to have it understood, however, that in making these proposals it is
animated by a spirit of pure conciliation, and that this attitude does not imply in any
manner that Panama accepts the validity of the arbitral award, to which, it is
understood, the note of Your Excellency refers.

I avail myself [etc.]
H. J. ALFARO
[Enclosure 2—Translation]
The Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs (Alfaro) to the American Minister (South)
PANAMA, January 30, 1925.
MR. MINISTER: With reference to our interview of this morning permit me to inform Your
Excellency that the Government of Panama considers that in order to proceed with the
nomination of the Panaman engineer who should participate in the demarcation of the
boundary line with Costa Rica, it is essential that a previous agreement be reached
along the lines indicated in the note which I had the honor to address to Your
Excellency dated the 29th instant, numbered S. P. 249.
I avail myself [etc.]
H. J. ALFARO
24 Latter not printed.
25 File translation revised.

[Document 312]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
Minister for Foreign Affairs reading a copy thereof to President Chiari:
“Under instructions from my Government I have the honor to advise you that
in view of the obligation assumed by the United States Government in Article
I of the Treaty of 1903,28 the question of Panama’s boundaries is of great
concern to it. Panama’s difficulties with its neighbors have in very large
measure arisen through disputed boundaries and have caused Panama on
several occasions in the past to call upon the United States Government for
assistance under the terms of the treaty stipulation referred to.
The guarantee by my Government of the independence of Panama has made
it necessary for it to examine carefully into the question of Panama’s
boundaries in order to satisfy itself regarding the extent of the territory
covered by that guarantee. The Government of the United States was highly
gratified at the satisfactory solution of the boundary question between
Panama and Colombia.29 It was also gratified that the boundary with Costa
Rica was established by Article I of the Porras-Anderson Treaty of 191030
and by the White Award.31 It is a source of profound regret to it, however,
that that Award has not yet been executed by Panama. While this
noncompliance with the Award persists the possibility of misunderstanding
and even of a re-occurrence of the regrettable incidents of 1921 between
Panama and Costa Rica is ever likely. In view of the treaty provisions above
cited such incidents would inevitably involve the United States Government.
Therefore, in the interest of peace, friendly relations between Panama and its
neighbors, and orderly procedure the United States Government would learn
with pleasure of the definite settlement of Panama’s only remaining boundary
controversy.
The Costa Rican Government has informed my Government of its earnest
desire to have removed any possibility of the friction that is apt to occur
through the lack of precise knowledge, until it is definitely surveyed and
marked off, of the actual boundary between the two countries. To this end it
has asked the United States Government to cooperate with it in having the

line demarcated. This matter has been pending so long to the detriment of the
development of the regions on both sides of the line, that the United States
Government feels that the desire of the Costa Rican Government to have this
matter now definitely determined is a reasonable one; and, being confident
that the White Award and the Treaty of 1910 definitely establish the boundary
my Government instructed me to invite Your Excellency’s Government to
appoint its engineer to demarcate the line. Your Excellency’s Government
declined to appoint its engineer and stated that it considered an arrangement
with Costa Rica along the lines specified in your note of January 29, last,
essential before Panama can appoint its engineer. You did inform me,
however, that your Government is ready to enter immediately into direct
negotiations with the Government of Costa Rica.
In view of the position taken by Your Excellency’s Government I am
instructed to make clear to you the position of the American Government in
the premises:
The Government of the United States feels that the boundary line should now
be definitely established and that the Treaty of 1910 and the White Award are
valid and binding on both Panama and Costa Rica. While my Government
cannot depart from this position it is willing, as a further manifestation of its
friendship and good-will toward Panama, to await for a reasonable time the
outcome of such direct negotiations as Panama may undertake with the
Government of Costa Rica. Any agreement satisfactory to both Panama and
Costa Rica will of course be acceptable to my Government but in the absence
of any such agreement my Government will have no other alternative than to
afford facilities for the engineers appointed by the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court of the United States and by the Government of Costa Rica in
demarcating the boundary line, should Panama refuse to cooperate therein. In
the absence of a prior arrangement between Panama and Costa Rica my
Government will proceed to this in January, 1926.
With reference to the position adumbrated in Your Excellency’s note of the
29th ultimo, I am instructed to say that my Government can find no merit in
the Panaman claim for indemnity against Costa Rica for the action taken by
the latter in 1921. Without expressing any opinion regarding this action it
should nevertheless be pointed out that Panama had then been in occupation
for eleven years of territory which it clearly recognized in the Porras-
Anderson Treaty of 1910 as belonging to Costa Rica and Costa Rica’s action
was doubtless inspired by the desire to enter into possession of what had been
recognized as belonging to it but was being withheld.

In order to further the negotiations my Government will be glad to express to
the Costa Rican Government the hope that in order to bring about a
settlement of this question and to pave the way for the reestablishment of
friendly relations between the two countries it agree that upon marking this
boundary the line should be so drawn as to give fair protection to the interests
of the Panamans living or holding property within the district under
discussion so far as this can be done consistently with the Award.
Furthermore no mention will be made at this time to the Costa Rican
Government of the readiness of the American Government to proceed in
January, 1926, with the demarcation of the boundary line should no
agreement have been reached in the meantime.”
HUGHES
27 Not printed; it transmitted the substance of the note of January 30 from the Panaman
Minister of Foreign Affairs, supra.

[Document 313]
The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 4:18 p.m.]
Foreign Minister which states that Panama is only willing to enter into direct
negotiations with Costa Rica to put into effect the solution which he proposed in his
If a settlement of the question of indemnity fails through direct negotiations, Panama
will only agree to submit this question to the International Court. Repeated to the
American Legation in Costa Rica.32
SOUTH
Julio Fabrega had been appointed confidential agent for Panama and that he expected
to depart for San José July 10 for the purpose of solving the boundary controversy (file

[Document 314]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)
President in such manner as may seem most advisable to further the success of the
negotiations impressing upon him that it is the fervent hope of this Government that an
agreement may be reached through direct negotiations between Costa Rica and Panama
which will settle the boundary controversy once for all and permit the demarcation of
the frontier in the near future in a manner acceptable to both parties.
KELLOGG
33 Informing the Department that Señor Julio Fabrega, confidential agent of Panama,

[Document 315]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)34
21. The Panaman Minister Saturday and today discussed informally the boundary
situation. It appears that Panama would accept as a compromise over the so-called
Bravo line proposed by Panama in 1924 a line from the vicinity of Cañas Gordas to
Meridian 83 and thence along the Meridian to the sea. This would be in lieu of any
indemnity and would also comprise the return of Costa Rica’s trophies of war.
It is understood that Fabrega will make this proposal to Costa Rica. What in your
opinion would be the attitude of Costa Rica toward such a settlement? The Department
realizes that Costa Rica is in a strong position in insisting upon the line of the Loubet
Award or a modification that would make mutual concessions. The Department
understands however that it is the view of the Panaman Government that the Loubet
line being mentioned in the Panaman Constitution35 as its boundary it could not
constitutionally give up any territory on the Panaman side thereof. The Department
would be glad to see an amicable settlement arrived at which would be satisfactory to
both parties. The Department desires you to be very careful however not to give the
impression that the Department supports the present Panaman proposal or that it
considers the Panaman claim for indemnity a valid one.
The Department informed the Panaman Government last February that it could not
support the Panaman claim for indemnity. On the other hand the Department does not
desire to do anything which would interfere with the Panaman negotiations for a
settlement of this matter and you should therefore be careful not to express any opinion
on this point. Please keep the Department fully informed of developments and should
the Panaman proposal not be acceptable to Costa Rica please advise what solution
would in your opinion be acceptable to the Costa Rican Government.
In view of the position which the Department has taken regarding the validity of the
White Award and the Loubet line it cannot formally suggest any other line but it would
nevertheless be gratified should Costa Rica, in view of the fact that the Loubet line
gives Costa Rica so much more than it was willing to accept under the Guardia-
Pacheco Treaty,36 grant Panama some consideration on the Pacific as an act of comity
in the interest of peace and orderly procedure in Central America. The Department
desires your personal views in the premises before authorizing you to discuss the
matter discreetly with Costa Rican officials.

KELLOGG
34 Repeated to Panama as the Department’s telegram No. 70 of the same date.
would have carried out, with modifications, the Loubet award. It was replaced by the
Anderson-Porras treaty of Mar. 17, 1910, which submitted the boundary question to the
arbitration of the Chief Justice of the United States; his decision, the White award, was

[Document 316]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)37
[Paraphrase]
The Department is now advised that the minimum amount acceptable to Panama is as
follows: Costa Rica’s war trophies to be returned; no indemnity to Panama; immediate
survey of the boundary along the lines of the White award and the Loubet line to the
vicinity of Cañas Gordas; thence the line would proceed to the 83d meridian and follow
the 83d meridian to the point where it crosses the Loubet line in the vicinity of Cerro de
Burica and thence follow the line of the Loubet award to the sea at Punta Burica. If, in
your opinion, the line set forth in the Department’s telegram No. 21 dated November
10, 3 p.m., would not be acceptable to Costa Rica, would this new line, in your opinion,
be acceptable?
It is the understanding of the Department that Fabrega stated he intended to return to
Panama on November 13 because of Costa Rica’s uncompromising attitude. The
Panaman Minister has suggested to his Government that he be instructed to remain
pending a decision by the Department as to what support, if any, it can give to the last
proposal of Panama. Cable Department as to your views. Until further instructed do not
discuss question with Costa Rican officials.
KELLOGG
37 Repeated, except for the first paragraph, to Panama as the Department’s telegram

[Document 317]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)38
[Paraphrase]
The Panaman Minister has advised the Department that Fabrega has recently conversed
with Casorla41 and he feels very hopeful that Costa Rica might be willing to settle the
boundary dispute by establishing the line as set forth in Department’s telegram number
to make a formal proposal to President Jimenez to that effect.
From conversations with the Costa Rican Minister—who is uninformed regarding
Fabrega’s conversations with Casorla and other Costa Ricans on this point—it appears
that this proposal would not be acceptable to Costa Rica, and if it should be accepted,
Congress would probably not ratify it because it would not ratify any instrument giving
up territory unless Costa Rica received other territory of approximately the same area
in return. It would be most unfortunate if Costa Rica and Panama were to conclude
another agreement which would not be ratified; this would leave the matter in a worse
state than at present. Oreamuno42 has received instructions from Costa Rica that it
would be willing to conclude a convention providing for the demarcation of the
boundary in accordance with the awards and would suggest as Arbitrator the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States. According to Oreamuno this means a
submission to arbitration of the claims of each side against the other. As stated by
Alfaro, Panama would be willing to settle the boundary on the lines stipulated in the
awards, and to arbitrate the amount of the indemnity due Panama from Costa Rica. In
short, Costa Rica would have to agree in principle to an indemnity. Oreamuno says that
this is out of the question, but that should he be informed that Panama would accept, he
would be willing to employ all his influence—and he thinks he would succeed—to
induce Costa Rica to accept a solution on the basis of the convention providing for the
demarcation of the boundary according to the awards, the matter of indemnity to be
submitted to arbitration, Costa Rica agreeing, so as to secure a settlement of the
boundary. Should the Arbitrator find Panama to be at fault, Costa Rica would agree to
waive, in advance, all claims for indemnity. Should Costa Rica be at fault, the
Arbitrator would set the amount of the indemnity.

On its face this offer seems reasonable, conciliatory, and eminently fair. Discuss the
matter orally and informally with the President and the Foreign Minister and determine
if some such arrangement cannot be agreed upon as affording once for all a satisfactory
settlement of this long-drawn-out dispute. Telegraph results.
KELLOGG
38 Repeated to Costa Rica as the Department’s telegram No. 27 of the same date (file
41 Buenaventura Casorla, confidential agent of Costa Rica in Panama.
42 J. Rafael Oreamuno, Costa Rican Minister in the United States.

[Document 318]
The Chargé in Panama (Munro) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 7 p.m.]
with Foreign Minister Department’s suggestion; but my promised interview with the
President was put off from time to time for trivial reasons until it became evident that
he was unwilling to discuss the matter at the present time. I then took up the question
again with the Foreign Minister. He finally said that Panama was unwilling to accept
the Department’s suggestion at present because they still hope Costa Rica will accept
Fabrega’s proposition for straightening the boundary line. He let me see Fabrega’s
latest letter which was moderately optimistic although at the time of writing Fabrega
had not presented his proposition.
Although I believe that Panama would finally accept any solution which involved a
concession by Costa Rica sufficient to enable the Government of Panama to defend
publicly its complete change of politics regarding the White award, nevertheless, it
especially wants a territorial concession which would protect Panamans owning
property on the Costa Rican side of the boundary line. I doubt if the Government of
Panama would seriously consider any other solution until it is convinced that a
territorial concession is impossible. I think it would be more profitable to take up the
Department’s suggestion when Costa Rica has definitely rejected Fabrega’s
proposition. Despatch will follow.43
MUNRO
43 Not printed.

[Document 319]
The Minister in Costa Rica (Davis) to the Secretary of State
respectively.
[Paraphrase]
Panaman proposal outlined in Department’s telegram number 22 was rejected by the
leaders of Congress in confidential conference reported in my telegram number 50.
President Jiménez has formally notified the Panaman representative that the proposal is
unacceptable to Costa Rica. He has, however, submitted to the Panaman representative
the following counterproposal.
1. Demarcation of boundary to be made according to the Loubet and White
awards.
2. Costa Rica to accept land titles given by Panama to private persons on
territory coming under the sovereignty of Costa Rica.
3. To be submitted to arbitration: The question as to whether Costa Rica owes
Panama any indemnity for expenses incurred by the Panaman Government in
1921 during the conflict of Coto and whether Panama is indebted to Costa
Rica on account of expenses incurred during that period for the reason
expressed.
4. Panama to return to Costa Rica the arms, vessels, and flags seized by the
forces of Panama upon signing the agreement.
5. Should the Arbitrator decide that Panama, not Costa Rica, owes the
indemnity Costa Rica will renounce its demand for payment, except that
stipulated in the above proposal.
Article 2 of counterproposal seemingly grants a concession to Panama because article 3
of the Anderson-Porras convention of 1910 simply provides for the recognition of titles
granted prior to that date.

Casorla says it is his impression that the President will waive the demand for the return
of the vessels mentioned in article 4 of the counterproposal, if necessary, but that the
President thinks the return of the trophies is necessary in order to create a public
sentiment in favor of his proposal.
The exception which is mentioned in the last clause of article 5 of the counterproposal
refers to the items in article 4.
My information is that the Panaman representative has indicated that he is not willing
to accept the President’s proposal even if Panaman Government should send him
instructions to do so.

The above information should be considered confidential until the Costa Rican
Minister at Washington informs the Department.
Repeated to the American Legation in Panama.
DAVIS
44 Neither printed.
is part of Doc. 317].

[Document 320]
The Chargé in Panama (Munro) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 6 p.m.]
123. Yesterday Foreign Minister informed me that Fabrega had flatly rejected the Costa
Rican proposal as was reported in telegram dated December 18 from the American
Legation in Costa Rica, but that at the request of President Jiménez had made a
counterproposal for a rectification of the boundary which would leave a small section
southeast of Cañas Gordas to Panama. Fabrega stated that President Jiménez appeared
willing to consider this proposal and took it under advisement. Fabrega asked to be
permitted to return to Panama if the proposal were accepted or if the Government of
Costa Rica would consent to postpone further negotiations until May when there would
be a new Congress in Costa Rica more favorable to the Government. This was granted
and today Fabrega returns to Costa Rica. From this fact the Foreign Minister infers that
Costa Rica either has accepted Panama’s last proposal or has consented to a delay.
The inclusion in the Costa Rican proposition of a stipulation for the return of the arms
and flags appears especially objectionable to Panama since the Panaman Government
would prefer to return them as a spontaneous gesture upon the resumption of relations.
Panama also objects to the return of the vessels upon which much money has been
spent, it is said, for repairs.
I believe that if these two stipulations were to be eliminated the Costa Rican proposal
might ultimately be accepted, but not as long as Costa Rica appears willing to receive
counterproposals which involve territorial concessions or to agree to a delay in the
negotiations.
MUNRO

[Document 321]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)
[Paraphrase]
information.
[Here follows text of telegram printed in paraphrase, supra.]
Endeavor to find out whether Costa Rica has accepted counterproposal of Fabrega for
rectification of the boundary or has agreed to put off further negotiations until May. If
Costa Rica has agreed to a postponement until May it is important that you secure, if
possible, a statement to that effect, in the form of a note or memorandum from the
Foreign Minister.
GREW

[Document 322]
The Minister in Costa Rica (Davis) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 1:53 p.m.]
Costa Rica has rejected Fabrega’s counterproposal for rectification of the boundary and
his proposal to postpone the negotiations until May.
I shall forward on January 9 a memorandum on the final conference between President
Jiménez and Fabrega.46
DAVIS
46 Not printed.

Extension of the sovereignty of the United
States
over
Swain’s
Island
by
joint
resolution of Congress, approved March 4,
1925
[323] The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
Washington, May 22, 1924.

[Document 323]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
THE PRESIDENT: I have the honor to invite attention to the anomalous status of Swain’s Island
(otherwise known as Quiros, Gente Hermosa, Olosega, or Jennings Island), an isolated
approximately 200 miles east southeast from Apia, Samoa, and to suggest that, if you
approve, the case be brought to the attention of Congress with the recommendation that
the sovereignty of the United States be extended over the island and that it be placed
under the jurisdiction of the government established in American Samoa.
The following statement will indicate this Government’s relation to the island for more
than half a century: It appears that in 1856, Captain Turnbull, a British subject, the
alleged discoverer of Swain’s Island, gave the island to Eli Jennings, who is reported to
have always held himself out as an American citizen. Jennings married a native woman
of Upolou, Samoa, and resided on the island until his death in 1878, at which time,
under his will, the island became the property of his wife, Maria Jennings. The
marriage certificate and will of Eli Jennings were recorded in the American Consulate
at Apia. By the will of the widow, Maria Jennings, the island became, at her death in
1891, the property of her son, Eli Hutchinson Jennings.
In September, 1909, the Resident Commissioner in the Gilbert Islands visited Swain’s
Island and collected approximately eighty-five dollars in taxes from Eli Hutchinson
Jennings for the British Government. In response to an inquiry from the American
Consul at Apia, this Department on November 9, 1910, instructed the Consul that Mr.
Jennings should file a diplomatic claim against the British Government for recovery of
the amount paid as taxes, but added “From the facts before the Department, it is not
clear whether Swain’s Island was ever in fact discovered and occupied with the
sanction of the United States and whether the United States has ever actually exercised
jurisdiction over the island. In the absence of further evidence on these points, it is an
unsettled question whether this Government could well maintain a claim to sovereignty
over this island, based on the mere occupation thereof by a private citizen.” However,
before the Department’s instruction was received by the Consul, the Assistant High
Commissioner of the British Government for the Western Pacific informed the Consul
that the British Government considered Swain’s Island to be American territory and
that the taxes collected from Mr. Jennings would be returned to him.47
During the summer of 1917 certain natives, former residents of Swain’s Island,
appeared before the native court of Western Samoa and filed charges of cruelty against

Mr. Jennings. The British Embassy at Washington under date of January 30, 1918,
informed the Department that His Majesty’s Government understood that Swain’s
Island was American territory and, accordingly, transmitted to the Department for
consideration a copy of the evidence presented in support of the charges. The evidence
was referred to the Secretary of the Navy, who caused an investigation to be made
respecting the conditions obtaining on the island. Such investigation disclosed that the
complaints were not justified and the Department so advised the British Embassy under
Eli Hutchinson Jennings died at Swain’s Island in October, 1920. By his last will and
testament, all his property, including Swain’s Island, was left to his daughter, Anne
Eliza Carruthers, wife of Irving Hetherington Carruthers, a British subject, and to his
son, Alexander Jennings, as tenants in common. Irving Hetherington Carruthers, who
was named sole executor and trustee, in 1921 endeavored to probate the will of his
father-in-law but no court could be found which would exercise jurisdiction. Two prior
wills of members of the Jennings family purporting to devise Swain’s Island, were
probated in the American Consular Court at Apia, Samoa. However, the exterritorial
jurisdiction formerly exercised by the American Consular Court at Apia came to an end
upon the conclusion on December 2, 1899, of the Convention to Adjust the Question
between the United States, Germany and Great Britain in respect to the Samoan
Islands,49 and the American Consul at Apia since he now exercises no judicial powers
is without authority to probate the will or to grant letters testamentary.
Mrs. Carruthers died intestate in August, 1921, and letters of administration were
granted by the British High Court of Western Samoa to Mr. Carruthers, who was
appointed guardian of the five minor children and administrator of the estate of his
deceased wife. It is understood, however, that the letters of administration granted by
the British Court affect only such property of the estate as is situated in Western Samoa
and do not cover Swain’s Island, over which that Court has declined to exercise
jurisdiction. Both Mr. Carruthers and Mr. Jennings, who apparently is not satisfied with
Mr. Carruthers’ management of the property, are desirous of having the jurisdiction of
the administrative and judicial authorities of the Government established in American
Samoa by the Navy Department extended to Swain’s Island. The matter was brought to
the attention of the Navy Department and that Department under date of March 30,
1921, expressed doubt whether the judicial authorities of the Government established
in American Samoa were vested with requisite jurisdiction under existing
circumstances of undeclared American sovereignty over Swain’s Island to probate the
will of Eli Hutchinson Jennings.50
The status of Swain’s Island so far as the jurisdiction of the United States is concerned
cannot accurately be defined. The island, under the name Quiros, appears on the list of
guano islands appertaining to the United States, which have been bonded under the Act

embodied in Sections 5570–5578 of the Revised Statutes, authorizes the President, in
his discretion, upon the fulfillment of the conditions enumerated therein to declare that
islands or keys not within the jurisdiction of any other Government, and upon which
guano deposits have been discovered by American citizens, shall appertain to the
United States. It is questionable, in view of the interpretation given the Act of August
18, 1856, by the Courts, whether an island declared to appertain to the United States
becomes thereby a part of the territorial domain thereof. In the case of Grafflin versus
the Nevassa Phosphate Company of New York (35 Fed. page 474), the Court stated in
part as follows:
“Looking to the language and purpose of the act of Congress, which is
entitled ‘An act to authorize protection to be given to citizens of the United
States who may discover deposits of guano,’ we find nothing which indicates
that it was the intention of Congress to claim title to or to recognize in the
discoverer, who was to be protected in the exclusive occupancy of the island
for the purpose of obtaining and shipping guano therefrom, any title to the
land; on the contrary, the provisions of the law entirely negative any idea that
such islands were in any sense to become part of the territorial domain of the
United States. It is clear that the United States extends its protection to the
discoverer and his assigns solely to enable him to obtain the guano. The act
of Congress does not authorize or countenance the establishment of any form
of governmental authority or local tribunal; it does not look to colonization or
permanent settlement. It treats these islands, as in fact they are, as unsuited
for permanent settlement by civilized communities, and as only temporarily
occupied for the purpose of obtaining the guano.”
I may also mention that a further complication with regard to the status of Swain’s
Island arises from the fact that no guano has, at least for some years, been removed
from the island and the question whether the limited jurisdiction conferred by the
Guano Islands Act continues over an island after the removal of guano has ceased does
not appear to have been passed upon by the courts. While it is questionable whether the
United States has acquired sovereignty over Swain’s Island by reason of the provisions
of the Act of August 18, 1856, it appears to be clear that no other country is in a
position to assert a claim to the island. The fact that the island is included in the list of
guano islands appertaining to the United States, and has since 1856 been continuously
in the possession of the Jennings family, who have always regarded themselves as
American citizens, and that American jurisdiction over the island has been recognized
by Great Britain, the only other country which might be in a position to dispute an
American claim thereto, would seem to place upon this Government the responsibility
either of extending its sovereignty over Swain’s Island and assuming the obligations
which such a course would necessarily entail, or of disclaiming the exercise of any
control or jurisdiction over the island and the inhabitants thereof.

Opinion, page 216) regarding the extension of sovereignty over the Swan Islands,
whose status appears to be similar to that of Swain’s Island, stated in part as follows:
“These facts and circumstances are sufficient in my opinion to warrant the
statement that no other country has any proper claim to these islands, and that
the United States Government may at any time assert its sovereignty over
them by appropriate action. As to the form which that action should take, that
is a matter for the consideration of the executive and of the legislative
branches of the Government, as a political measure relating to acquisition of
subject upon which this Department should give an opinion.”
Under the circumstances, I am of the opinion that it would be desirable to have
Congress indicate its desire or willingness to extend the sovereignty of the United
States over Swain’s Island and to place it under the jurisdiction of the administrative
and judicial authorities of American Samoa.
It is believed that the purpose might appropriately be accomplished by a Joint
Resolution of Congress along the lines of the attached draft. This draft has received the
approval of the Secretary of the Navy.
Respectfully submitted,
CHARLES E. HUGHES
WASHINGTON, May 22, 1924.
[Enclosure]
Proposed Joint Resolution Extending the Sovereignty of the United States over Swain’s Island and Making the
Island a Part of American Samoa52
Whereas Swain’s Island (otherwise known as Quiros, Gente Hermosa, Olosega and
Jennings Island) is included in the list of Guano Islands appertaining to the United
States, which have been bonded under the Act of Congress approved August 18, 1856;
and Whereas the Island has been in the continuous possession of American citizens for
over fifty years and no form of government therefor or for the inhabitants thereof has
been provided by the United States: Therefore, be it Resolved by the Senate and House
of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That the
sovereignty of the United States over American Samoa is hereby extended over
Swain’s Island which is made a part of American Samoa and placed under the

jurisdiction of the administrative and judicial authorities of the government established
therein by the United States.
47 Correspondence not printed.
48 Correspondence not printed.
50 Correspondence not printed.

Albania:

Contents

Recognition by the United States of the
government of Ahmed Zogu1
1 For previous correspondence regarding relations with the revolutionary government
in Albania, see Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 306 ff.
[324] The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[325] The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[326] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)
[327] The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[328] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)

[329] The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[330] The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[331] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)
[332] The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State

[Document 324]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, January 5, 1925.
The Prime Minister who fled in June last has returned together with most of his
colleagues and announced the resignation of his Cabinet. A new one is in process of
formation under Ahmet Zogu as Prime Minister. One regent remains, the others’ terms
having expired. Ahmet Zogu is admittedly dictator of Albania and having foreign
support will doubtless remain so for some time.
In view of his having been sentenced by a court, whose jurisdiction has not been
questioned, as one of those responsible for the murder of Coleman and De Long,2 early
instructions are respectfully requested as to the attitude to be assumed towards the new
Government. My foreign colleagues are preparing to accept it as fully regular. Copy to
European Information Center.
GRANT-SMITH
2 Robert Lewis Coleman and George B. De Long, American citizens, were murdered
by bandits in Albania, Apr. 6, 1924.

[Document 325]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
3. The Italian Government will withhold recognition from the Government of Ahmed
Zogu even though it may fulfill constitutional forms but will await developments. My
Italian colleague, who informs me of this, had offered the contrary advice. French,
British, Servian and Greek representatives seem to anticipate no difficulties will be
raised by their Government[s]. Ahmed Bey has assumed portfolio of Ministry of
Foreign Affairs ad interim. Constituent Assembly adjourned last May reconvened for
January 15th to regularise new regime.
GRANT-SMITH

[Document 326]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)
government of Ahmet Zogu is firmly established Department would not be disposed
indefinitely to withhold recognition for the reason indicated in second paragraph of
your telegram of January 5, since careful examination of the notes of the trial, as
has failed to convince Department there is any serious evidence to support the charge,
apparently advanced for political reasons, that Zogu was implicated in the killing of
Coleman and De Long.
Pending further instructions from the Department you should maintain informal
relations with the present authorities and keep Department fully informed of action of
other powers. Also telegraph briefly regarding stability of present regime and submit
statement of your views as to weight of evidence brought against Ahmet Zogu.
HUGHES
3 Latter not printed.
4 Neither printed.

[Document 327]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
regime appears to be relatively stable. Portions of Northern Albania are as yet not
entirely pacified.
In spite of the nature of the evidence brought against Zogu at the murder trial it seems
that the fact that he was convicted is almost the only hope left of eventually securing
the arrest and punishment of the murderers and their accomplices who without doubt
have received protection from high authority. In order to clear Zogu officially the case
is to be reopened.

I am trying to convince Zogu that the only way to clear his name is by swift and
searching justice since he has been branded as a criminal before the world. Probably
the whole matter will be dropped as soon as the records of the court have been changed
to Zogu’s satisfaction, if we disregard the verdict from the outset.
GRANT-SMITH

[Document 328]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)
indefinitely withholding recognition, nor does it appear prosecution those responsible
killing Coleman and De Long would be materially affected by such decision.
If therefore you can secure definite assurances from Ahmet Zogu that the prosecution
will be pressed, Department would consider sending you early instructions to accord
recognition. Before taking this step, however, Department desires to know what
powers and whether assembly has met and given vote of confidence to new régime.
HUGHES

[Document 329]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
confidence 19th. Only British, Greek and Bulgarian representatives having [have]
replied to formal notification. French colleague requesting instructions. Italian Minister
left on extended leave of absence 18th. Republic proclaimed 21st. All but American
representative sent acknowledgment in reply to official notification. Italian Chargé
d’Affaires asserts his was noncommittal. Ahmet Bey down with influenza. Will
[omission] additional assurances as soon as possible. Copy to European Information
Center.
GRANT-SMITH

[Document 330]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
that in order to prove the falsity of the charge brought against him in connection with
the murders every possible measure has been already taken for the arrest, exemplary
punishment of those responsible and he is confident that the results will be positive.
The Italian Chargé d’Affaires in pursuance of instructions has replied to the notification
of the vote of confidence formally but without enthusiasm. Mussolini did likewise to
second telegram from Ahmet Bey announcing the Republic. In view of the purport of
the Prince’s note mentioned above nothing would presumably be gained by our longer
deferring recognition. Copy to European Information Center.
GRANT-SMITH

[Document 331]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)
extend recognition to the new régime in Albania and to acknowledge the receipt of
official notification of establishment of the republic.
When above action has been taken you are authorized leave of absence as requested.
3. Telegraph action taken.
HUGHES
5 Neither printed.

[Document 332]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
confidence and of adoption of republican form of government made under date of 2d
instant. Copy to European Information Center.
GRANT-SMITH

Renewed representations by the United
States for equitable treatment of American
oil interests in Albania6
6 For previous correspondence regarding oil concessions in Albania, see Foreign
Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 371 ff.
[333] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)
[334] The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[335] The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[336] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[337] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)

[338] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[339] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Albania (Kodding)
[340] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Albania (Kodding)
[341] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[342] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Albania (Kodding)
[343] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[344] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

[345] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[346] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Albania (Kodding)
[347] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[348] The Vice President of the Standard Oil Company of New York (Cole) to the
Secretary of State
[349] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[350] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[351] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Albania (Kodding)

[352] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[353] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[354] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[355] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Albania (Kodding)
[356] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[357] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[358] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State

[359] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[360] The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State

[Document 333]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)
[Paraphrase]
6. The Standard Oil Company of New York informs the Department that it has received
word of renewed activity on the part of Anglo-Persian in Albania. The company is
disposed to send a representative to Albania should the situation warrant. Please make a
brief telegraphic report.
HUGHES

[Document 334]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
11. In the course of an interview which I had today with the President and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, I repeated representations concerning the murders7 and reminded them
of our position regarding the matter of the oil concessions. Their assurances with
respect to the former were satisfactory, but on the latter question both Ahmed and the
Minister maintained a noncommittal attitude. They promised to give me a statement on
the 7th defining the Government’s attitude. The Italian representative has urged that the
matter be postponed, and the Yugoslav representative has asked for instructions from
Belgrade immediately. Ahmed Bey told me that the British Minister will request
earnestly a speedy conclusion of the matter. The arrival of the Anglo-Persian
representative is expected. No news has been received of the Standard Oil agent.
GRANT-SMITH
7 Robert Lewis Coleman and George B. De Long, American citizens, were murdered
by bandits in Albania, Apr. 6, 1924.

[Document 335]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[Received 7:40 p.m.]
d’Affaires has urged postponement of decision on oil concession until assembly of new
Parliament. Copy to foreign information bureau.9
GRANT-SMITH
8 Not printed.
9 i. e., European Information Center.

[Document 336]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5:23 p.m.]
15. The Cabinet as revised by the President of the Republic received unanimous vote of
confidence yesterday afternoon. Mufid Bey Libohova who remains Minister for
Foreign Affairs ad interim announced that two projects to facilitate entry of foreign
capital will soon be presented to the Assembly.
Copy to European Information Center.
KODDING

[Document 337]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)
[Paraphrase]
7. The Department has information that Mr. Sheffield10 is shortly to leave the United
States and will proceed at once to Tirana, where he should arrive about February 28th.
HUGHES
10 E. S. Sheffield, representative of the Standard Oil Co. of New York.

[Document 338]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
being pressed this morning that the Constituent Assembly would possibly remain in
session for about 20 days more and if so the granting of the oil concession would be
considered although, according to the Foreign Office, the Cabinet has not yet acted
upon the question. The British Minister is said to be exerting pressure in his almost
daily conferences with the Ministers. One of the two projects mentioned in my 15,
February 10, 9 a.m. is admitted by the Ministry to be banking concession to British
representatives who are now in Tirana. He was noncommittal concerning the second.
Situation is very acute.
Copy to European Information Center.
KODDING
11 Not printed.

[Document 339]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Albania (Kodding)
that the Albanian Government would not desire to take any final action in the granting
of a concession without affording to interested American companies adequate
opportunity to present their proposals which should receive the same consideration at
the hands of the Albanian Government as proposals submitted by companies of any
other nationality. Further, Department assumes that Albanian Government would in no
case be disposed to grant any concession of an essentially monopolistic or exclusive
character either as regards prospecting or exploitation. In this connection you will
situation in your opinion justifies you should make appropriate representations to the
Albanian Government for the protection of interested American companies.
GREW
12 Latter not printed.

[Document 340]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Albania (Kodding)
9. Department informed by Standard Oil Company of New York that they are cabling
the following message directly to Albanian Minister of Foreign Affairs:
“We are advised that you have been erroneously informed our company is no
longer interested in obtaining an oil concession in Albania. We hasten to
correct any such impression as you may have and to state unqualifiedly that
we are very much interested in obtaining a concession. May we express the
hope it will be consistent for Your Excellency to postpone action in respect to
the granting of the concession to others pending the arrival in Tirana of our
representative, Mr. E. S. Sheffield, who sailed from New York February 11th
and should be with you at the end of February. Accept please our assurances
of highest esteem.”
This message is repeated for your information but there would be no objection to your
indicating to the Minister of Foreign Affairs that you have been informed that message
has been sent. In the event that you have reason to believe that due to telegraphic or
other interference it has not been received by Albanian Government, you may hand
Minister of Foreign Affairs a copy but without covering communication from the
Legation.
Keep Department fully advised of developments.
GREW

[Document 341]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
immediately critical stage yesterday that I presented a firm note to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs reasserting the American position and mentioning the rights our
citizens expect to enjoy by virtue of accordance of most-favored-nation treatment and
other promises, conditions precedent to American recognition of the Albanian State. In
order that these rights may not be denied I requested that action on the concession be
postponed until the American companies should have had time to resume negotiations.
The Italian Chargé d’Affaires declared he informed the Minister for Foreign Affairs
that his Government would consider the contemplated granting of the oil concession an
act of hostility. The Servian Chargé d’Affaires states that while presenting the protest
of his Government on this subject he gained the impression that the promise of British
support for a League of Nations loan is influencing Albanian Government, which is in
dire financial straits, to accept immediately Anglo-Persian proposal.
Instructions are requested to govern the Legation’s further steps inasmuch as only the
strongest measures could affect situation. Copy to European Information Center.
KODDING
14 Not printed.

[Document 342]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Albania (Kodding)
making representations to Albanian Government is approved and it is desired that you
follow up this matter vigorously with a view to reserving an opportunity for American
interests to be heard before final action is taken.
Keep Embassy Rome and Legation Belgrade advised of developments and continue to
report fully to Department.
HUGHES

[Document 343]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
20. The Anglo-Persian concession was ratified by the Albanian Constituent Assembly
this afternoon by 50 votes to 6 after a short discussion. Although the Assembly
dispensed with reading of the concession its terms are believed to be substantially
identical with those of the agreement transmitted to the Department with despatch
At the same time that the Foreign Office was expressing to the Legation regret that the
efforts of the Government to delay consideration of the oil concession until a later date
had failed, the Minister of Public Works, when asked by a deputy to state the
Government’s position, requested the Assembly to accept Anglo-Persian proposal.
Copy to European Information Center.
KODDING
15 Not printed.

[Document 344]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ROME, February 23, 1925—noon.
[Received 12:07 p.m.]
36. Regarding the Albanian oil concession. Active negotiations have been in progress
between British and Italian Governments since the ratification of the Anglo-Persian oil
concession. Italy will, I suspect, be granted one-fourth of the Albanian concession (25
percent is the figure mentioned) and Anglo-Persian may thus secure hold on Italian oil,
since the Sinclair concession17 has been abrogated.
FLETCHER
17 Contract between the Italian Government and the Sinclair Exploration Co. for
exploitation of Italian petroleum resources.

[Document 345]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
39. I have just had an interview with Contarini18 and he states that negotiations with
Great Britain regarding Anglo-Persian oil concession in Albania are still actively in
progress and that Italy still insists on securing its concession for 50,000 hectares. He
tells me that the Anglo-Persian concession extends to approximately 200,000 hectares,
but that the area is not defined by metes and bounds, and that Italy has not abandoned
hope. I mentioned press reports from Rome and London stating that Anglo-Persian
would grant Italy or Italian capitalists a certain share in the Albanian concession in
return for which Italy would concede certain rights of exploitation in Italy to the Anglo-
Persian Company. He absolutely denied this, declaring that there was no suggestion of
Italian oil lands being involved in these negotiations, and intimated to me that the
Italian Government would not be satisfied with a share in the Anglo-Persian concession
in Albania, but wished a distinct and separate concession for Italy.
Repeated to London.
FLETCHER
18 Senator Contarini, Director General of the Italian Foreign Office.

[Document 346]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Albania (Kodding)
representative, will shortly arrive in Tirana with a view to taking up further with the
Albanian Government his Company’s interest in the Albanian field. Department desires
you to consult with him and to communicate, with your comments, his views of the
situation which the Department desires to consider before making a reply to your
telegram of February 25th.
You should not fail, however, to take any opportunity to point out to the Albanian
Government that this Government confidently expects the Albanian Government to
give practical effect to the assurances embodied in that Government’s note of June 18
[Paraphrase.] Rumors have come to the Department that Anglo-Persian would be
disposed to reach an agreement with both American and Italian groups interested. Not
being supplied with information regarding a basis for this sort of agreement, and
viewing this as largely a matter of business policy for the American Company to
determine, the Department has not advised the American Company concerned of this
reported attitude of the Anglo-Persian interests. [End paraphrase.]
HUGHES
19 Not printed.
includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361].

[Document 347]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 10:22 p.m.]
confidentially that he has reported to Standard Oil Company that most practical course
would be to regard the petroleum situation as an accomplished fact and to proceed to
investigate whether it would be desirable to make further proposals.
Rumors persist and have reached both Sheffield and the Legation, although without
verification, that the Italians have already formed an agreement with Anglo-Persian. It
is said that the terms include Italy’s insistence that an oil district be granted to her,
which would then be exploited jointly with Anglo-Persian. The frank attitude of the
Italian Legation toward this mission has been altered since the granting of the Anglo-
Persian concession.
Copy to Rome and to European Information Center.
KODDING

[Document 348]
The Vice President of the Standard Oil Company of New York (Cole) to the
Secretary of State
[Extract]
NEW YORK, March 10, 1925.
[Received March 11.]
SIR: We take this opportunity of giving you below a copy of Mr. E. S. Sheffield’s cable,
of March 4th, text of which was read to you over the telephone Saturday morning:
“In accordance with contract ratified February 18th Anglo-Persian Oil
Company, Ltd. have exclusive right to 200,000 hectares until April 30th, this
year, when they must choose not more than 50,000 hectares final concession
in which drilling obligations are much easier than proposed by us; royalty on
the gross production of crude oil 13.5%, other conditions similar to ours.
Inasmuch as it is barely possible Anglo-Persian Oil Company, Ltd. may not
make good selection on April 30th a similar concession covering second
choice of areas might be very valuable. In this connection please take notice
they have not sufficient time to drill before April 30th and that their geology
in Jugo-Slavia was very poor. We are trying to learn where Anglo-Persian Oil
Company, Ltd. is to choose areas and chance for similar concessions to us.
Representatives of Sinclair Oil & Refining Corporation have not been here
and informed us at Rome they have abandoned project here. Anglo-Persian
Oil Company, Ltd. representatives have just arrived”.
Respectfully,
H. E. COLE

[Document 349]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
Government would not fail to give practical effect to the assurances embodied in its
Albanian Government’s invitation he today presented his company’s proposal for a
second choice but that the Minister for Foreign Affairs informed him that due to
political considerations an agreement had been practically completed to give the
Italians second choice and thirty odd thousand hectares of the oil area. Above not
officially confirmed as efforts to see the Minister for Foreign Affairs were
unsuccessful. At an interview tomorrow I propose to [apparent omission] but in view of
requested. Copy to European Information Center.
KODDING
includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361].
22 Not printed.

[Document 350]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
TIRANA, March 11, 1925—noon.
[Received 9:09 p.m.]
Foreign Affairs made known this morning that the President of Albania on March 8
granted to the Italian railway administration extensive rights in Albania, including
30,000 hectares of oil lands. The grant was made by decree, which does not require
ratification. The lands supplement rather than represent a separate choice from the
Anglo-Persian selection. Upon my mentioning the assurances recently repeated, which
had been given to the American Government and interests, he declared that he was
willing to give them practical effect by granting third choice to American interests,
should they accept at once, otherwise third choice would be given to the French.
The Minister admitted that the American proposals had not been considered until after
the grant to Italy and stated that there were at stake contingent agreements with Italy
covering banking, mineral, and other concessions, and a loan. He showed me parts of a
confidential agreement which had been signed by the Italian Minister and which
provided for a grant of a 50-million gold franc credit to Albania over a period of 5
years.
I stated that I would transmit to Washington the opinion that the American position
repeated, had not been met by the Albanian Government. Copy to the European
Information Center. Repeated to the Embassy at Rome.
KODDING

[Document 351]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Albania (Kodding)
[Extract—Paraphrase]
unsatisfactory and the Department wishes you to inform the Albanian Government to
that effect candidly. As far as the Department can estimate the situation on the basis of
facts in its possession, it would appear that the Albanian Government, by inducements
which are still unfulfilled, has led American companies to expend considerable time
and effort in Albania, and that the Government has reaped considerable benefit from
the geological and other work carried on by these companies. Besides, it would appear
that Albania has been able to profit largely from the terms, advantageous to Albania,
which have been proposed by these companies and which have compelled foreign
competitors to propose more reasonable terms than they would have been inclined to
make otherwise. Even the Anglo-Persian concession does not seem to be as favorable
to the Albanian Government in certain respects as those which the American companies
have proposed.
(2) Additionally, the situation regarding the punishment of those guilty of the murder of
Coleman and De Long has worked out most unsatisfactorily and the Department is of
the opinion that its patient attitude in this matter possibly has been misunderstood. In
fact the Department is unable to reconcile the present attitude of the Albanian
Government with its alleged desire for closer relations with the United States and its
repeated expressions of friendship. One of the heirs has put before the Department a
request for support for a claim for indemnity. The matter is now being considered.
(3) You are at liberty to inform the Albanian Government of the preceding and to add
that unless there is an improvement in the situation and you are able to inform the
American Government to that effect, you would be inclined to make the
recommendation that the sending of an American Minister to Tirana be withheld.
(4) In the same connection you may also refer to the attitude of the Department in the
matter of receiving an Albanian consul in New York.24

Endeavor to obtain the text of the Italian agreement with Albania and especially inform
Department concerning the period within which the second choice of areas for
exploitation by Italian interests is to be made.
KELLOGG
24 Agreement to the appointment of Dr. Terenc Toçi as Albanian consul general at New
York had been temporarily withheld.

[Document 352]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
1. According to interpretation of Sheffield and Legation, Italian concession renders
50,000 hectares indefinitely unavailable for exploitation. Decree provides for choice
within research period. Research period of 3 years, which may be extended by mutual
accord before deciding the time of official publication of ratification by Parliament of
concession. Decree valid for 20 years without ratification and for 60 years if ratified.
KODDING

[Document 353]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
54. It is indicated from informal conversations at the Foreign Office that, however glad
Italy was to secure American cooperation at Tirana for support of the open door so long
as the door actually was open, Italy realized after the grant of the Anglo-Persian
concession that it was then each one for himself for the remainder. The intimation was
that after the Anglo-Persian concession had been granted, it had become necessary that
Italy, in view of both the foreign and domestic political situations, not give the
appearance of having suffered a setback in Albania, thus explaining the Italian efforts
both in London and at Tirana to secure the concession and thus to have something to
show. The British appear to have acted in a conciliatory spirit.

I gathered from conversation with Sheffield that, if properly selected, 50,000 hectares
could include all the oil-bearing areas in Albania, and that the Italians did not know
where the oil-bearing territories were. Inasmuch as the Italian Government have more
interest in the political and strategic situation than in petroleum, it would appear that
American interests could well go ahead and take their chances with third choice; for if
the British do not pick the right areas, it is practically sure the Italians will not, as the
districts to be assigned to them seem almost to have been decided upon.
After considering the matter further, I withdraw the suggestion I made yesterday24a
about representations to the Italian Ambassador in Washington.
Repeated to Tirana and London.
FLETCHER
24a Telegram not printed.

[Document 354]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, March 30, 1925.
[Received April 21.]
No. 419
SIR: I have the honor to report that on March 21st a call was made upon His Excellency
Mufid Bey Libohova, Albanian Minister for Foreign Affairs in order to present the
representations authorized by the Department’s telegram No. 15 of the 17th instant
concerning the state of Albanian-American relations. Before the position taken by the
Department was disclosed to him the Minister for Foreign Affairs showed me as he had
previously done at the time of my representations on March 11th portions of the
confidential agreement signed by the Italian Minister which grants a fifty million gold
franc credit to Albania. As the loan was supposed to be secret Mufid Bey did not
mention details other than to state that its main purpose other than as consideration for
the petroleum concession was to provide for the development in Albania by Italian
interests of banking facilities, railways, tramways, bridges and agriculture.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs then listened to the reading of the American
representations (as set forth in an enclosure25 with this despatch) concerning (1) the
unsatisfactory situation created by the failure of the Albanian Government to carry out
situation created by the unsatisfactory development of the de Long and Coleman
murder case. The Minister in informally commenting on the representations showed
that he had no real understanding of either situation, presenting the point of view that
only one of the murderers of the two Americans remained to be apprehended and
punished and offering to permit a representative of the Legation to examine the records
of the court which now has the matter in charge. It was pointed out that such an
examination could have no influence upon the actual apprehension and trial of the
alleged murderers involved whose names are already known.
The fact that the American Government might withhold the sending of a Minister to
Tirana providing the unsatisfactory situations did not show improvement apparently
affected Mufid Bey but very little, …
The Minister for Foreign Affairs was so perturbed, however, over the fact that the
Department had been requested to support a claim for indemnity for Messrs. de Long

and Coleman that he refused to accept my written representations until I had had time
to consider the fact that should the two unsatisfactory situations be mentioned in the
same paper he would be able to use it against the United States in the press and before
the League of Nations. After carefully going over the representations again and finding
that the two situations were not dependent upon one another in any way I left the above
mentioned Note Verbale at the Foreign Office.
The Albanian Government’s reply, copies of which are transmitted herewith both in the
original and in translation, was dictated in my presence by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs to the Secretary General of the Foreign Office, Djemail Bey Dino, on the 23rd
by his attitude than by his Note that he did not understand either of the two situations or
the serious view which the American Government took of them. He felt that the
American Government was in no position to exercise effective pressure upon his
Government and actually stated in a cheerful side remark that whatever happened it
would not be war. …
I had asked for an appointment with the President of the Republic to follow the
delivery of the Department’s representations to the Foreign Office. Ahmet Bey Zogu
was not able to receive me, however, until the afternoon of the 24th instant. He seemed
to understand both the details and the significance of the unsatisfactory situations better
than did his Minister for Foreign Affairs and stated that he regretted that Veisel Idrizi27
had been killed in a fight with gendarmes who were pursuing him in an attempt to take
alive this leader of the band of alleged murderers of the Americans. He wished that the
Americans had a machine of some kind that could be secured to go into the mountains
to round up all the bandits and hoped that even without one all the murderers would be
apprehended in the near future but it was beyond his power to command that this be
accomplished by a certain date. To his definite knowledge Cub Sul Cana and Elez
Hasani27a were being tracked down.
Concerning the unfulfilled commercial assurances the President gave his promise that
he would instruct the Minister for Foreign Affairs to enter into an agreement of such a
nature with the representative of the American company in Tirana that the American
Government would be satisfied that a very real improvement had been made in the
situation. … Mr. Sheffield states that up to the present date he has not been able to
come to satisfactory terms with the Albanian Government for even a third choice of
areas.
I have [etc.]
TROJAN KODDING
[Enclosure—Translation]

The Albanian Minister for Foreign Affairs ad interim (Mufid Bey Libohova) to the American Chargé (Kodding)
No. C IV 964
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs reiterates to the Legation of the United States of
America its assurances as to the favorable reception of American requests in the
economic and financial field. The Principle of the Open Door, according to the
Albanian Government, has never ceased to be respected. The grant of the petroleum
concession to the Railway Administration of the Italian State is combined with the
institution of a State Bank in Albania and with the contracting of a loan of two million
pounds sterling on the Italian market. It concerns, consequently, the existence of an
indivisible economic whole. The American companies can without injury to the rights
acquired by the Italians obtain other oil concessions on the same terms.
As to the concession granted to the Anglo-Persian the Albanian Government was
engaged with regard to that company previous to the recognition of Albania by the
Government of the United States.
In the note transmitted by the Legation of the United States to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs mention is made of profits which Albania should have derived from the
geological work of American companies. The Albanian Government, as far as this
Ministry knows, has not derived to date any profit from these works. As to the expenses
incurred by the American companies it is evident that all these were made at their risk
and peril.
As for the murder of the two Americans the Albanian Government, strongly moved by
that regrettable incident, immediately took all the measures that the situation permitted.
In the interval there has been the revolution of last June but for which the Judicial
proceedings which resulted would have been finished at the present time. The legal
cabinet on its return to the country undertook again with more care the acceleration of
the judicial proceedings in question and according to the progress of the trial the
expected judgement will shortly be given. Furthermore several of the alleged murderers
have been killed not having wished to surrender alive.
Consequently the Albanian Government can not accept any responsibility of either a
moral or material order; in a word, justice follows its course without any obstacle from
any side. The courts will judge in full independence.
The Albanian Government warmly and sincerely desires the continuation of cordial
relations between the United States of America and Albania.
TIRANA, March 23, 1925.

25 Note verbale not printed.
includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361].
26 Not printed.
27 Charged with the murder of Coleman and De Long.
27a Charged with the murder of Coleman and De Long.

[Document 355]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Albania (Kodding)
[Paraphrase]
20. The Department has received information from Mr. Cole, vice president of the
Standard Oil Company of New York, to the effect that the granting to his company of
third choice has been conditioned upon the payment of a contribution of between
twenty and forty thousand dollars. Mr. Cole declares that he has told Sheffield that the
company would not consider making any such contribution. He also states that
Sheffield is instructed to proceed actively with his negotiations, but not to agree to any
such suggestion.
At your discretion you may bring to the attention of the Albanian Government orally
that the above report has reached the Department and that it fails to understand the
suggestion that the fulfillment of promises given previously by the Albanian
Government should be made conditional upon action which the American Government
could only regard as improper on the part of an American company.
KELLOGG

[Document 356]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, June 1, 1925.
[Received July 2.]
No. 453
SIR: Adverting to the petroleum concession situation in Albania I have the honor to
report upon several developments which have recently come to the notice of the
Legation. Mr. Sheffield, the representative of the Standard Oil Company of New York,
is continuing his negotiations to obtain a third choice of territory. His proposals have
been accepted by all the members of the Cabinet with the exception of Mufid Bey
Libohova, Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Mr. Sheffield expects to find a formula which will satisfy his company’s interests and
those of the Crédit Générale des Pétroles as well, thus avoiding any conflict between
the French and American projects. Further opportunities for successfully demanding a
contribution to personal funds will be materially reduced in this way, it is hoped.
The French proposals for an oil concession concern a limited area of about 2400
hectares which was defined and applied for several years ago. Approximately 1400
hectares of this area were granted by the Albanian Government to the Italian Railway
Administration, but the French have held tenaciously to the point of view that they
have a special position in this area and that it must eventually be granted to the Crédit
Générale des Pétroles. I am informed by M. Guys, the French Secretary of Legation
and Consul, that his Government’s Ambassador at Rome approached the Italian
Government with a view towards securing a relinquishment of Italian rights over the
above-mentioned territory desired by French interests. He was informed that inasmuch
as an agreement existed between the Italian and English oil interests in Albania
concerning selection of areas the Italians could relinquish no rights over territory which
had been chosen until the Anglo-Persian Oil Company had been approached. Mr.
Sheffield previously had stated that from a geological standpoint the English and
Italian areas were chosen in so complementary a manner as to leave but little room for
doubt that an agreement existed between the two interests.
Mr. H. C. A. Eyres, the British Minister, informs me that the French Government
approached the British Foreign Office a short time ago, stating that the Anglo-Persian
oil concession in Albania was a monopoly and requesting on this ground that certain
areas be given up to French enterprise. The British Government refused to interfere in

the matter and pointed out that the Anglo-Persian concession was not monopolistic,
citing the grant of a larger area to the Italian Railroad Administration. Mr. Eyres felt
that his Government would have interposed no objection had the French not made a
matter of right of the question hut had merely suggested negotiating an agreement with
the Anglo-Persian Oil Company.
I have [etc.]
TROJAN KODDING

[Document 357]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
45. Albanian Cabinet approved concession proposed by Standard Oil Company and
referred it to Parliament yesterday. Copy to European Information Center.
KODDING

[Document 358]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, July 13, 1925.
[Received August 5.]
No. 473
Albanian Government had approved the petroleum concession proposed by the
Standard Oil Company of New York and referred it to parliament on the 7th instant, I
have the honor to confirm the information contained therein and to add that the
legislature reached this item on its schedule today. The concession was referred to the
committee on National Economy without discussion. The Minister of Public Works, M.
Kocha Kotta, asked that this contract be given early consideration as an urgent
measure, to which request the parliament agreed.
French Legation, and Mr. Sheffield of the Standard Oil Company were reported as
tending to show that an agreement existed between the Anglo-Persian Oil Company
and the Italian Railway Administration for the selection by the former of the oil lands
granted to Italian interests by the Albanian Government. M. Branko Lazarevitch, the
Yugoslav Minister, informs me that he obtained an admission to this effect several days
ago from Ahmet Bey Zogu, who was informed of the arrangement from the beginning.
The latter added that the agreement was much broader than one for aid in selection of
territories and provided for the complete exploitation of the Italian areas by the Anglo-
Persian Oil Company for which the Italian interests were to be recompensed by
financial payments.
I have [etc.]
TROJAN KODDING
JULY 15, 1925.
I reopen my despatch to state that the Albanian Chamber of Deputies ratified the
Standard Oil Company’s proposals for a concession yesterday afternoon by a
unanimous vote. A favorable vote in the Senate is expected within the next few days.
T. K.

[Document 359]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
48. Ratification Standard Oil Company’s concession in Albania completed yesterday.
KODDING

[Document 360]
The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, October 7, 1925.
[Received October 28.]
No. 30
SIR: I have the honor to report that the Standard Oil Company of New York has
completed the selection of lands under the concession ratified by the Albanian
Parliament on July 14, 1925.
Selections have been made in two tracts, one of 47,000 hectares and the other of 6,000
hectares. The larger tract stretches along the northern shore of the Bay of Valona and
runs north up the Adriatic coast approximately 25 miles, adjoining the western border
of the Italian concession for probably 15 miles of this distance.
The smaller tract is on the north side of the Bay of Durazzo far removed from the
selections made by the Anglo-Persian and the Italian companies. E. S. Sheffield,
Standard Oil representative in Albania, speaks somewhat pessimistically of the outlook
for oil on the lands selected for his company, but he is thought to be more optimistic
than he would make believe. He is an engineer and geologist, as differentiated from the
breezy oil stock promoters, and therefore has a professional reputation at stake. He
admits that the geological structure is promising on that part of the selection lying on
and near the Bay of Valona.
Significance also may be attached to the fact that this experienced geologist has seen fit
to include in his company’s concession such a large area on Durazzo bay. If oil should
be found in paying quantities in this sector the competing companies doubtless would
feel that their experts had been guilty of a serious oversight, because Durazzo has
excellent harbor possibilities on the east side of the Adriatic and is near to an abundant
timber supply, so essential to oil drilling operations on any large scale.

The Anglo-Persian Oil Company is preparing to start drilling its first well on the 12th
of this month at a point about 15 miles north and slightly east of Valona.
I have [etc.]

C HAS. C . Haar

Approval by the Parliament of Albania of
the American-Albanian agreement effected
by an exchange of notes June 23 and 25,
1922
[361] The Commissioner in Albania (Blake) to the Secretary of State
[362] The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
[363] The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State

[Document 361]
The Commissioner in Albania (Blake) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
TIRANA, August 2, 1922.
[Received August 29.]
No. 3
SIR:
… I considered it my duty to address the following communication to the Prime
Minister under date of June 23, 1922:
“Mr. Prime Minister: During informal conversations which I have had the
honor of holding with Your Excellency, in my unofficial capacity as
American Commissioner, assurances were offered that the authorities of the
Albanian State, under a decree of the Regents, would be instructed by your
government to duly recognize, throughout Albanian territory, all passports
issued by the American Secretary of State, especially those carried by
persons of Albanian origin who have acquired American nationality in
conformity with the laws of the United States of America.
It may be found useful for me, on my part, to reiterate at this time points of
view which I have already explained to Your Excellency concerning the
attitude of the Department of State, in the interpretation and application of
laws affecting naturalization in the United States, which is, to wit, that a
naturalized citizen who returns to his country of origin and there resides
continuously for a period of more than two years, shall be considered to have
expatriated himself and thereby to have ceased any longer to be entitled to
the rights of American citizenship, unless (a) such residence in his country of
origin is for the purpose of trading directly and principally with the United
States, or (b) to enable him to pursue studies or engage in missionary or other
legitimate cultural and philanthropical work, or (c) because a state of poor
health prevents his immediate return to the United States. The right of a
naturalized citizen to benefit by any of these exceptions must be proven in

each case by the submission of satisfactory evidence to the Department of
State.
It would be a further source of gratification to me to be able to draw to the
attention of my government the fact that similar assurances had been given
by the Government of Albania that favored-nation treatment also would be
accorded American interests in Albania, coincident with an initiation of
formal diplomatic relations between the Government of Albania and that of
the United States of America; and that the Albanian Government will include
this provision as a treaty clause in any future commercial convention that
may be drawn up between Albania and the American Government.
In connection with the above, for the completion of the archives of this
Commission, I venture to suggest the propriety of our confirming these
understandings by an exchange of written communications.
Please accept, Mr. Prime Minister, the assurances of my highest
consideration.”
To the above, the Prime Minister replied as follows, under date of June 25, 1922:
“Mr. Commissioner: In response to your letter of June 23, 1922, I beg to state
that the Albanian Government feels the utmost satisfaction to enter into
correspondence with the unofficial representative of the United States
Government, which more than once has saved Albania from partition and
utter destruction, by pleading her cause during most critical periods of her
history.
In connection with the two points you bring forth in your letter as needing
settlement, before you could take any steps in favor of the official recognition
of the Government of Albania by that of the United States, allow me to
communicate to you that:
1. The Albanian Government will recognize the passports given by
the authorities of the United States of America, to persons of
Albanian origin, who are naturalized Americans in conformity with
the American laws concerning nationalities.
2. In case a commercial treaty is concluded between the
Government of the United States of America and that of Albania,
the latter promises to insert in the said treaty, the most favored
nation clause. Meanwhile, following the official recognition of the
Government of Albania by that of the United States, and pending

the conclusion of the treaty above mentioned, the American
interests in Albania will receive the most favored nation treatment.
Furthermore, the Albanian Government is ready to show all kinds of
facilities! to the installation of American capital in Albania, as well as to
accord concessions to American concerns.
Please accept, Mr. Commissioner, the assurances of my highest
consideration.”
I have [etc.]
MAXWELL BLAKE

[Document 362]
The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, December 16, 1925.
[Received January 11, 1926.]
No. 44
SIR: Engagements made by the Albanian state as the conditions upon which recognition
was granted by the American Government on July 28, 1922,28 have at last been
removed from the field of controversy, as I had the honor to report in my telegram No.
approved these conventions in substantially the form set forth in the note of Djafer Ypi,
president of the Council of Ministers, to Maxwell Blake, American Commissioner,
under date of June 25, 1922.
Included herewith are copies of the measure as approved and of the report of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs.
I have [etc.]
CHAS. C. HART
[Enclosure 1—Translation]
The approval is proposed of the two conditions presented below:
1. The Albanian Government will recognize the passports granted by the
authorities of the United States of America, in conformity with American
laws concerning nationalities, to persons of Albanian origin naturalized in
America.
2. In the event of the conclusion of a commercial treaty between the
Government of the United States of America and the Government of Albania
the latter promises to insert, on the basis of reciprocity, in the above
mentioned treaty, the most favored nation clause. Meanwhile, following the

official recognition of the Government of Albania by that of the United States
of America and pending the conclusion of the treaty above mentioned the
American interests in Albania shall receive the most favored nation treatment
as well as the Albanian interests in America.
3. This law takes effect on the day of its publication.
4. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of the Interior are
charged with the execution of this law.
SUL STAROVA
Min. of Finance and Min. a. i. of Justice.
M. JUKAMin. of Pub. Works and Min. a. i. of the Interior.

[Enclosure 2—Translation]
Report Rendered by the Albanian Minister for Foreign Affairs
TIRANA, November , 1925.
The approval is proposed of the two conditions of the United States of America for the
following reasons: 1. The Albanian State is engaged to the United States of America
described below:
“The Albanian Government will recognize the passports granted by American
authorities to Albanians naturalized in America in accordance with American
laws on nationalities.”
The international significance of the United States of America must be taken under
consideration as well as our moral obligation to honor promises made by our State.
2. “The most favored nation” clause is a principle accepted by all countries and has
become customary in the making of all treaties relating to commerce, always based on
reciprocity.
3. The naturalization question is not of any great importance because the Albanians
who become naturalized and return to our country would lose their American
citizenship if they remained here for two consecutive years.
4. In order to give recognition to countries created after the world war the Government
of the United States has imposed on them, as a sine qua non condition, the acceptance
of the two above mentioned points.

H. Vaiom

“2 Not printed.

[Document 363]
The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, December 29, 1925.
[Received January 27, 1926.]
No. 46
No. 44 of December 16, I have the honor to report that Albania’s pledges to the
the Official Gazette, government organ.
President Ahmet Zogu signed the measure on December 21, just seven days after
parliament had given its unanimous approval. The President’s sanction reads:
“We the President of the Albanian Republic, approve this law passed by the
legislative bodies and decree its application.
“Tirana, the 21st of December, 1925.
“A. Zogu”
“Musa Juka,
Minister of Public Works and Minister
a. i. of the Interior and for Foreign Affairs.”
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Hussein Vrioni, was absent at the time the law was
signed which accounts for the signature of Musa Juka as Minister ad interim for
Foreign Affairs.
I have [etc.]
CHAS. C. HART
30 Not printed.

Austria:
Contents
Informal agreement between the United States and Austria for
continuation of reciprocal most-favored-nation treatment in customs
matters (Documents 364-365)

Informal agreement between the United
States and Austria for continuation of
reciprocal most-favored-nation treatment in
customs matters1
[364] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[365] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

[Document 364]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[Paraphrase]
Commerce, and Consular Rights.
This Government has under consideration the counterproposals which the Austrian
Government has made and will shortly send you instructions regarding them. It is
desired that you inform this Government whether after July 16, 1925, the Austrian
Government intends to continue to accord American commerce most-favored-nation
establishing friendly relations.5 July 16 is the date after which it is understood that the
rights granted the Allied and Associated Powers under the articles referred to will
cease.
It is the view of this Government that reciprocal most-favored-nation treatment, as now
accorded to the commerce of Austria by the United States and by Austria to the
commerce of the United States, ought to be continued until the negotiations now being
conducted for the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce, and Consular Rights have been
concluded and the treaty brought into force. Please take up the matter with the Austrian
Foreign Office informally and learn whether it would be ready to assure continuance of
most-favored-nation treatment as provided in the four articles referred to. Please report
by telegram.

You know, of course, of the provisions of section 317 of the Tariff Act of 1922,6
according to which the President is empowered to proclaim additional or new duties
not exceeding 50 percent ad valorem or the equivalent on articles imported from any
country which discriminates in respect to any customs duties or other charges, or in the
classification or regulation of commerce, against the commerce of the United States.
You should not, however, make reference to section 317 unless the attitude of the
Austrian authorities necessitates it.

KELLOGG
5 Ibid., pp. 2493 ff.

[Document 365]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
45. Department’s telegram 25. During the absence of present Foreign Minister in Paris,
Doctor Schüller who has matter in hand has given assurance that his informal
understanding with me for the reciprocal application of most-favored-nation treatment
will continue after July 16th until the treaty now being negotiated has been concluded
and become effective.
changes of Hungary and Czechoslovakia may oblige him in September to enter into
discussion with respect to forthcoming treaty between the United States and Austria, on
the lines of paragraph 222, Treaty of Saint Germain.
WASHBURN
7 Not printed.

Belgium:

Contents

Convention between the United States and
Belgium for the prevention of smuggling of
intoxicating liquors, signed December 9,
1925
[366] The Acting Secretary of State to the Belgian Chargé (Tilmont)
Washington, September 8, 1925.
[367] Convention Between the United States of America and Belgium, Signed at
Washington, December 9, 1925
Done at the city of Washington this ninth day of December, one thousand nine hundred
and twenty-five.
Treaty Series No. 759

[Document 366]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Belgian Chargé (Tilmont)
WASHINGTON, September 8, 1925.
SIR: I beg to refer to your conversation with Mr. William R. Castle, Jr., of this
Department, on July 15, 1925, concerning the desire of your Government to conclude
with the Government of the United States a convention for the prevention of smuggling
of intoxicating liquors similar to the convention concluded between the United States
Government would find satisfactory a convention identic with that signed by the
United States and France.2 You also stated that, if this Government is disposed to
propose a convention which is identic with the convention signed by the United States
and France, you would be grateful to receive at the same time a copy of the French text
as signed by the two Governments.
I am pleased to enclose for the consideration of your Government a draft of a
convention which this Government is disposed to conclude with your Government for
the prevention of smuggling of intoxicating liquors3 and to enclose, also, a copy of the
convention which was signed by the United States and France on June 30, 1924.
You will observe that, in preparing the draft of the convention which this Government
is willing to conclude with your Government, the word “convention”, wherever it
appears in Articles IV, V and VI, was substituted for the word “treaty”, appearing in the
convention signed by the United States and France. The amendment is made so that the
phraseology used in the Articles will conform to the phraseology in the Preamble. In
the circumstances, it is hoped that the proposed draft is sufficiently identic to comply
with the wishes of your Government in the matter.
Accept [etc.]
JOSEPH C. GREW
3 The draft convention enclosed with this despatch is identic with the treaty signed Dec.
9, 1925, infra.

Treaty Series No. 759
[Document 367]
Convention Between the United States of America and Belgium, Signed at
Washington, December 9, 19254
The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of the
Belgians, being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise between them
in connection with the laws in force in the United States on the subject of alcoholic
beverages have decided to conclude a Convention for that purpose, and have appointed
as their Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America: Mr. Frank B.
Kellogg, Secretary of State of the United States; and His Majesty the King of the
Belgians: Baron de Cartier de Marchienne, His Majesty’s Ambassador Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiary to the United States of America.
Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form, have agreed
as follows: ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and claims, without
prejudice by reason of this agreement, with respect to the extent of their territorial
jurisdiction.
ARTICLE II
(1) His Majesty the King of the Belgians agrees that Belgium will raise no
objection to the boarding of private vessels under the Belgian flag outside the
limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States, its
territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be addressed to those on
board and an examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring to import
or have imported alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or
possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such enquiries and
examination show a reasonable ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel
may be effected.
(2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has committed or is
committing or attempting to commit an offense against the laws of the United
States, its territories or possessions prohibiting the importation of alcoholic
beverages, the vessel may be seized and taken into a port of the United
States, its territories or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such
laws.

(3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a greater
distance from the coast of the United States, its territories or possessions than
can be traversed in one hour by the vessel suspected of endeavoring to
commit the offense. In cases, however, in which the liquor is intended to be
conveyed to the United States, its territories or possessions by a vessel other
than the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other vessel
and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall determine the distance
from the coast at which the right under this article can be exercised.
ARTICLE III
No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be applicable or
attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason of the carriage of such
liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or cargo destined for a port foreign to
the United States, its territories or possessions on board Belgian vessels voyaging to or
from ports of the United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the
territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law with
respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal, provided that such
liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel on which they are carried
remains within said territorial waters and that no part of such liquors shall at any time
or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions.
ARTICLE IV
Any claim by a Belgian vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has suffered loss
or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the rights conferred by
Article II of this Convention or on the ground that it has not been given the benefit of
Article III shall be referred for the joint consideration of two persons, one of whom
shall be nominated by each of the High Contracting Parties.
Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint report. If no
joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to an umpire selected by the
two Governments; should they fail to agree on the choice of that umpire, it shall be
referred to the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the
Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded at The
Hague October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted in accordance with
Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III) of the said Convention. The
proceedings shall be regulated by so much of Chapter IV of the said Convention and of
Chapter III thereof (special regard being had for Articles 70 and 74, but excepting
Articles 53 and 54) as the Tribunal may consider to be applicable and to be consistent
with the provisions of this agreement. All sums of money which may be awarded by
the Tribunal on account of any claim shall be paid within eighteen months after the date
of the final award without interest and without deduction, save as hereafter specified.

Each Government shall bear its own expenses. The expenses of the Tribunal shall be
defrayed by a ratable deduction of the amount of the sums awarded by it, at a rate of
five per cent, on such sums, or at such lower rate as may be agreed upon between the
two Governments; the deficiency, if any, shall be defrayed in equal moieties by the two
Governments.
ARTICLE V
This Convention shall be subject to ratification and shall remain in force for a period of
one year from the date of the exchange of ratifications.
Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of the High
Contracting Parties may give notice of its desire to propose modifications in the terms
of the Convention.
If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of the term of
one year mentioned above, the Convention shall lapse.
If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications, the
convention shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically, but subject
always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on either side to propose as
provided above three months before its expiration modifications in the Convention, and
to the provision that if such modifications are not agreed upon before the close of the
period of one year, the Convention shall lapse.
ARTICLE VI
In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented either by
judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the provisions of the
present Convention the said Convention shall automatically lapse, and, on such lapse or
whenever this Convention shall cease to be in force, each High Contracting Party shall
enjoy all the rights which it would have possessed had this Convention not been
concluded.
The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United States of
America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Majesty
the King of the Belgians in accordance with the constitutional laws of Belgium; and the
ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible.

In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention
in duplicate in the English and French languages and have thereunto affixed their seals.

Done at the city of Washington this ninth day of December, one thousand nine hundred
and twenty-five.
FRANK B KELLOGG [SEAL]
BON DE CARTIER DE MARCHIENNE [SEAL]
4 In English and French; French text not printed. Ratification advised by the Senate,
President, Jan. 11, 1928.

Interest of the United States in German
reparation payments to Belgium5
vol. II, pp. 133 ff.
[368] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[369] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[370] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[371] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[372] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

[373] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[374] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[375] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[376] The Unofficial Representative on the Reparation Commission (Logan) to the
Secretary of State
[377] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[378] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

[Document 368]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 3:48 p.m.]
118. Yesterday I called on the Minister for Foreign Affairs at his request and he
explained that Belgian Government was greatly concerned over attitude of the British
Treasury experts in Paris. According to the Minister it is feared that British delegates
are seeking to do away with Belgian priority to German payments held by the
Comptabilité Centrale de Gages at Coblenz. Allied Powers had always admitted
[payment?] of army costs out of these funds. British experts now assert that Belgium is
not entitled to receive priority payments from these funds held at Coblenz and must
hereafter accept her proportion of payments in kind instead of in cash.
Belgian Government is anxious to be protected from extreme view of British Treasury
and asks intervention of delegate of the United States in support of the Belgian equities.
The Minister reminded me that the Government of the United States had from the first
favored idea of Belgian priorities; that Belgium had been very sympathetic to recent
American claim to right of participation in Dawes annuities to cover claims of
American citizens in addition to army costs;6 and that Belgian Government had taken
initiative in turning over to the United States 25 percent of any sums paid to Belgium
that he referred to these three points in the hope that the Department would at present
time find it possible to come to Belgium’s assistance and to protect her from British
Treasury’s ultra rigid attitude. He also referred to critical situation which would be
created here in political circles were the Government forced to abandon its just claim to
priority payments; it is evident that both he and the Prime Minister are alarmed at
course events have taken in Paris and foresee that there will be decided reaction against
the Government in the forthcoming elections should Belgium be forced to abandon her
present priorities.
Copy of this telegram sent to Logan.
PHILLIPS

7 For correspondence concerning payment by Belgium, see ibid. , pp. 140 ff.; for text of
agreement, see ibid., 1923, vol. II, p. 180.

[Document 369]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
11. L–186 for Logan. You are referred to Ambassador Phillips’ telegram of December
4, 1924, on Belgium’s request for American support of her priority.
(1) The Department appreciates greatly the attitude of Belgium toward
American participation in German payments and desires, of course,
continued Belgian support. In principle, also, this Government desires that
Belgium receive equitable treatment.
(2) The Department understands from Ambassador Phillips’ telegram that
Belgium desires our support of her priority. The principle of Belgian priority
has already been viewed with sympathy by this Government, and, in
principle, the Department is entirely willing that Belgian priority should be
realized. The points on which Belgian priority has been contested, however,
have not been made clear. Ambassador Phillips’ telegram refers to German
payments held at Coblenz. Department’s view is unchanged that this
Government would not wish to be considered as expressing any opinion on
these funds. If Belgium desires American support on some specific point
please telegraph particulars to Department.
essential for us to maintain integrity of our position of looking to Belgium for
payment. I do not see, therefore, how the United States could assert a claim
to participate in German payments without implying change in Department’s
position. The Department appreciates, however, that as we continue to look
to Belgium for payment we have a deep interest in Belgium’s strengthening
her finances in order to be in a position better to reimburse this Government.
The Department perceives no reason, therefore, why Belgium should not
receive proportionately increased participation in German payments if she is
unable to look to the United States for release from the obligation in
question. The Department has consulted the Treasury and authorizes you to

take position that Belgium should receive the percentage that would go to the
United States under proposed plan if latter had accepted substitution of
German liability described in Article 232 of Treaty of Versailles10 and letter
however, upon obtaining suitable assurances that Government of Belgium
will institute appropriate negotiations for refunding of its debt to the United
States12 and that this Government will get benefit of payments made to
Belgium as aforesaid.
HUGHES

[Document 370]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9:05 p.m.]
agreement provides for reimbursement Belgian war debt as follows:
available for reparations in any year shall be applied to the
reimbursement of the Belgian war debt as defined in the last
paragraph of article 232 of the Treaty of Versailles.
(b) Of the amounts so applied in any year France shall receive 46
percent, Great Britain 42 percent, and Belgium 12 percent.
(c) The amounts due under this head between 1st May, 1921 and
1st September, 1924 shall be treated as arrears in drawing up the
accounts of the various powers as at the 1st of September 1924.”
The 12 percent covers Belgian debt to United States. [Paraphrase.] Twelve percent is
correct as compared with the percentage allotted to France and Great Britain on
account of their share of the Belgian debt. [End paraphrase.] Logan.
HERRICK

[Document 371]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
regarding Belgian war debt.
Department does not understand the apparent increase in British percentage at the
expense of percentage in which we are interested and desires you to assure yourself of
accuracy of computation resulting in the figures given in your L–310.
Department understands the statement that “the 12 per cent covers Belgian debt to
United States” is your comment only, and does not (repeat not) appear in the
agreement.
Have you obtained from Belgium the assurances as to the refunding negotiations
mentioned in Department’s L–186, paragraph 3?
GREW
14 Not printed.

[Document 372]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5:45 p.m.]
45. L–317 [from Logan].
war debt” reads as follows:
available in any year after meeting the charges for the service of
the German external loan 1924 and the charges for costs of
commissions; costs of United States Army of Occupation; annuity
for arrears of pre 1st May 1921 army costs; prior charge for current
army costs; and any other prior charges which may hereafter be
agreed, shall be applied to the reimbursement of the Belgian war
debt as defined in the last paragraph of article 232 of the Treaty of
Versailles.
(b) The amounts so applied as in any year shall be between the
powers concerned in proportion to the amount of the debts due to
them respectively as at 1st May 1921. Pending the final settlement
of the accounts France shall receive 46 percent, Great Britain 42
percent, and Belgium (by reason of her debt to the United States of
America) 12 percent”.
2. It will be noted from foregoing that Belgium not the United States receives
12 percent “by reason of her debt to the United States.” It will also be noted
that 12 percent basis only tentative and “pending the final settlement”.16
3. Belgians agree that they will turn this money over to us on account of their
debt to us. It will be observed from foregoing that our debt position with
Belgium in no way compromised by foregoing. Confidently feel that I can
make arrangements for Belgians to use this 12 percent in marks for payment
account their deliveries in kind from Germany, we subsequently taking
equivalent in Belgian francs, thus overcoming difficulties that might be
presented by transfer committee in getting these marks across foreign

exchange. Request Department cable me tentative text of letter for Belgians
to send me which will meet our angle of situation. Anticipate no difficulty in
having it signed. Logan.
HERRICK
133.

[Document 373]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
53. L–206 for Logan.
opinion that arrangement suggested in third paragraph your L–317 should be accepted,
it being made entirely clear however that the position of the United States as a creditor
of Belgium remains unchanged. Treasury would be glad if you can arrange as you
suggest for payment in Belgian francs or other currencies freely convertible into dollars
in place of German marks. However, the Treasury would not desire any commitment in
this respect which would release Belgium from the requirement of handing over to us
German marks if that were the only way in which payment could be made.
(2) Treasury suggests that you obtain following letter from Gutt:19
“My dear Mr. Logan: I desire to confirm our understanding that the sums to
be received by Belgium under Article 4 of the Agreement of January 14,
1925, by reason of the debt of Belgium to the United States of America shall
be paid over to the United States by Belgium when and as received on
account of the indebtedness of the Belgian Government to the United States.
My Government is prepared to take appropriate steps to that end and, having
in mind your desire that payments be made in currencies freely convertible
into dollars. I take pleasure to assure you that my Government will use the
funds to be received under this head in marks for the payment on account of
deliveries in kind to be received by Belgium from Germany and will pay to
the Government of the United States the equivalent amount in Belgian francs
or in currencies freely convertible into dollars.
I shall be glad if you will let me know whether the foregoing is agreeable to
your Government and advise me as to any details with respect to the
procedure to be followed in making these sums promptly available to the
Government of the United States”.
[3] Treasury suggests the following reply to be made by you

“My dear Mr. Gutt: In reply to your letter of blank regarding the payment to
the United States of the sums received by Belgium under Article 4 of the
agreement of January 14, 1925, I beg to inform you that my Government has
instructed me to state that it will apply on account of the indebtedness of the
Belgian Government to the United States the sums thus received from the
Belgian Government, it being understood that the Government of the United
States of course continues to look to Belgium for the payment of the entire
amount of its indebtedness to the United States.
I am also directed to express my Government’s appreciation of your
assurances given with respect to the intention of the Belgian Government to
make these payments available to the Government of the United States in
Belgian francs or currencies freely convertible into dollars.
It is understood that any payment of the above account in currencies freely
convertible into dollars will be credited to Belgium at the equivalent thereof
in dollars at the current rate of exchange at the time of such payment.
Payments may be made to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or by
deposit in the national bank of the country whose currency is used, in the
name of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for account of the Treasury
of the United States, it being understood that the Federal Reserve Bank shall
have the right at any time to convert into dollars the amount standing to its
credit in the account.”
(4) If Belgium desires any change in the foregoing draft letters, do not modify above
texts without consulting Department.
(5) [Paraphrase.] For your information it is Treasury’s intention to apply payments
referred to against interest on the Belgian debt to the United States; upon receipt of the
first payment Belgian Government will be duly advised. [End paraphrase.]
HUGHES
17 Supra.
18 Not printed.
19 Camille Gutt, Belgian assistant representative on the Reparation Commission.

[Document 374]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:46 p.m.]
1. Discussed exchange of letters [with] Gutt representing Theunis20 concerning article
4 finance agreement. Gutt suggests following changes in proposed letters.
2. Gutt letter to Logan: Omit following phrases in first paragraph “on account of the
indebtedness of the Belgian Government to the United States”. Change last sentence
same paragraph21 to read as follows: “I take pleasure to assure you that my
Government”, insert following phrase, “unless and until the transfer committee
authorizes the transfer into foreign currencies of the marks received”. Letter then
continues to its end as originally drafted by the Department.
Logan letter to Gutt: Change first and second paragraphs to read as follows “In reply to
your letter of blank regarding the payment to the United States of the sums received by
express my Government’s appreciation of your assurances given with respect to the
intention of the Belgian Government to make these payments available to the
Government of the United States in Belgian francs or currencies freely convertible into
dollars”. Letter then continues to end as drafted by the Department.
3. Gutt frankly explained that the exchange of letters without the modification
suggested somewhat dangerous from an internal Belgian political point of view, that as
a matter of fact the distinct reference in the proposed exchange of letters to article 4 of
the finance agreement of January 14th in itself constituted a practical admission that
our Government was in no way committed to last paragraph of article 232 of the Treaty
of Versailles and the connected agreement signed by Wilson, Lloyd George and
Clemenceau22 (which Congress never accepted), [that] we therefore had what we
wanted with the additional advantage that such an exchange of letters with the
modifications he proposed would not cause internal Belgian public clamor concerning
the foregoing point.
Confidentially hope Department will cable its approval of these proposed changes in
the text thus permitting the immediate exchange of these two letters.

4. The total priority accorded the Belgian war debt under article 4 of the finance
is 36,000,000 gold marks. Twelve percent of the foregoing to be paid to Belgium “by
reason of her debt to United States of America” is 4,300,000 gold marks to be made
available to Belgium during the 7 months beginning February 1st and ending August
under proposed exchange of letters Belgium should deposit in the Federal Reserve
Bank on foreign accounts approximately $125,000 monthly from March 1st to
September 1st, 1925.
We have checked the foregoing figures under paragraph 3 of article 4 and find them
correct. Logan.
HERRICK
20 Belgian Prime Minister.
21 i. e., second paragraph of draft letter as communicated by Department, supra.

[Document 375]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
78. For Logan. L–213.
(1) Your L–339 was communicated to the Treasury which, in view of the Belgian
attitude respecting pre-Armistice debt, considers it important that in connection with
the proposed exchange of letters it should be made clear that the position of the United
States as to the Belgian debt is in no way changed.
(2) Treasury suggests that you address the following letter to Gutt:23
“Pursuant to our conversation I communicated to my Government your
suggestions as to the modification of the draft letters and your reasons
therefor which we discussed, also your statement that it would be
unnecessary to refer in the letters to the position taken by the Government of
the United States with respect to pre-Armistice advances inasmuch as the
distinct reference in the proposed letters to Article 4 of the agreement of
January 14, 1925, constitutes a practical admission that the United States is in
no way committed to the modification of this position. I am authorized to
inform you that, if it be clearly understood that the United States does not in
any way modify its position in the matter, my Government has no objection
to the modifications which you proposed in the draft letters.”
(3) On the foregoing basis you are authorized to exchange with Gutt the proposed
letters containing the modifications set forth in your L–339, inserting the phrase “by
reason of the debt of Belgium to the United States of America” after the date “January
14, 1925,” and before the words “I am directed et cetera” in the first paragraph of your
letter to Gutt so as to correspond to his letter.
HUGHES
2, changed to “your.”

[Document 376]
The Unofficial Representative on the Reparation Commission (Logan) to
the Secretary of State
PARIS, 17 February, 1925.
[Received February 25.]
L–213 of February 7th and preceding interchange of cables on the subject of Article
Four of the Agreement of January 14th, 1925, under which Belgium receives certain
moneys from Germany, by reason of the debt of Belgium to the United States of
America, and the methods by which these sums are to be paid over to the United States
by Belgium when and as received.
me under date of February 17th, together with copies of my letters to Mr. Gutt of
though actually delivered February 17th) It will be noted that the enclosures are drafted
in the terms desired by the Treasury Department.
I venture the suggestion that this letter and its enclosures be referred to the Treasury
Department for appropriate collection of the sums due from Belgium. In this
connection, I invite attention that “pending the final settlement of the accounts” or in
other words, pending any correction of the percentages as between France, Great
Britain and Belgium “by reason of her debt to us” and as from February 1, 1925 to
August 31st, 1925, Belgium is entitled to receive on this account from the Dawes
Annuities, 610,000 gold marks per month.
I will promptly notify the Department when and if it is decided that Belgium is to
receive any increased percentage “by reason of her debt to us”. This office will also
inform the Department of any changes in the monthly rate as starting from September
1, 1925, or the date of the commencement of the second Dawes Annuity year. In the
meantime, the 610,000 gold mark figure stands for each of the seven months
contemplated by the inclusive dates hereinbefore given.
In accordance with my understanding, the question of collection is now transferred to
the Treasury Department for the 610,000 gold marks per month during the period in
question, and that the only further intervention of this office will be a possible
notification of the change in the amount after final settlement is reached and the

periodical notification of the sums accruing in the second and subsequent Dawes
Annuity years.
Faithfully yours,
JAMES A. LOGAN, Jr.
[Enclosure]
The Belgian Assistant Representative on the Reparation Commission (Gutt) to the American Unofficial
Representative on the Reparation Commission (Logan)
PARIS, 17 February, 1925.
MY DEAR MR. LOGAN: I desire to confirm our understanding that the sums to be received by
Belgium under Article Four of the Agreement of January 14, 1925, by reason of the
debt of Belgium to the United States of America, shall be paid over to the United States
by Belgium when and as received. My Government is prepared to take appropriate
steps to that end and, having in mind your desire that payments be made in currencies
freely convertible into dollars, I take pleasure to assure you that my Government,
unless and until the Transfer Committee authorizes the transfer into foreign currencies
of the marks received, will use the funds to be received under this head in marks for the
payment on account of the deliveries in kind to be received by Belgium from Germany
and will pay to the United States Government the equivalent amount in Belgian Francs
or in currencies freely convertible into dollars.
I shall be glad if you will let me know whether the foregoing is agreeable to your
Government and advise me as to any details with respect to the procedure to be
followed in making these sums promptly available to the Government of the United
States.
Faithfully yours,
GUTT
24 Not printed.
24a Letters to Mr. Gutt not printed.

[Document 377]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Treasury regards the amount of Belgium’s pre-armistice debt to the United States as a
question solely between the two governments and states that while Germany’s
obligation to make payments on account of Belgium war debts is governed by Article
232,27 the determination by the Reparation Commission of the amount of Belgium’s
debt to the United States does not fix the amount due from Belgium to the United
States.
Treasury agrees that United States cannot properly object to action of the Commission
under Article 232 but desires that the position of the United States be made clear to the
Belgian Government that in accepting from Belgium payments made to the latter by
the United States is in no way committed to the decision of the Reparation Commission
as to the amount of the debt owed by Belgium to the United States.
The Treasury believes that you should take appropriate steps to inform the Belgian
Government through Gutt of its position as set forth above and you are authorized in
your discretion so to do.
KELLOGG
25 Ralph W. S. Hill, acting unofficial representative on the Reparation Commission.
26 Not printed.
27 Of the Treaty of Versailles.

[Document 378]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Received April 2—9 a.m.]
today for a brief vacation. He stated he understood perfectly position of Treasury. In
order that there could be no possible misunderstanding I supplemented conversation by
letter embodying statement in second paragraph your telegram commencing “in
accepting from Belgium et cetera.” Mailing copy of my letter.28 Hill.
HERRICK
28 Not printed.

Brazil:
Contents
Disapproval by the Department of State of proposed loans from
American bankers to the State of São Paulo (Documents 379-382)

Disapproval by the Department of State of
proposed loans from American bankers to
the State of São Paulo
[379] Memorandum by Mr. Stokeley W. Morgan, of the Division of Latin
American Affairs, of a Conversation With Mr. Earle Bailie, August 18, 1925
August 18, 1925
[380] The Secretary of State to Mr. Earle Bailie
Washington, August 21, 1925.
[381] Speyer & Co. to the Secretary of State
[382] The Secretary of State to Speyer & Co.
Washington, November 6, 1925.

[Document 379]
Memorandum by Mr. Stokeley W. Morgan, of the Division of Latin
American Affairs, of a Conversation With Mr. Earle Bailie,1 August 18,
1925
August 18, 1925
Mr. Bailie stated that his firm had been approached by the Paulista Institute for the
Permanent Defense of Coffee of Sao Paulo for a loan which it was thought would be in
the neighborhood of $15,000,000. The Institute contemplates using the proceeds to (1)
found a bank for financing coffee growers; (2) compile statistics on coffee production;
(3) fight the coffee plague, and (4) regularize the price of coffee.
Mr. Bailie said that after his telephone conversation with Mr. White2 on July 30, (see
attached memorandum)3 he cabled his representative in São Paulo that he thought the
Department would not object to a loan the proceeds of which would be used for any
legitimate business other than the valorization of coffee, to which Mr. Bailie’s
representative replied inquiring what operations would be objected to by the
Department on the plea of valorization, adding that he believed the Institute would be
willing to consider any reasonable restrictions.
Mr. Bailie stated that he thought the Institute would be willing to obligate itself not to
use the proceeds of the loan directly or indirectly to buy or store coffee and asked
whether the Department would approve of a loan on those conditions.
I pointed out that this restriction on the activities of the Institute would not prevent the
bank which was to be founded with the proceeds of the loan from carrying on the
valorization program. Mr. Bailie agreed that this was the case but inquired whether the
Department wished to go so far as to refuse its approval of money loaned for the
ordinary financing of crops, which would be all the bank could be said to be
undertaking. In this case, he pointed out, the Department would be practically refusing
to approve any loan to the State of Sao Paulo on the grounds that the money might
indirectly be used to keep up the price of coffee.
Mr. Bailie wished it distinctly understood that his firm was not urging that this loan be
approved but would be glad to complete the transaction if it felt that it had the complete
approval of the Department. I informed him that I would lay the matter before the
Secretary.

It seems to me that the question hinges on whether the financing of crops by the bank
will result in maintaining an artificially high price or merely a steady normal price.
MORGAN
1 Of J. & W. Seligman Co., New York, N. Y.
2 Francis White, chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs.
3 Not printed.

[Document 380]
The Secretary of State to Mr. Earle Bailie
WASHINGTON, August 21, 1925.
SIR: With reference to your visit to the Department on August 19 [sic], during which you
inquired whether the Department would have any objection to a projected loan by your
firm to the Paulista Institute for the Permanent Defense of Coffee of São Paulo, I beg to
say in reply that in the light of the information before it, the Department cannot view
this financing with favor.
For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW
Under Secretary

[Document 381]
Speyer & Co. to the Secretary of State
NEW YORK, November 4, 1925.
[Received November 5.]
SIR: We are now in negotiation with the State of São Paulo, Brazil, covering a Loan for
an amount between $25,000,000 and $35,000,000, to be issued under a law to be
passed by the Congress of the State of São Paulo. The Bonds are to carry interest at a
rate still to be determined (which will be either 7½% or 8% per annum) and will be in
the form of Twenty Year or Twenty-five Year Bonds, to be redeemable by means of a
Sinking Fund sufficient to retire all of the Bonds at or before maturity. The Bonds will
be the direct external obligation of the State of São Paulo, and will be payable in
United States gold, free from all Brazilian taxes, and will be secured by a first charge
on the railway tax of One Milreis Gold per bag of coffee transported across the State of
São Paulo.
We are advised by cable that the President and State Secretary of São Paulo have
declared as follows: First, that the proceeds of the Loan will be deposited in the São
Paulo banks to finance agricultural and commercial interests; second, that the purpose
of the Loan is not for coffee valorization. The President and State Secretary further
advise that the policy of the Defense of Coffee Institute is to stop speculation and not to
valorize coffee.
We trust that the Department will find no objection to the flotation of this proposed
Loan in the American market, and we shall be obliged if you will so advise us.
Respectfully yours,
SPEYER & Co.

[Document 382]
The Secretary of State to Speyer & Co.
WASHINGTON, November 6, 1925.
SIRS: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of November 4, 1925, regarding
your interest in a proposed loan to the State of Sao Paulo, Brazil, in the amount of from
$25,000,000 to $35,000,000, for the purposes and under the terms set forth therein, and
in reply thereto to state that in view of the policy of coffee valorization followed by the
authorities of Sao Paulo, this Department is unable to view the proposed financing with
favor at this time.
For the Secretary of State:
LELAND HARRISON
Assistant Secretary

Bulgaria:
Contents
Continuance of American capitulatory rights in Bulgaria (Documents

Continuance of American capitulatory rights
in Bulgaria
[383] The Minister in Bulgaria (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[384] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bulgaria (Wilson)
Washington, September 23, 1925.
[385] The Chargé in Bulgaria (Cable) to the Secretary of State

[Document 383]
The Minister in Bulgaria (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
SOFIA, July 1, 1924.
[Received July 14.]
No. 503
SIR: I have the honor to report that the French Minister called on me yesterday to inquire
whether the exchange of the ratifications of the Bulgarian-American extradition treaty1
was to be taken as an indication that the United States has definitely relinquished in
Bulgaria its capitulatory rights, which by article 175 of the Treaty of Neuilly2 were
specifically retained by all countries signatory to that instrument.
Although since I have been in charge of this mission I have on various occasions
referred to the capitulations as governing certain rights and privileges of Americans in
Bulgaria, I have never received from the Department any definite expression as to its
point of view of the matter. In looking over the past records of the Legation, I cannot
find that the United States ever relinquished its capitulatory rights, and in fact at times
seems to have attached considerable importance to their maintenance, while never
actually invoking them.
Apparently those countries which have ratified the Treaty of Neuilly intend to maintain
their capitulatory rights, and it is on the strength of these rights that the British, French,
and probably the Italian Governments are going to insist upon the free customs entry of
In view of the above inquiry of the French Minister, and possibly like inquiries from
the Bulgarian Government, I have the honor to request that the Legation may be
informed as to the position of the United States Government on the question of
capitulatory rights in Bulgaria as affecting American interests in that country.
I have [etc.]
CHARLES S. WILSON
3 Not printed.

[Document 384]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bulgaria (Wilson)
WASHINGTON, September 23, 1925.
No. 141
inquiry by the French Minister at Sofia as to whether the exchange of the ratifications
of the Extradition Treaty between the United States and Bulgaria was to be taken as an
indication of the relinquishment by this country of its capitulatory rights in Bulgaria.
You state that apparently the countries which have ratified the Treaty of Neuilly intend
to maintain their capitulatory rights and that upon examining the past records of your
Legation you have been unable to find that the United States has relinquished its
capitulatory rights in Bulgaria.
The Department does not perceive that there is any direct relation between the
capitulatory rights enjoyed by the United States in Bulgaria and the provisions of the
Extradition Treaty between the two countries. As noted in Moore’s Digest of
International Law, Volume IV, page 259, the United States has not generally followed
the practice of certain Powers in seeking to obtain the recovery of fugitive criminals
through the action of their ministers and consuls in countries in which such ministers
and consuls are by treaty invested with judicial powers. This country has, on the other
hand, in two cases, that of the Ottoman Empire, in 1874,4 and Japan, in 1886,5 entered
into extradition treaties with countries in which citizens of the United States were
entitled to capitulatory privileges. “The Government of the United States,” Mr. Moore
observes, “has been induced to take this position not only by reason of doubts as to the
applicability of the extraterritorial stipulations to extradition, but also because the
statutes passed to carry such stipulations into effect confer upon the ministers and
consuls no authority for that purpose.”
Inasmuch as the United States has not ratified the Treaty of Neuilly, it is of course not
in a position to rely directly upon the provisions of that Treaty as a basis for any claim
which it may care to assert in regard to the continued enjoyment of capitulatory rights
in Bulgaria. On the other hand, it does not appear that this country has at any time
relinquished its capitulatory rights in Bulgaria and, accordingly, those rights may be
said to be still subsistent. For your confidential information and guidance it may be
added that the Department’s interest in this matter is that of assuring to American
nationals in Bulgaria treatment as favorable as that which may be accorded to nationals

of the most favored nation. The Department would therefore, under present
circumstances, be disposed to press for rights of a capitulatory character only in the
event that other Powers advance claims by virtue of the capitulations. Your comments
on the present situation and on the attitude of the various capitulatory Powers would be
appreciated.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
5 Ibid., vol. I, p. 1025.

[Document 385]
The Chargé in Bulgaria (Cable) to the Secretary of State
SOFIA, December 6, 1925.
[Received December 24.]
No. 743
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s Instruction No.
powers in Bulgaria.
Inasmuch as the Capitulations in Bulgaria are a legacy of the Ottoman Empire and as
the historical point of view arises even to-day, it appears best to take up the case from
its inception.
The Treaty of Berlin of 1878,6 which marks the first real step in the independence of
Bulgaria, stipulates that the Capitulations in force under Turkish domination shall
remain in vigor. (Art. 8) Of necessity the signatories to the Treaty of Berlin were the
nations to enjoy the rights exercised thereunder. However, other nations who enjoyed
capitulary rights in the Ottoman Empire claimed them also in Bulgaria and obtained
them. (Holland, Spain, etc.) The Bulgarians claim that by actual right only the
signatories of the Treaty of Berlin have a right to Capitulations in Bulgaria, that other
nations have acquired that position during the formative period of the country, and only
enjoy the privileges due to the complaisance of the signatories. In reality the
Capitulations are a charge imposed on Bulgaria by the Great Powers with the original
accord of the Sublime Porte. From the terms of the Treaty of Berlin it would appear
that for Bulgaria to receive modifications in the Capitulations it would take unanimous
action on the part of the signatories. Serbia, by various conventions, agreements and
treaties has accomplished this very end, inasmuch as the various nations interested had
some definite end to gain.
In 1891 the French Government invoked its Capitulary right when the Bulgarian
Government attempted to expel a Mr. Chadbourne, a French correspondent who had
criticized Bulgarian politics. Carnot’s Government, de Freycinet was Premier at the
time, broke diplomatic relations with Bulgaria and recalled Lanel, the French Chargé
d’Affaires. Placed in this position there was nothing for Ferdinand to do but knuckle
under. France was given satisfaction and the incident was considered closed. However,
it showed both the attitude of the Bulgarian Government, and the possible use that

could be made of the Capitulations, both as a threat or as a barter, for the Bulgarians
were ready to exchange anything against their removal at that time.
Beginning with 1892 Bulgaria began, by treaty and agreement, to ameliorate her
position. Almost invariably such steps in advance as she consummated were solely on
the judicial side, and dealt mostly with civil law. Italy, Germany and Austria all
withdrew the necessity of the presence of a consular representative in case of civil
action. Curiously enough, Great Britain which had plead[ed] the cause of Bulgaria at
Berlin never acquiesced to this modification.
By degrees practically all cases to be tried before a civil court were allowed to pass
without challenge by the Capitulary nations. Certain agreements were entered into to
protect nationals undergoing bankruptcy or similar commercial misadventures in
Bulgaria.
By degrees Bulgaria came to believe herself free from the onus of the Capitulations and
as they were not invoked, as far as I can discover, from 1908, when she became a
sovereign state, and [to] the end of the war she, possibly, had every reason to think that
they were considered non-existent.
However, Article 175 of the Treaty of Neuilly clearly stipulates that the Capitulary
rights are to be considered as still in existence.
In 1924 and again in 1925 Great Britain, France and Italy acting in consort [concert?]
brought up the question of the extraterritoriality of their consuls based on the
Capitulations. I must state, that from conversation with the representatives of these
powers, I am inclined to believe that the representations made were rather to obtain
preferential commercial agreements as against relinquishment of the rights enjoyed,
and if the point could be definitely forced home it was a point definitely gained.
After the explosion in the Cathedral on April 16th, 1925, the situation respecting the
capitulations became a trifle more involved. Léger, a Frenchman, and his wife were
arrested for complicity in the affair. They had rented rooms to some of the conspirators
and I believe personally that Léger knew that he was without the law. At all hazards
[sic], the fact remains that, they were tried by a military tribunal and both were found
guilty. Léger was condemned to death and his wife to life-imprisonment.
The French Chargé did not hear till several days after his arrest that Léger was in
prison. He contented himself at that time with furnishing the man with counsel and
seeing that Madame Léger receive[d] some sort of preferential treatment from the
prison authorities. However, after the two were sentenced, the French Minister who had
newly arrived received instructions to request clemency of the King for Léger. The
French Minister tells me that in making the request he pointed out that in other
countries the crime of which the condemned was accused was not punishable by death,

and that should the Government persist in its attitude it might be necessary to invoke
the Capitulations. He found a ready listener in the King, who at all times is against
capital punishment, and the sentence was commuted to life imprisonment; which was
satisfactory to all concerned.
Inasmuch as the trial had caused a certain amount of comment, seeing that it comprised
[sic] foreigners, the British Legation requested what its attitude should be under similar
circumstances of the Home authorities. The reply was to the effect that in all cases of a
criminal nature as soon as the Legation learned of the arrest all possible facilities
should be arranged for the detained person. It is to be understood that this refers
primarily to political crime. Later, as the case developed would be time enough to
determine on a definite line of action.
The attitude of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs is that the Capitulations no longer exist.
They state that since the Capitulations have been abolished in Turkey they can no
longer be invoked in Bulgaria, as they were merely a relic of Ottoman rule. When faced
with Article 175 of the Treaty of Neuilly, to which the British Minister once called their
attention, they assume a calmer attitude. There is no doubt that their existence is a thorn
in the flesh, and that present Bulgaria would do much to remove them.
At this moment the attitude of the three Great Powers holding capitulary rights under
the terms of the Treaty of Neuilly is about as follows: Great Britain has withdrawn
rights in Civil cases, but have made definite statements concerning their rights in
Criminal cases. Will use Capitulations as a lever to obtain preferences in proposed
Commercial Treaty.
France has adopted a similar attitude, perhaps a trifle more conciliatory, but have made
it clear that Capitulations certainly exist in Criminal cases. It is to be noted that all
Roman Catholics in Bulgaria are supposedly under the protection of the French. This
dates from the time of Francis the First, and it appears unlikely that it would be
invoked.
Italy joined Britain and France concerning the Consular question pointed out in the
foregoing. Their Chargé (Italy’s) tells me that he does not believe that his country
would invoke the Capitulations except in a flagrant miscarriage of justice in a criminal
case. I believe, inasmuch as Italy is bending every effort toward capturing the trade of
Bulgaria, that she prefers to use the Capitulations to gain some end and that eventually
she will barter them away against some Treaty or Agreement.
At the present moment American citizens in Bulgaria receive the same treatment as that
accorded to the nationals of other countries. Moreover, such Americans as reside in this
country are unlikely to run afoul of the law in criminal matters. Their litigation, such as
it is, would come before a civil court.

There is one side of the question that must be considered attentively. In a country as
prone to political disturbance as Bulgaria it would appear unwise to renounce
capitulary rights in cases involving political crime. Even though the Government at
Washington might not desire to institute a Consular Court to examine a case,
nevertheless as shown in the case of Léger, the remindance [sic] of the existence of the
Capitulations might have a salutary effect. It would appear to be the best policy to hold
the capitulary rights of the United States in reserve against either the possible defense
of a national or to use for some commercial preference.
I have [etc.]
PHILANDER L. CABLE

Canada:

Contents

Extradition convention between the United
States and Canada applying to offenses
against laws for the suppression of traffic in
narcotics1
1 This convention resulted from a draft extradition treaty submitted by the
representatives of the United States to their Canadian colleagues at the Ottawa
[386] Convention Between the United States of America and Great Britain in
Respect of the Dominion of Canada, Signed at Washington, January 8, 1925
Done in duplicate at the City of Washington this eighth day of January, in the year one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-five.
Treaty Series No. 719

Treaty Series No. 719
[Document 386]
Convention Between the United States of America and Great Britain in
Respect of the Dominion of Canada, Signed at Washington, January 8,
19252
The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas,
Emperor of India, in respect of the Dominion of Canada, being desirous of enlarging
the list of crimes on account of which extradition may be granted with regard to certain
offences committed in the United States or in the Dominion of Canada under the
Conventions concluded between the United States and Great Britain on the 12th July,
1922,6 with a view to the better administration of justice and the prevention of crime,
have resolved to conclude a Supplementary Convention for this purpose, and have
appointed as their Plenipotentiaries, to wit: The President of the United States of
America: Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States of America,
and His Britannic Majesty: The Honorable Ernest Lapointe, Minister of Justice to the
Dominion of Canada; Who, after having communicated to each other their respective
full powers, which were found to be in due and proper form, have agreed to and
concluded the following Articles: ARTICLE I
The following crimes are, subject to the provision contained in Article II, hereof, added
Supplementary Convention concluded between the United States and Great Britain on
the Supplementary Convention concluded between the United States and Great Britain
Supplementary Convention concluded between the United States and Great Britain on
suppression of the traffic in narcotics.
ARTICLE II
The operation of the present Convention is confined to cases in which the offences
mentioned in the preceding Article having been committed in the United States or in
the Dominion of Canada, the person charged with the offence is found in the Dominion
of Canada or in the United States respectively.

ARTICLE III
The present Convention shall be considered as an integral part of the said Extradition
July, 1889, shall be read as if the lists of crimes therein contained had originally
comprised the additional crimes specified and numbered 17 in the 1st Article of the
present Convention subject to the provision contained in Article II.
The present Convention shall be ratified, and the ratifications shall be exchanged either
at Washington or Ottawa as soon as possible.
It shall come into force ten days after its publication in conformity with the laws of the
High Contracting Parties, and it shall continue and terminate in the same manner as the
said Convention of the 12th July, 1889.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, the respective plenipotentiaries have signed the present Supplementary
Convention and have affixed their seals thereto.
DONE in duplicate at the City of Washington this eighth day of January, in the year one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-five.
[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
[SEAL] ERNEST LAPOINTE

Boundary treaty between the United States
and Canada
[387] Treaty Between the United States of America and Great Britain in Respect
of the Dominion of Canada, Signed at Washington, February 24, 1925
Done at Washington the 24th day of February, A. D. 1925.
Treaty Series No. 720

Treaty Series No. 720
[Document 387]
Treaty Between the United States of America and Great Britain in Respect
of the Dominion of Canada, Signed at Washington, February 24, 19257
The United States of America and His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of
India, in respect of the Dominion of Canada, desiring to define more accurately at
certain points and to complete the international boundary between the United States
and Canada and to maintain the demarcation of that boundary, have resolved to
conclude a treaty for these purposes, and to that end have appointed as their respective
plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America: Charles Evans
Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; and His Britannic Majesty, in respect
of the Dominion of Canada: The Honorable Ernest Lapointe, K. C, a member of His
Majesty’s Privy Council for Canada and Minister of Justice in the Government of that
Dominion; Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers,
which were found to be in due and proper form, have agreed to and concluded the
following articles: ARTICLE I
Whereas Article V of the Treaty concerning the boundary between the United States
and the Dominion of Canada concluded on April 11, 1908, between the United States
and Great Britain,7a provided for the survey and demarcation of the international
boundary line between the United States and the Dominion of Canada from the mouth
of Pigeon River, at the western shore of Lake Superior, to the northwesternmost point
of Lake of the Woods, as defined by the treaties concluded between the United States
And whereas Article VI of the said Treaty concluded on April 11, 1908, provided for
the relocation and repair of lost or damaged monuments and for the establishment of
additional monuments and boundary marks along the course of the international
boundary between the United States and the Dominion of Canada from the
northwesternmost point of Lake of the Woods to the summit of the Rocky Mountains,
as established under existing treaties and surveyed, charted, and monumented by the
Joint Commission appointed for that purpose by joint action of the Contracting Parties
in 1872; And whereas it has been found by surveys executed under the direction of the
Commissioners appointed pursuant to the said Treaty of April 11, 1908, that the
boundary line between the United States and the Dominion of Canada from the mouth
of Pigeon River, at the western shore of Lake Superior to the northwesternmost point of
Lake of the Woods as defined by the treaties concluded on September 3, 1783, and

August 9, 1842, is intersected by the boundary from the northwesternmost point of
Lake of the Woods to the summit of the Rocky Mountains as established under existing
treaties and surveyed, charted, and monumented by the Joint Commission appointed for
that purpose in 1872, at five points in Lake of the Woods adjacent to and directly south
of the said northwesternmost point, and that there are two small areas of United States
waters in Lake of the Woods, comprising a total area of two and one-half acres, entirely
surrounded by Canadian waters; And whereas no permanent monuments were ever
erected on these boundary lines north of the most southerly of these points of
intersection; The Contracting Parties, in order to provide for a more practical definition
of the boundary between the United States and the Dominion of Canada in Lake of the
Woods, hereby agree that this most southerly point of intersection, being in latitude 49°
boundary line heretofore referred to as the international boundary line between the
United States and the Dominion of Canada from the mouth of Pigeon River, at the
western shore of Lake Superior, to the northwesternmost point of Lake of the Woods
and the initial point of the boundary line heretofore referred to as the international
boundary between the United States and the Dominion of Canada from the
northwesternmost point of Lake of the Woods to the summit of the Rocky Mountains,
in lieu of the said northwesternmost point.
The aforesaid most southerly point shall be located and monumented by the
Commissioners appointed under the said Treaty of April 11, 1908, and shall be marked
by them on the chart or charts prepared in accordance with the provisions of Articles V
and VI of the said Treaty, and a detailed account of the work done by the
Commissioners in locating said point, together with a description of the character and
location of the several monuments erected, shall be included in the report or reports
prepared pursuant to the said Articles.
The point so defined and monumented shall be taken and deemed to be the terminus of
the boundary line heretofore referred to as the international boundary line between the
United States and the Dominion of Canada, from the mouth of Pigeon River, at the
western shore of Lake Superior, to the northwesternmost point of Lake of the Woods
and the initial point of the boundary line heretofore referred to as the international
boundary between the United States and the Dominion of Canada from the
northwesternmost point of Lake of the Woods to the summit of the Rocky Mountains.
ARTICLE II
Whereas Article VI of the Treaty concerning the boundary between the United States
and the Dominion of Canada concluded on April 11, 1908, between the United States
and Great Britain, provided for the relocation and repair of lost or damaged monuments
and for the establishment of additional monuments and boundary marks along the
courses of the international boundary between the United States and the Dominion of

Canada from the northwesternmost point of Lake of the Woods south to the 49th
parallel of north latitude and thence westward along said parallel of latitude to the
summit of the Rocky Mountains, as established under existing treaties and surveyed,
charted, and monumented by the Joint Commission appointed for that purpose by joint
action of the Contracting Parties in 1872; And whereas Article VI of the said Treaty
concluded on April 11, 1908, further provides that in carrying out the provisions of that
article the agreement stated in the protocol of the final meeting of the said Joint
Commission, dated May 29, 1876, should be observed, by which protocol it was agreed
that in the intervals between the monuments along the 49th parallel of north latitude the
boundary line has the curvature of a parallel of 49° north latitude; And whereas the
Commissioners appointed and acting under the provisions of Article VI of the said
Treaty of 1908 have marked the boundary line wherever necessary in the intervals
between the original monuments established by the said Joint Commission, appointed
in 1872, in accordance with the agreement stated in the Protocol of the final meeting,
dated May 29, 1876, of the Joint Commission aforesaid, and as set forth in Article VI
of the Treaty of 1908, by placing intermediate monuments on lines joining the original
monuments, which have in each case the curvature of a parallel of 49° north latitude;
And whereas the average distance between adjacent monuments as thus established or
reestablished along the 49th parallel of north latitude from Lake of the Woods to the
summit of the Rocky Mountains by the Commissioners acting under Article VI of the
Treaty of 1908 is one and one-third miles and therefore the deviation of the curve of the
49th parallel from a straight or right line joining adjacent monuments is, for this
average distance between monuments, only one-third of a foot, and in no case does the
actual deviation exceed one and eight-tenths feet; And whereas it is impracticable to
determine the course of a line having the curvature of a parallel of 49° north latitude on
the ground between the adjacent monuments which have been established or
reestablished by the Commissioners and the demarcation of the boundary would be
more thoroughly effective if the line between adjacent monuments be defined as a
straight or right line; And whereas it is desirable that the boundary at any point between
adjacent monuments may be conveniently ascertainable on the ground, the Contracting
Parties, in order to complete and render thoroughly effective the demarcation of the
boundary between the United States and the Dominion of Canada from the
northwesternmost point of Lake of the Woods to the summit of the Rocky Mountains,
hereby agree that the line heretofore referred to as the international boundary between
the United States and the Dominion of Canada from the northwesternmost point of
Lake of the Woods to the summit of the Rocky Mountains shall be defined as
consisting of a series of right or straight lines joining adjacent monuments as now
established or reestablished and as now laid down on charts by the Commissioners
acting under Article VI of the Treaty of 1908, in lieu of the definition set forth in the
agreement of the aforesaid Joint Commissioners, dated May 29, 1876, and quoted in
Article VI of the said Treaty of 1908, that in the intervals between the monuments the
line has the curvature of the parallel of 49° north latitude.

ARTICLE III
Whereas the Treaty concluded on May 21, 1910, between the United States and Great
Britain,7c defined the international boundary line between the United States and the
Dominion of Canada from a point in Passamaquoddy Bay lying between Treat Island
and Friar Head to the middle of Grand Manan Channel and provided that the location
of the line so defined should be laid down and marked by the Commissioners appointed
under the Treaty of April 11, 1908; And whereas it has been found by the surveys
executed pursuant to the said Treaty of May 21, 1910, that the terminus of the boundary
line defined by said Treaty at the middle of Grand Manan Channel is less than three
nautical miles distant both from the shore line of Grand Manan Island in the Dominion
of Canada and from the shore line of the State of Maine in the United States, and that
there is a small zone of waters of controvertible jurisdiction in Grand Manan Channel
between said terminus and the High Seas; The Contracting Parties, in order completely
to define the boundary line between the United States and the Dominion of Canada in
the Grand Manan Channel, hereby agree that an additional course shall be extended
from the terminus of the boundary line defined by the said Treaty of May 21, 1910,
meters, through the middle of Grand Manan Channel, to the High Seas.
The course so defined shall be located and marked by the Commissioners appointed
under the Treaty of April 11, 1908, and shall be laid down by them on the chart or
charts adopted in accordance with the provisions of Article I of the said Treaty, and a
detailed account of the work done by the Commissioners in locating and marking said
line, together with a description of the several monuments erected, shall be included in
the report or reports prepared pursuant to Article I of the Treaty of April 11, 1908.
The course so defined and laid down shall be taken and deemed to be the boundary line
between the United States and the Dominion of Canada in Grand Manan Channel from
the terminus of the boundary line as defined by the Treaty of May 21, 1910, to the High
Seas.
ARTICLE IV
Whereas, pursuant to existing treaties between the United States and Great Britain, a
survey and effective demarcation of the boundary line between the United States and
the Dominion of Canada through the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River and
through the Straits of Georgia, Haro, and Juan de Fuca from the 49th Parallel to the
Pacific Ocean and between Alaska and the Dominion of Canada from the Arctic Ocean
to Mount St. Elias have been made and the signed joint maps and reports in respect
thereto have been filed with the two governments; And whereas a survey and effective
demarcation of the boundary line between the United States and the Dominion of
Canada from the Gulf of Georgia to Lake Superior and from the St. Lawrence River to

the Atlantic Ocean and between Alaska and the Dominion of Canada from Mount St.
Elias to Cape Muzon are nearing completion; And whereas boundary monuments
deteriorate and at times are destroyed or damaged; and boundary vistas become closed
by the growth of timber;
And whereas changing conditions require from time to time that the boundary be
marked more precisely and plainly by the establishment of additional monuments or
the relocation of existing monuments; The Contracting Parties, in order to provide for
the maintenance of an effective boundary line between the United States and the
Dominion of Canada and between Alaska and the Dominion of Canada, as established
or to be established and for the determination of the location of any point thereof,
which may become necessary in the settlement of any question that may arise between
the two governments hereby agree that the Commissioners appointed under the
provisions of the Treaty of April 11, 1908, are hereby jointly empowered and directed:
to inspect the various sections of the boundary line between the United States and the
Dominion of Canada and between Alaska and the Dominion of Canada at such times as
they shall deem necessary; to repair all damaged monuments and buoys; to relocate and
rebuild monuments which have been destroyed; to keep the boundary vistas open; to
move boundary monuments to new sites and establish such additional monuments and
buoys as they shall deem desirable; to maintain at all times an effective boundary line
between the United States and the Dominion of Canada and between Alaska and the
Dominion of Canada, as defined by the present treaty and treaties heretofore
concluded, or hereafter to be concluded; and to determine the location of any point of
the boundary line which may become necessary in the settlement of any question that
may arise between the two governments.
The said Commissioners shall submit to their respective governments from time to
time, at least once in every calendar year, a joint report containing a statement of the
inspections made, the monuments and buoys repaired, relocated, rebuilt, moved, and
established, and the mileage and location of vistas opened, and shall submit with their
reports, plats and tables certified and signed by the Commissioners, giving the
locations and geodetic positions of all monuments moved and all additional monuments
established within the year, and such other information as may be necessary to keep the
boundary maps and records accurately revised.
After the completion of the survey and demarcation of the boundary line between the
United States and the Dominion of Canada from the Gulf of Georgia to Lake Superior
and from the St. Lawrence River to the Atlantic Ocean, as provided for by the Treaty of
April 11, 1908, the Commissioners appointed under the provisions of that Treaty shall
continue to carry out the provisions of this Article, and, upon the death, resignation, or
other disability of either of them, the Party on whose side the vacancy occurs shall
appoint an Expert Geographer or Surveyor as Commissioner, who shall have the same
powers and duties in respect to carrying out the provisions of this Article, as are

conferred by this Article upon the Commissioner appointed under the provisions of the
said Treaty of 1908.
The Contracting Parties further agree that each government shall pay the salaries and
expenses of its own commissioner and his assistants, and that the expenses jointly
incurred by the Commissioners in maintaining the demarcation of the boundary line in
accordance with the provisions of this Article shall be borne equally by the two
Governments.
ARTICLE V
This treaty shall be ratified by the Contracting Parties and the ratifications shall be
exchanged in Washington or Ottawa as soon as practicable. The treaty shall take effect
on the date of the exchange of ratifications.
Upon the expiration of six years from the date of the exchange of ratifications of the
present treaty, or any time thereafter, Article IV may be terminated upon twelve
months’ written notice given by either Contracting Party to the other, and following
such termination the Commissioners therein mentioned and their successors shall cease
to perform the functions thereby prescribed.
In faith whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this treaty in duplicate
and have hereunto affixed their seals.
Done at Washington the 24th day of February, A. D. 1925.
[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
[SEAL] ERNEST LAPOINTE

Convention and protocol between the United
States and Canada to regulate the level of
the Lake of the Woods
[388] Convention Between the United States of America and Great Britain in
Respect of the Dominion of Canada, Signed at Washington, February 24, 1925
In faith whereof the above named Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention
and affixed thereto their respective seals. Done in duplicate at Washington, the 24th day
of February, 1925.
Treaty Series No. 721
[389] Protocol Accompanying the Convention To Regulate the Level of the Lake of
the Woods
Done in duplicate at Washington the 24th day of February, 1925.
Treaty Series No. 721
[390] Agreement Accompanying the Convention and Protocol To Regulate the
Level of the Lake of the Woods
In witness whereof the undersigned have signed this Agreement at Washington this
24th day of February, 1925.
Treaty Series No. 721

Treaty Series No. 721
[Document 388]
Convention Between the United States of America and Great Britain in
Respect of the Dominion of Canada, Signed at Washington, February 24,
19258
The United States of America, and His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of
India, in respect of the Dominion of Canada,
Desiring to regulate the level of Lake of the Woods in order to secure to the inhabitants
of the United States and Canada the most advantageous use of the waters thereof and of
the waters flowing into and from the Lake on each side of the boundary between the
two countries, and Accepting as a basis of agreement the recommendations made by
the International Joint Commission in its final report of May 18th, 1917,9 on the
Reference concerning Lake of the Woods submitted to it by the Governments of the
United States of America and Canada, Have resolved to conclude a Convention for that
purpose and have accordingly named as their plenipotentiaries: The President of the
United States of America: Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United
States; and His Britannic Majesty, in respect of the Dominion of Canada: The
Honorable Ernest Lapointe, K. C., a member of His Majesty’s Privy Council for
Canada and Minister of Justice in the Government of that Dominion; Who, having
communicated to each other their full powers, found in good and due form, have
agreed as follows: ARTICLE I
In the present Convention, the term “level of Lake of the Woods” or “level of the lake”
means the level of the open lake unaffected by wind or currents.
The term “Lake of the Woods watershed” means the entire region in which the waters
discharged at the outlets of Lake of the Woods have their natural source.
The term “sea level datum” means the datum permanently established by the
International Joint Commission at the town of Warroad, Minnesota, of which the
description is as follows: “Top of copper plug in concrete block carried below frost
line, and located near fence in front of and to the west of new schoolhouse. Established
“The International Joint Commission” means the Commission established under the
Treaty signed at Washington on the 11th day of January, 1909,10 between the United

States of America and His Britannic Majesty, relating to boundary waters and questions
arising between the United States and Canada.

ARTICLE II
The level of Lake of the Woods shall be regulated to the extent and in the manner
provided for in the present Convention, with the object of securing to the inhabitants of
the United States and Canada the most advantageous use of the waters thereof and of
the waters flowing into and from the Lake on each side of the boundary between the
two countries for domestic and sanitary purposes, for navigation purposes, for fishing
purposes, and for power, irrigation and reclamation purposes.
ARTICLE III
The Government of Canada shall establish and maintain a Canadian Lake of the Woods
Control Board, composed of engineers, which shall regulate and control the outflow of
the waters of Lake of the Woods.
There shall be established and maintained an International Lake of the Woods Control
Board composed of two engineers, one appointed by the Government of the United
States and one by the Government of Canada from their respective public services, and
whenever the level of the lake rises above elevation 1061 sea level datum or falls below
elevation 1056 sea level datum the rate of total discharge of water from the lake shall
be subject to the approval of this Board.
ARTICLE IV
The level of Lake of the Woods shall ordinarily be maintained between elevations 1056
and 1061.25 sea level datum, and between these two elevations the regulation shall be
such as to ensure the highest continuous uniform discharge of water from the lake.
During periods of excessive precipitation the total discharge of water from the lake
shall, upon the level reaching elevation 1061 sea level datum, be so regulated as to
ensure that the extreme high level of the lake shall at no time exceed elevation 1062.5
sea level datum.
The level of the lake shall at no time be reduced below elevation 1056 sea level datum
except during periods of low precipitation and then only upon the approval of the
International Lake of the Woods Control Board and subject to such conditions and
limitations as may be necessary to protect the use of the waters of the lake for
domestic, sanitary, navigation and fishing purposes.

ARTICLE V
If in the opinion of the International Lake of the Woods Control Board the experience
gained in the regulation of the lake under Articles III and IV, or the provision of
additional facilities for the storage of waters tributary to the lake, demonstrates that it is
practicable to permit the upper limit of the ordinary range in the levels of the lake to be
raised from elevation 1061.25 sea level datum to a higher level and at the same time to
prevent during periods of excessive precipitation the extreme high level of the lake
from exceeding elevation 1062.5 sea level datum, this shall be permitted under such
conditions as the International Lake of the Woods Control Board may prescribe. Should
such permission be granted, the level at which under Article III the rate of total
discharge of water from the lake becomes subject to the approval of the International
Lake of the Woods Control Board may, upon the recommendation of that Board and
with the approval of the International Joint Commission, be raised from elevation 1061
sea level datum to a correspondingly higher level.
ARTICLE VI
Any disagreement between the members of the International Lake of the Woods
Control Board as to the exercise of the functions of the Board under Articles III, IV,
and V shall be immediately referred by the Board to the International Joint
Commission whose decision shall be final.
ARTICLE VII
The outflow capacity of the outlets of Lake of the Woods shall be so enlarged as to
permit the discharge of not less than forty-seven thousand cubic feet of water per
second (47,000 c. f. s.) when the level of the lake is at elevation 1061 sea level datum.
The necessary works for this purpose, as well as the necessary works and dams for
controlling and regulating the outflow of the water, shall be provided for at the instance
of the Government of Canada, either by the improvement of existing works and dams
or by the construction of additional works.
ARTICLE VIII
A flowage easement shall be permitted up to elevation 1064 sea level datum upon all
lands bordering on Lake of the Woods in the United States, and the United States
assumes all liability to the owners of such lands for the costs of such easement.
The Government of the United States shall provide for the following protective works
and measures in the United States along the shores of Lake of the Woods and the banks
of Rainy River, in so far as such protective works and measures may be necessary for
the purposes of the regulation of the level of the lake under the present Convention:

namely, the removal or protection of buildings injuriously affected by erosion, and the
protection of the banks at the mouth of Warroad River where subject to erosion, in so
far in both cases as the erosion results from fluctuations in the level of the lake; the
alteration of the railway embankment east of the town of Warroad, Minnesota, in so far
as it may be necessary to prevent surface flooding of the higher lands in and around the
town of Warroad; the making of provision for the increased cost, if any, of operating
the existing sewage system of the town of Warroad, and the protection of the waterfront
at the town of Baudette, Minnesota.
ARTICLE IX
The United States and the Dominion of Canada shall each on its own side of the
boundary assume responsibility for any damage or injury which may have heretofore
resulted to it or to its inhabitants from the fluctuations of the level of Lake of the
Woods or of the outflow therefrom.
Each shall likewise assume responsibility for any damage or injury which may
hereafter result to it or to its inhabitants from the regulation of the level of Lake of the
Woods in the manner provided for in the present Convention.
ARTICLE X
The Governments of the United States and Canada shall each be released from
responsibility for any claims or expenses arising in the territory of the other in
connection with the matters provided for in Articles VII, VIII, and IX.
In consideration, however, of the undertakings of the United States as set forth in
Article VIII, the Government of Canada shall pay to the Government of the United
States the sum of two hundred and seventy-five thousand dollars ($275,000) in
currency of the United States. Should this sum prove insufficient to cover the cost of
such undertakings one-half of the excess of such cost over the said sum shall, if the
expenditure be incurred within five years of the coming into force of the present
Convention, be paid by the Government of Canada.
ARTICLE XI
No diversion shall henceforth be made of any waters from the Lake of the Woods
watershed to any other watershed except by authority of the United States or the
Dominion of Canada within their respective territories and with the approval of the
International Joint Commission.

ARTICLE XII

The present Convention shall be ratified in accordance with the constitutional methods
of the High Contracting Parties and shall take effect on the exchange of the
ratifications, which shall take place at Washington or Ottawa as soon as possible.
In faith whereof the above named Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention
and affixed thereto their respective seals. Done in duplicate at Washington, the 24th day
of February, 1925.
[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
[SEAL] ERNEST LAPOINTE
9 Final Report of International Joint Commission on Lake of the Woods Levels
(Washington, Government Printing Office, 1917).

Treaty Series No. 721
[Document 389]
Protocol Accompanying the Convention To Regulate the Level of the Lake
of the Woods
At the moment of signing the Convention between the United States of America, and
His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the
British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, in respect of the Dominion of
Canada, regarding the regulation of the level of Lake of the Woods, the undersigned
Plenipotentiaries have agreed as follows:
1. The plans of the necessary works for the enlargement of the outflow
capacity of the outlets of Lake of the Woods provided for in Article VII of the
Convention, as well as of the necessary works and dams for controlling and
regulating the outflow of the water, shall be referred to the International Lake
of the Woods Control Board for an engineering report upon their suitability
and sufficiency for the purpose of permitting the discharge of not less than
forty-seven thousand cubic feet of water per second (47,000 c. f. s.) when the
level of the lake is at elevation 1061 sea level datum. Any disagreement
between the members of the International Lake of the Woods Control Board
in regard to the matters so referred shall be immediately submitted by the
Board to the International Joint Commission whose decision shall be final.
2. Should it become necessary to set up a special tribunal to determine the
cost of the acquisition of the flowage easement in the United States provided
for in Article VIII of the Convention, the Government of Canada shall be
afforded an opportunity to be represented thereon. Should the cost be
determined by means of the usual judicial procedure in the United States, the
Government of Canada shall be given the privilege of representation by
counsel in connection therewith.
3. Since Canada is incurring extensive financial obligations in connection
with the protective works and measures provided for in the United States
along the shores of Lake of the Woods and the banks of Rainy River, under
Article VIII of the Convention, the plans, together with the estimates of cost,
of all such protective works and measures as the Government of the United
States may propose to construct or provide for within five years of the
coming into force of the Convention shall be referred to the International
Lake of the Woods Control Board for an engineering report upon their
suitability and sufficiency for the purpose of the regulation of the level of the

lake under the Convention. Any disagreement between the members of the
International Lake of the Woods Control Board in regard to the matters so
referred shall be immediately submitted by the Board to the International
Joint Commission whose decision shall be final.
4. In order to ensure the fullest measure of cooperation between the
International Lake of the Woods Control Board and the Canadian Lake of the
Woods Control Board provided for in Article III of the Convention, the
Government of Canada will appoint one member of the Canadian Board as
its representative on the International Board.
5. Until the outlets of Lake of the Woods have been enlarged in accordance
with Article VII of the Convention, the upper limit of the ordinary range in
the levels of the lake provided for in Article IV of the Convention shall be
elevation 1060.5 sea level datum, and the International Lake of the Woods
Control Board may advise the Canadian Lake of the Woods Control Board in
respect of the rate of total discharge of water from the lake which may be
permitted.
In faith whereof the undersigned Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Protocol and
affixed thereto their respective seals.
Done in duplicate at Washington the 24th day of February, 1925.
[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
[SEAL] ERNEST LAPOINTE

Treaty Series No. 721
[Document 390]
Agreement Accompanying the Convention and Protocol To Regulate the
Level of the Lake of the Woods
At the moment of signing the Convention and Protocol between the United States of
America and His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, in respect of the
Dominion of Canada, regarding the regulation of the level of Lake of the Woods, the
undersigned Plenipotentiaries have agreed that the Government of the United States
and the Government of the Dominion of Canada shall, without delay, address to the
International Joint Commission identic letters of reference relating to Rainy Lake and
other upper waters of the Lake of the Woods watershed as follows:
“I have the honor to inform you that, in pursuance of Article 9 of the Treaty
of the 11th January 1909, between the United States and Great Britain, the
Governments of the United States and Canada have agreed to refer to the
International Joint Commission the following questions for examination and
report, together with such conclusions and recommendations as may be
deemed appropriate:
“Question 1. In order to secure the most advantageous use of the
waters of Rainy Lake and of the boundary waters flowing into and
from Rainy Lake, for domestic and sanitary purposes, for
navigation purposes, for fishing purposes, and for power, irrigation
and reclamation purposes; and in order to secure the most
advantageous use of the shores and harbors of both Rainy Lake and
the boundary waters flowing into and from the lake, is it, from an
economic standpoint, now practicable and desirable, having regard
for all or any of the interests affected thereby, or under what
conditions will it become thus practicable and desirable—
“(a) To regulate the level of Rainy Lake in such a manner
as to permit the upper limit of the ordinary range of the
levels to exceed elevation 1108.61 sealevel datum?
“(b) To regulate the level of Namakan Lake and the
waters controlled by the dams at Kettle falls in such a
manner as to permit the upper limit of the ordinary range
of the levels to exceed elevation 1120.11 sealevel datum?

“(c) To provide storage facilities upon all or any of the
boundary waters above Namakan Lake?
“Question 2. If it be found practicable and desirable thus (1) to
regulate the level of Rainy Lake, and/or (2) to regulate the level of
Namakan Lake and the waters controlled by the dams at Kettle
falls, and/or (3) to provide storage facilities upon all or any of the
boundary waters above Namakan Lake—
“(a) What elevations are recommended?
“(b) To what extent will it be necessary to acquire lands
and to construct works in order to provide for such
elevations and/or storage, and what will be their
respective costs?
“(c) What interests on each side of the boundary would
be benefited? What would be the nature and extent of
such benefit in each case? How should the cost be
apportioned among the various interests so benefited?
“Question 3. What methods of control and operation would be
feasible and advisable in order to regulate the volume, use and
outflow of the waters in each case in accordance with such
recommendations as may be made in answer to questions one and
two?
“Question 4. What interests on each side of the boundary are
benefited by the present storage on Rainy Lake and on the waters
controlled by the dams at Kettle falls? What are the nature and
extent of such benefits in each case? What is the cost of such
storage and how should such cost be apportioned among the
various interests so benefited?
“Each Government will appoint from its public service such engineering and
other technical assistance as may be necessary to enable the Commission to
make the desired examination and to submit their report.”
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned have signed this Agreement at Washington this 24th day of
February, 1925.
CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
Secretary of State of the United States of America

ERNEST LAPOINTE
Minister of Justice in the Government of the Dominion of Canada
Continued
protests
by
the
Canadian
Government against increased diversion of
the waters of the Great Lakes11
[391] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
Washington, February 13, 1925.
[392] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
Washington, February 24, 1925.
[393] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
Washington, March 21, 1925.
[394] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
Washington, May 7, 1925.
[395] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, June 15, 1925.

[396] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[397] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
Washington, November 24, 1925.

[Document 391]
The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, February 13, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to transmit herewith for your information a copy of a notice
of a hearing which will be held in the office of the Secretary of War on February 20,
1925, on an application made by the Sanitary District of Chicago for a permit to divert
an annual average of ten thousand cubic feet of water per second from Lake Michigan.
Accept [etc.]
JOSEPH C. GREW
[Enclosure]
Notice Issued by the Secretary of War (Weeks) of a Hearing To Be Held on February 20, 1925
FEBRUARY 10, 1925.
The Secretary of War will hold a hearing in his office at eleven A.M., February 20,
for a permit to divert an annual average of 10,000 cubic feet per second of water from
Lake Michigan.
He now has under consideration the question of issuing a permit, covering a period of
five years, to the Sanitary District, to divert from Lake Michigan, through its main
drainage canal and auxiliary channels, an amount of water not to exceed an annual
average of 8,500 cubic feet per second, with an instantaneous maximum not to exceed
11,000 cubic feet per second—the permit to be made conditional upon the following:
(1) The Sanitary District of Chicago shall submit for approval and carry out a
program of sewage treatment by artificial processes which will provide the
equivalent of the complete (100%) treatment of the sewage of a human
population of 1,200,000 before the expiration of the permit, proper credit to
be given for all completed portions of projects which are a part of its sewage
treatment program.
(2) The Sanitary District shall pay its share of the cost of such regulating or
compensating works to restore the levels or compensate for the lowering of

the Great Lakes, if and when constructed, and post a guarantee in the way of
a bond or certified check in the amount of $1,000,000 as an evidence of its
good faith in this matter.
(3) The execution of the sewage treatment program and the diversion of
water from Lake Michigan shall be under the supervision of the U. S. District
Engineer at Chicago, and the diversion of water from Lake Michigan shall be
under his direct control in times of flood on the Illinois and Des Plaines
Rivers.
(4) If, within six months after the issuance of this permit, the City of Chicago
does not adopt a program for metering at least ninety percent of its water
service and provide for the execution of said program at the average rate of
ten percent per annum thereafter, this permit may be revoked without notice.
The Secretary desires that the discussion at the hearing be limited strictly to the matter
contained in the application for the permit, that is, the amount of water to be granted to
Chicago and the conditions upon which the issuance of a permit should be contingent.
As the time which can be given each side for the hearing is limited, it is desired that the
number of speakers be limited to as few as practicable, and it is hoped that the
proponents and opponents of the application will select their speakers with this object
in view.

[Document 392]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, February 24, 1925.
No. 198
SIR: I have the honor to refer to your note of the 13th instant, and to inform you that the
Government of Canada have observed that public hearings have recently been held by
the War Department in Washington on an application made by the Sanitary District of
Chicago for permission to increase the quantity of water which that District is now
permitted to divert from Lake Michigan under authority of the Secretary of War and
that the question whether, in accordance with the recommendation of the Chief
Engineer, the amount permitted to be diverted should, under certain conditions, be
increased to 8,500 cubic feet per second instead of 4,167 cubic feet per second, to
which the Sanitary District is limited under a recent judgment of the Supreme Court of
the United States, was also considered.
The Dominion Government now desire me to state that, while they would not wish to
oppose any interim measure which may be necessary to protect the health of the
inhabitants of the city of Chicago, they feel compelled to reiterate the protest they have
already made against the abstraction of water from the St. Lawrence basin12 and, in
order that there may be no misunderstanding, I desire to take this opportunity of
making it clear that the Government of Canada do not surrender any claims that might
be put forward for consequential losses already suffered or which may possibly be
suffered in the future on this account. The Dominion Government are of opinion that it
is impossible to lose sight of the fact that the effect of the present increase in permitted
diversion of water will be to postpone the relief for which the navigation and other
interests injuriously affected by the attitude of the Chicago Sanitary District have been
waiting already too long, and which, subject only to the paramount necessity of
safeguarding public health, these interests are now entitled to receive.
I feel sure that you will readily appreciate that the injury to Canadian interests by any
lowering of the natural level of the Great Lakes connecting waters and the St.
Lawrence River by the diminution of their natural water supply is of constantly
increasing importance not only on account of navigation on the Great Lakes and lower
St. Lawrence River but also on account of power development. The Government of
Canada have not failed to recognise that United States interests are likewise
substantially affected by this question.

The Government of Canada feel confident that the Government of the United States is
fully alive to the advisability of restricting within the narrowest possible limit the
amount of water to be diverted from Lake Michigan for use by the Sanitary District of
Chicago, and in this connection, they feel certain that no permit will be granted for the
diversion of any water not essential to safeguarding the health of the population of that
city, and, further, that the period during which such diversion must on this account
continue, will be made as short as circumstances permit.

I should be most grateful if you would be so good as to communicate the contents of
this note to the interested authorities of the United States Government.
I have [etc.]
ESME HOWARD

[Document 393]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, March 21, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: Referring to my predecessor’s note of February 26, 1925,13 informing you that
of War, I have the honor to inform you that under date of March 3, 1925, a permit was
issued by the Secretary of War to the Sanitary District of Chicago authorizing the
temporary withdrawal from Lake Michigan of 8,500 cubic feet of water per second
until December 31, 1929, subject to certain specific conditions which are set forth in
the permit.
The permit issued by the Secretary of War, a copy of which is enclosed, was made
public on March 7, 1925.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
[Enclosure]
Permit Issued by the War Department to the Sanitary District of Chicago
making appropriations for the construction, repair, and preservation of certain public
works on rivers and harbors, and for other purposes,” it is provided that it shall not be
lawful to build or commence the building of any wharf, pier, dolphin, boom, weir,
breakwater, bulkhead, jetty, or other structures in any part, roadstead, haven, harbor,
canal, navigable river, or other water of the United States, outside established harbor
lines, or where no harbor lines have been established, except on plans recommended by
the Chief of Engineers and authorized by the Secretary of War; and it shall not be
lawful to excavate or fill, or in any manner to alter or modify the course, location,
condition or capacity of any port, roadstead, haven, harbor, canal, lake, harbor of
refuge, or in-closure within the limits of any breakwater, or of the channel of any
navigable water of the United States, unless the work has been recommended by the
Chief of Engineers and authorized by the Secretary of War prior to beginning the same;
AND WHEREAS, Application has been made to the Secretary of War by the Sanitary District of
Chicago, Illinois, for authority to divert an annual average of 10,000 cubic feet of water

per second from Lake Michigan through the channels of said Sanitary District; AND
WHEREAS, In the judgment of the Secretary of War, an annual average diversion of more
than 8,500 cubic feet per second should not now be permitted; NOW THEREFORE, this is to
certify that, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Engineers, the Secretary of War,
under the provisions of the aforesaid statute, hereby authorizes the said Sanitary
District of Chicago to divert from Lake Michigan, through its main drainage canal and
auxiliary channels, an amount of water not to exceed an annual average of 8,500 cubic
feet per second, the instantaneous maximum not to exceed 11,000 cubic feet per
second, upon the following conditions:
1. That there shall be no unreasonable interference with navigation by the
work herein authorized.
2. That if inspections or any other operations by the United States are
necessary in the interests of navigation, all expenses connected therewith
shall be borne by the permittee.
3. That no attempt shall be made by the permittee or the owner to forbid the
full and free use by the public of any navigable waters of the United States.
4. That the Sanitary District of Chicago shall carry out a program of sewage
treatment by artificial processes which will provide the equivalent of the
complete (100%) treatment of the sewage of a human population of at least
1,200,000 before the expiration of the permit.
5. That the Sanitary District shall pay its share of the cost of regulating or
compensating works to restore the levels or compensate for the lowering of
the Great Lakes system, if and when constructed, and post a guarantee in the
way of a bond or certified check in the amount of $1,000,000 as an evidence
of its good faith in this matter.
6. That the Sanitary District shall submit for the approval of the Chief of
Engineers and the Secretary of War plans for controlling works to prevent the
discharge of the Chicago River into Lake Michigan in times of heavy storms.
These works shall be constructed, in accordance with the approved plans and
shall be completed and ready for operation by July 1, 1929.
7. That the execution of the sewage treatment program and the diversion of
water from Lake Michigan shall be under the supervision of the U. S. District
Engineer at Chicago, and the diversion of water from Lake Michigan shall be
under his direct control in times of flood on the Illinois and Des Plaines
Rivers.

8. That if, within six months after the issuance of this permit, the City of
Chicago does not adopt a program for metering at least ninety per cent of its
water service and provide for the execution of said program at the average
rate of ten per cent per annum, thereafter, this permit may be revoked without
notice.
9. That if, in the judgment of the Chief of Engineers and the Secretary of
War, sufficient progress has not been made by the end of each calendar year
in the program of sewage treatment prescribed herein so as to insure full
compliance with the provisions of condition 4, this permit may be revoked
without notice.
10. That this permit is revocable at the will of the Secretary of War, and is
subject to such action as may be taken by Congress.
11. That this permit, if not previously revoked or specifically extended, shall
cease and be null and void on December 31, 1929.
WITNESS my hand this 3rd day of March, 1925.
H. TAYLOR
Major General, Chief of Engineers
WITNESS my hand this 3rd day of March, 1925.
JOHN W. WEEKS
Secretary of War
13 Not printed.

[Document 394]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 7, 1925.
No. 467
SIR: In your note of March 21st last you were so good as to inform me that a permit had
been granted on the 3rd of that month by the Secretary of War to the Trustees of the
Sanitary District of Chicago authorising a diversion from Lake Michigan, through its
main drainage canal and auxiliary channels, of an amount of water not to exceed an
annual average of 8,500 cubic feet per second, the instantaneous maximum not to
exceed 11,000 cubic feet per second.
I now have the honour to inform you that before considering further the situation
resulting from the decision of the Secretary of War to allow an increase of the flow
through the main drainage canal and auxiliaries beyond the limit of 4,167 cubic feet per
second specified in the permit of 30th June, 1910, and the consequences to navigation,
power and other interests on the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence waterway system
resulting from this continued diversion, against which the Government of Canada have
been compelled to protest repeatedly and against which they must still protest, the
Dominion Government desire to ascertain precisely the extent to which the new permit
will modify the actual conditions which obtained during the year immediately
preceding the 3rd March, 1925.
Inasmuch as previous permits on the part of the Secretary of War have authorised a
certain total flow in the main canal and auxiliary channels, either by direct limitation of
flow or by authorization of channel capacity, the Government of Canada interpret the
permit of March 3rd last as having been issued on a similar basis, with the sole
exception that modification has been made in the total amount of water specified. In
other words, the flow permitted under previous permits included all waters from
whatever source passing Lockport, and under the permit of 3rd March, 1925, this flow
is not to exceed an annual average of 8,500 cubic feet per second.
The Government of Canada would, therefore, appreciate being advised as follows:—
First,—What has been the actual average flow of the water passing Lockport
during the year ending 3rd March, 1925;

Second,—By what amount will this average flow of water passing Lockport
be immediately reduced under the terms of the permit of 3rd of March;
Third,—By what amount will this average flow be further reduced by 31st of
December, 1929, the date upon which the new permit terminates.
I have [etc.]
(For the Ambassador)
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 395]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, June 15, 1925.
water from Lake Michigan by the Sanitary District of Chicago, I have the honor to
furnish you with the following information in reply to the inquiries made by the
Canadian Government:
First: The actual average flow of the water passing Lockport during the year
Second: This average flow of water passing Lockport will not be
immediately reduced by any amount under the terms of the permit issued by
the Secretary of War on March 3, 1925.
Third: This average flow may be reduced by December 31, 1929, by an
amount varying from 1,750 to 3,000 cubic feet per second.
By way of explanation of the wide range over which the amount of reduction by
December 31, 1929, varies, it should be stated that the amount of reduction depends
upon the decrease in the sewage load on the water in the Drainage Canal. The permit
prescribes that a minimum population of 1,200,000 be provided with the equivalent of
100% treatment. The program of sewage treatment plant construction contemplates the
completion of plants which will give 100% treatment to a population of slightly over
1,400,000. If this program is carried to completion a larger reduction may be made in
the flow than if only the requirements of the permit are carried out.
Furthermore, when the controlling works which are required to be placed in the
Chicago River or Drainage Canal to prevent reversals into Lake Michigan in times of
flood are completed and in operation it may be found practicable to make a much larger
reduction in the flow of water with safety to the water supply of the City of Chicago
during winter season, a time when the oxygen content of the diluting water is much
higher than it is during the summer season.
It is also expected that there will be a substantial reduction in the amount of water
consumed in the locality for domestic purposes as the result of a requirement of the
permit of March 3, 1925, which makes it necessary for the City of Chicago to adopt

and carry into execution a program of metering its water supply. By December 31,
The net result of all these varying influences will be to make it possible to reduce the
average flow by a minimum amount of 1,750 cubic feet per second and possibly by the
maximum amount of 3,000 cubic feet per second.
To explain the apparent inconsistency between the amount of water specified in the
permit (8,500 cubic feet per second measured at the intakes) and the flow at Lockport
(9,700 cubic feet per second) it might be stated that the difference represents the
amount of domestic water consumption by the City of Chicago which could not be
authorized or included properly in a permit issued to the Sanitary District of Chicago, a
separate municipality, other than to make the permit non-operative in case of failure on
the part of the former agency to adopt certain measures of conservation which were
of this portion of the flow in the Chicago Drainage Canal, at the same time condition 4
makes possible a reduction in the amount of water used for dilution of sewage.
Accept [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW

[Document 396]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., September 15, 1925.
[Received September 17.]
No. 813
SIR: At the request of the Governor General of Canada I have the honour to inform you
that the Government of Canada has carefully considered your note of June the 15th last
on the subject of the interpretation of the permit granted by the United States Secretary
of War on the 3rd of March, 1925, for the diversion of water from Lake Michigan by
the Sanitary District of Chicago.
The Government of Canada is constrained to point out that despite repeated protests
against the diversion of water from Lake Michigan, the above-mentioned permit of
March 3rd, 1925, authorizes a diversion in amount over twice that stipulated in any
previous permits.
In this connection I have the honour to state that the Canadian Government also views
with apprehension the interpretation which has been placed upon the permit in your
note under reference. As set forth in the note which I had the honour to address to you
on this subject on May the 7th last, the Government of Canada believed that the present
permit, as in the case of previous permits, would limit the amount of the total diversion
and be applicable to all waters passing Lockport. The interpretation of the permit of the
3rd March, 1925, as contained in your note under reference, would indicate, however,
that the point of measurement is changed from Lockport to the intake works of the
Sanitary District and through such change the permit recognizes an actual diversion
much in excess of the stipulated amount of 8,500 second feet set forth in the permit. In
other words, it is clearly stated that the permit does not embrace water diverted by the
City of Chicago’s pumping stations which at the present rate of pumping amounts to
some 1200 second feet thereby increasing the authorized diversion from 8,500 second
feet to 9,700 second feet.
In addition, it would appear that if measurement be made at the intake from Lake
Michigan the result would be to exclude from the operations of the permit the
intercepted flow of the Chicago and Little Calumet Rivers, which varies in amount but
is equal, it is understood, to an annual average of about 1300 second feet. In these
circumstances it would appear that the effect of the permit of the 3rd March would not
merely authorize an average annual diversion of 9,700 second feet as above noted, but

would recognize and permit of a total diversion passing Lockport of 11,000 second
feet.
While it is understood from your note of June the 15th that the Government of the
United States anticipates that at the expiry of a five year period the annual diversion
may be reduced between 1,750 and 3,000 second feet, this is far from reassuring since
even if the larger suggested reduction becomes effective, the diversion at the beginning
of 1930 will still be almost double that authorized by the Secretary of War of the
United States when action for an injunction against the Sanitary District of Chicago
was commenced in 1908.

Furthermore, the Government of Canada would point out that works dependent on the
levels and flow of the Great Lakes System cannot be confidently projected or
economically carried out if diversions from the watershed are permitted without mutual
assent thereto. Moreover, in this connection the continued and increasing impairment
of the natural levels and discharge of the Great Lakes System, due to the diversion
from Lake Michigan, raises the question as to the extent to which the Canadian
Government would be warranted in giving consideration to any further improvements
therein until there is an assurance of definite curtailment of such diversion.
In connection with this matter the attention of the Canadian Government has been
called to a permit dated the 30th April, 1925, from the United States Acting Secretary
of War, authorizing the Sanitary District of Chicago to carry out certain dredging work
in the Calumet river system, which it is understood will involve an expenditure of
$1,500,000 and enable the Calumet-Sag Channel to bypass 2000 second feet into the
main drainage canal. If the report of this large expenditure is correct, it would appear to
indicate that the Sanitary District is proceeding in expectation of continued diversion.
The Canadian Government is therefore compelled to conclude that despite repeated
protests no immediate or definite reduction has been provided and, furthermore, that if
the above interpretation of the permit of 3rd March, 1925, is confirmed, the effect will
actually be to authorize a greater diversion than is now being made.
I accordingly have the honour to request that you will be so good as to communicate
the above consideration to the competent authorities of the United States Government
and to enquire whether it is not their intention to take measures to ensure immediate as
well as more definite and more substantial future curtailment in the amount of water
which is being diverted with such serious results from the Great Lakes and St.
Lawrence System.
I have [etc.]

H. G. Cuno

[Document 397]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, November 24, 1925.
bringing to my attention certain remarks and inquiries of the Canadian Government in
regard to the diversion of water from Lake Michigan by the Sanitary District of
Chicago, I take pleasure in submitting the following statements:
The Sanitary District of Chicago to which the permit of March 3, 1925, was issued by
the Secretary of War, is a municipal corporation separate and distinct from the City of
Chicago. The operations of the Sanitary District are conducted under direct authority of
the legislature of the State of Illinois without reference to the operations of the
municipal government of the City of Chicago. Diversion of water for domestic
consumption in the City of Chicago being purely a function of the municipal
government of the City, it is considered that the authority granted the Sanitary District
could not be made to apply to or include this other diversion as well. The case before
the Secretary of War for action involved the granting of a permit for diversion of water
for sanitary purposes only, and the instrument of authority was worded accordingly.
On the other hand, it seemed to the Secretary of War that the diversion of water for
domestic consumption by the City of Chicago was larger than it should be, and that the
amount wasted was not a negligible portion of the gross diversion. He also considered
that this excessive diversion for domestic purposes made the cost of sewage treatment
plant construction and operation unnecessarily high and consequently added to the
length of the construction period and the difficulties of financing. For these reasons the
Secretary of War took cognizance of the diversion for which the City of Chicago is
responsible, in a restrictive way, rather than by permissive means, and included a
condition in the permit making the instrument voidable in case the City of Chicago
fails to take specified steps looking to a curtailment in the amount of water diverted for
domestic purposes.
In the judgment of the Secretary of War the average diversion which should be
authorized for sanitary purposes under the conditions known to exist should be not less
than 8,500 cubic feet per second. The safety of the lives and health of citizens of the
locality cannot be disregarded, and until the conditions of the permit of March 3, 1925,
have been complied with no substantial reduction in the amount of diversion could be
made without endangering health if not life.

The expression “measured at the intakes”, used to designate the places where the total
actual flow should not exceed that specified in the permit, is hypothetical as it is
impracticable to measure the diversion at the numerous intakes with accuracy. For this
reason, the practical enforcement of the limitation placed upon the diversion will be
carried out at Lockport. Measurements taken there will determine the gross diversion,
sanitary and domestic, and, as accurate information is available in regard to the amount
of water pumped by the City of Chicago for domestic purposes, the sanitary diversion
may be computed by subtracting the domestic diversion from the gross flow at
Lockport.
The term “diversion” as used in the permit is construed to include the discharge of the
Chicago and Calumet Rivers. In view of the methods employed in computing the
amount of the diversion the discharge of these streams will be included within the
With reference to the permit issued on April 29, 1925, by the Acting Secretary of War,
authorizing the dredging of the Little Calumet River, attention is invited to the
following special condition attached thereto: “That this permit does not authorize and
should not be construed as authorizing or allowing any increase whatever in the
diversion of water from Lake Michigan authorized by permit issued to the Sanitary
District of Chicago by the Secretary of War March 3, 1925, nor as modifying in any
respect the conditions of that permit.”
The deepening of the Little Calumet River will give the Sanitary District of Chicago
better control over river reversals, for it will increase the discharge capacity of the
system at intermediate stages and insure protection of the water supply during these
critical periods. Since the total sanitary diversion is limited to an average of 8,500
cubic feet per second and an instantaneous maximum of 11,000 cubic feet per second,
if the Sanitary District chooses to pass 2,000 cubic feet per second through the Calumet
River and Sag Channel it will be required to reduce the amount diverted through its
other intakes to keep within the limitations placed by the permit of March 3, 1925.
The Canadian Government is correct in concluding that no immediate reduction in
diversions has been provided, but its conclusion that no definite reduction is assured
and that the effect of the permits will actually be to authorize a greater diversion than is
now being made cannot be confirmed. The gross flow at Lockport will not exceed an
has expired the gross flow may be reduced to 8,000 cubic feet per second and probably
to 6,700 cubic feet per second. The sewage treatment program of the Sanitary District
has been arranged, so as to make it possible to effect a reduction to a gross flow of
4,167 cubic feet per second by the year 1935 or before.

I shall be grateful if you will cause the foregoing statements to be brought to the
attention of the Canadian Government.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

Intimation by the Canadian Government of
its claim to sovereignty in the islands of the
North
[398] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
Washington, June 15, 1925.
[399] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, June 19, 1925.
[400] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[401] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, July 18, 1925.

[Document 398]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, June 15, 1925.
No. 627
SIR: I have the honour to inform you that the Government of Canada have reason to
believe, from statements which have lately appeared in the press, that a scientific
expedition, commonly referred to as the MacMillan expedition, organised under the
auspices of the National Geographical [Geographic] Society with the co-operation of
the United States Navy, will shortly be leaving for the far North for the purpose of
exploring and flying over Baffin, Ellesmere, Axel Heiberg and certain other islands
within the northern territories of the Dominion.
As you are doubtless aware, posts of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police have been
established in Baffin and Ellesmere islands and other sections of the Canadian northern
territories, in addition to which Police patrols through the Arctic islands have created
depots of provisions at various centres. There are also a number of Hudson Bay
Company posts in existence at island and mainland points.
In these circumstances, and although the Dominion Government have received no
intimation from the Government of the United States regarding the route of the
MacMillan expedition or of the intention of the members thereof to carry out
explorations through and over Canadian territory, they have requested me to inform
you of their readiness to furnish the expedition with the necessary permits for an
exploring and scientific expedition entering Canadian northern territories, and possibly
desiring to fly over Baffin, Ellesmere and the adjoining islands within the boundaries
of the Dominion. Legislation formally requiring scientific or exploring expeditions to
secure such permits before entering any part of the Canadian northern territories was
enacted by both Houses of Parliament this month.
I would also take this opportunity of assuring you of the Canadian Government’s
readiness to afford the MacMillan expedition any assistance within the power of the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the other Canadian officers in the north. In this
connection, I would add that the Dominion Government S. S. Arctic will sail at an early
date on her customary northern patrol, and will carry Royal Canadian Mounted Police
details and reliefs. This vessel will touch at various points and will visit the police and
trading posts on Ellesmere Island.

L have [etc.]
H.G. Cuntron

[Document 399]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, June 19, 1925.
concerning the proposed MacMillan Exploring Expedition. It is the understanding of
this Department that the Expedition in question will sail from Wiscasset, Maine, on
June 20, directly to Etah, Greenland, and that no flights over Baffin Island are
contemplated. The planes attached to the Expedition are expected to fly from Etah
across Ellesmere Island to Axel Heiberg Land, and to establish a base there from which
exploration flights to the northward and westward may be made.
A copy of your note has been forwarded to the other interested departments of this
Government and, upon receipt of further information, I shall address a communication
to you dealing with the other questions raised in your note.
In order that full information may be available for use in studying these questions, I
shall be grateful if you will inform me what constitutes a post of the Royal Mounted
Police mentioned in the second paragraph of your note and the establishment thereof;
where such posts have been established; how frequently they are visited; and whether
they are permanently occupied, and, if so, by whom.
I desire to thank you for the offer of cooperation by any Canadian agency which may
temporarily be in the same territory with the MacMillan Expedition and I am sure that
the persons responsible for the Expedition will also appreciate the kind offer of the
Canadian Government. The scientific character of the Expedition and the experience of
those participating in it give assurance that useful data and information of value to the
world will unquestionably result from their efforts.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 400]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., July 2, 1925.
[Received July 6.]
No. 676
SIR: In continuation of my note No. 627 of the 15th instant [ultimo], and in response to
the specific enquiries contained in your note of the 19th ultimo, I have the honour to
inform you that I have received the following particulars from the Governor General of
Canada regarding posts of the Royal Canadian Mounted police established in Baffin,
and Ellesmere islands and other sections of the Canadian Northern territories: A
Mounted Police post in so far as buildings are concerned is composed of a small
barracks to house members of the Force and separate buildings for storing supplies. In
so far as personnel is concerned, each post is in charge of a non-commissioned officer
with two or three constables for duty and patrols, and the necessary number of natives
to act as dog drivers, guides and interpreters.
The Posts established in the Eastern Arctic Sub-District include the following:—
Baffin Island
(1) Pangnirtung, Cumberland Sound,
(2) Ponds Inlet, on the North end of the island.
Devon Island
(1) Dundas Harbour.
Ellesmere Island
(1) Craig Harbour, (South of the island)
(2) Rice’s Strait, (near Cape Sabine).
All the above mentioned posts are permanently occupied by members of the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police, with the exception of Rice’s Strait, near Cape Sabine, where
stores only have been placed, pending the arrival of buildings for a permanent post and
personnel, which are being sent up this year.

The above Sub-District is in charge of a Commissioned officer of the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police who resides at any one of the posts, as circumstances demand. All the
posts are visited once a year by the Commissioned Officer mentioned and by the
officials of the Canadian Department of the Interior.
In regard to the duties of members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police stationed in
the Eastern Arctic, it may be added that all the Mounted Police Detachments in the
Eastern Arctic are Post Offices and Customs Ports, and the Non-Commissioned
Officers in charge have been appointed Postmasters and Collectors of Customs.
Furthermore, the duties of members of the Force stationed in the Eastern Arctic include
the supervision of the welfare of the Eskimo for the Department of Indian Affairs,
educating them as far as possible in the White Man’s Laws and issuing destitute relief
where necessary, enforcement of all the Ordinances and Regulations of the Northwest
Territories, including Game Laws and the protection of Musk Oxen, and the issue of
Game, Animal and Bird Licenses to the various Trading Companies, the supervision of
liquor permits, the enforcement of the Migratory Birds Convention Act for the
Department of the Interior; the enforcement of the Criminal Code and Assistance to the
Post Office and Customs Department, as set forth in the last paragraph above, as well
as to the Department of Mines and Agriculture in the collection of Eskimo material and
ethnological and biological specimens.
Members of the Force are also called upon to assist in the taking of the Census and
assisting the Director of Meteorological Service in the taking of readings at the
different Posts from time to time, and to supply topographical information to the
Federal Service.
In addition, Police patrols to surrounding settlements and Eskimo villages and also
extended patrols to remote points are also made by each detachment for the purpose of
obtaining the information required.
In bringing the above information to your notice, I have the honour to renew the
assurance conveyed to you in my above mentioned note of the Canadian Government’s
readiness to afford the MacMillan expedition any assistance within the power of the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the other Dominion officers in Canadian Northern
territories.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 401]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, July 18, 1925.
concerning certain laws of the Arctic Ocean and the posts of the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police established therein.
acknowledgment, are receiving the careful consideration of this Government and a
reply thereto will be forwarded when the necessary study of this matter has been
completed.14
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
14 Apparently no further reply was made to these British notes.

Regulations to give effect to the convention
of June 6, 1924, between the United States
and
Canada
for
the
suppression
of
smuggling15
Give Effect to the Convention of June 6, 1924
The White House , September 19, 1925.

[Document 402]
Give Effect to the Convention of June 6, 1924
WHEREAS the Convention concluded between the United States and His Britannic Majesty
in respect of Canada, for the suppression of smuggling operations along the boundary
between the United States and the Dominion of Canada, and for other purposes, signed
ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties agree that the appropriate officers of the
Governments of the United States of America and of Canada respectively
shall be required to furnish upon request to duly authorized officers of the
other Government, information concerning clearances of vessels or the
transportation of cargoes, shipments or loads of articles across the
international boundary when the importation of the cargo carried or of
articles transported by land is subject to the payment of duties; also to furnish
information respecting clearances of vessels to any ports when there is
ground to suspect that the owners or persons in possession of the cargo intend
to smuggle it into the territory of the United States or of Canada.
ARTICLE II
The High Contracting Parties agree that clearance from the United States or
from Canada shall be denied to any vessel carrying cargo consisting of
articles the importation of which into the territory of the United States or of
Canada, as the case may be, is prohibited, when it is evident from the
tonnage, size and general character of the vessel, or the length of the voyage
and the perils or conditions of navigation attendant upon it, that the vessel
will be unable to carry its cargo to the destination proposed in the application
for clearance.
ARTICLE III
Each of the High Contracting Parties agrees with the other that property of all
kinds in its possession which, having been stolen and brought into the
territory of the United States or of Canada, is seized by its customs
authorities, shall, when the owners are nationals of the other country, be
returned to such owners, subject to satisfactory proof of such ownership and

the absence of any collusion, and subject moreover to payment of the
expenses of the seizure and detention and to the abandonment of any claims
by the owners against the customs, or the customs officers, warehousemen or
agents, for compensation or damages for the seizure, detention, warehousing
or keeping of the property.
ARTICLE IV
The High Contracting Parties reciprocally agree to exchange information
concerning the names and activities of all persons known or suspected to be
engaged in violation of the narcotic laws of the United States or of Canada,
respectively.
ARTICLE V
It is agreed that the customs and other administrative officials of the
respective Governments of the United States and of Canada shall upon
request be directed to attend as witnesses and to produce such available
records and files or certified copies thereof as may be considered essential to
the trial of civil or criminal cases, and as may be produced compatibly with
the public interest.
The cost of transcripts of records, depositions, certificates, and letters
rogatory in civil or criminal cases, and the cost of first-class transportation
both ways, maintenance and other proper expenses involved in the attendance
of such witnesses shall be paid by the nation requesting their attendance at
the time of their discharge by the court from further attendance at such trial.
Letters rogatory and commissions shall be executed with all possible
despatch and copies of official records or documents shall be certified
promptly by the appropriate officials in accordance with the provisions of the
laws of the respective countries.
ARTICLE VI
The following offenses are added to the list of offenses numbered 1 to 3 in
Article I of the Treaty concluded between the United States and Great Britain
on May 18, 1908,16 with reference to reciprocal rights for the United States
and Canada in the matters of conveyance of prisoners and wrecking and
salvage, that is to say:
4. Offenses against the narcotic laws of the respective Governments.
ARTICLE VII

No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be
applicable or attached to alcoholic liquors or to vessels, vehicles or persons
by reason of the carriage of such liquors when they are in transit under guard
by Canadian authorities through the territorial waters of the United States to
Skagway, Alaska, and thence by the shortest route, via the White Pass and
Yukon Railway, upwards of twenty miles to Canadian territory, and such
transit shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit of alcoholic
liquors through the Panama Canal or on the Panama Railroad, provided that
such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel or vehicle
on which they are carried remains within the United States, its territories or
possessions, and that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be
unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions.
ARTICLE VIII
This Convention shall be ratified, and the ratifications shall be exchanged at
Washington as soon as possible. The Convention shall come into effect at the
expiration of ten days from the date of the exchange of ratifications, and it
shall remain in force for one year. If upon the expiration of one year after the
Convention shall have been in force no notice is given by either party of a
desire to terminate the same, it shall continue in force until thirty days after
either party shall have given notice to the other of a desire to terminate the
Convention.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention in
duplicate and have thereunto affixed their seals.
DONE at the city of Washington this sixth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and
twenty-four.
WHEREAS it is desirable that uniform regulations should be established by the Government
of the United States and the Government of the Dominion of Canada to give effect to
the provisions of the treaty; AND WHEREAS, the following regulations have been agreed
upon by representatives of the two Governments and have been submitted to me for
approval on the part of the United States:
ARTICLE I
Section 1. The officers authorized to furnish, request and receive
information as provided in Article I of the Convention shall be as
follows:—For the Dominion of Canada, the Deputy Minister of
Customs and Excise, the Chief, Customs-Excise Preventive Service

and Collectors of Customs and Excise; for the United States of
America, Consuls, Collectors of Customs and United States
District Attorneys. In addition, other officers may be designated
and authorized, for Canada, by the Minister of Customs and Excise,
and for the United States by the Secretary of the Treasury or the
Attorney General.
Section 2. Advance or immediate information respecting the
clearance of vessels to any port shall be so furnished where there is
reasonable ground to suspect that the owners or persons in
possession of the cargo intend to smuggle or illegally introduce it
into Canada or the United States. It shall be the duty of any such
officer of either government having reasonable ground to suspect
an intent to smuggle or illegally introduce any merchandise into the
other country, immediately to inform by telegraph or telephone, at
the expense of the receiving government, the appropriate officer of
such government, as provided in Section 1. Arrangements may be
made to furnish such information to a specially-named officer
when it is deemed advisable to do so.
Section 3. For the purpose of Section 2, reasonable ground to
suspect an intent to smuggle or unlawfully to introduce goods or
merchandise shall be deemed to exist not only when the officers of
the country from which the goods are being conveyed suspect that
unlawful operations are contemplated but also when the Minister of
Customs and Excise, for Canada, or the Secretary of the Treasury,
for the United States, or the duly authorized representative of
either, certifies, one to the other, that he has reasonable grounds for
believing that such vessel or the owner or possessor of its cargo or
of such goods or merchandise is engaged in or about to engage in
such unlawful operations.
Section 4. All information furnished under the provisions of this
article of the Convention shall be for official use only and may be
designated as confidential by the officer furnishing it. The source
of all information furnished as confidential shall not be disclosed
without the consent of the officer who furnished it and any officer
who violates the provisions of this section will be subject to severe
disciplinary action.
ARTICLE II

Collectors of Customs and Excise of Canada and Collectors of Customs of
the United States will refuse to clear any vessel in accordance with the
provisions of Article II of the Convention. Lists of articles, the importation of
which is prohibited and to which it is desired that the provisions of Article II
shall be applied, will be exchanged between the Minister of Customs and
Excise of Canada and the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States.
ARTICLE III
Section 1. A national of the United States or of Canada desiring to
make claim under the provisions of Article III of the Convention
shall file a petition with the Minister of Customs and Excise or the
Secretary of the Treasury, as the case may be, setting out the facts
and making request for the return of the property.
Section 2. The claimant must produce evidence of his ownership
and of the absence of collusion on his part in the theft of the
property.
Section 3. Upon the submission of satisfactory evidence, the return
of the property will be authorized by the appropriate official,
provided the claimant pays to the Collector of Customs or
Collector or other proper officer of Customs and Excise, as the case
may be, all expenses incurred in the seizure and detention of the
property and files in writing a waiver and release of all possible
claims for compensation and damages incident to the seizure and
detention of the property against the Government and any and all
Government officers involved.
Section 4. Customs officials of the United States or Customs and
Excise officials of Canada will give assistance to the nationals of
the other Government by permitting the inspection by such
nationals of property under seizure; provided the Customs or
Customs and Excise officials are satisfied that such requests for
inspection are made in good faith. When such stolen property is
identified, such nationals will be furnished, so far as known, with
the names and description of persons from whom the property was
seized and other persons who have had possession of such property
subsequent to the theft thereof.
ARTICLE IV
Section 1. The information to be exchanged under Article IV of the
Convention shall be the name, and, where available, the

description, Bertillon measurements, fingerprints, photograph, and
record, or other relevant information regarding the following
persons:
(a) Every person known or suspected to be engaged or
about to engage in smuggling or unlawfully importing
narcotic drugs from the United States to Canada, or vice
versa.
(b) Every person arrested for smuggling or unlawfully
importing or bringing any narcotic drugs into the United
States from Canada, or vice versa.
(c) Every person arrested in the United States or in
Canada for a serious violation of the narcotic laws of
either government, if there is reasonable ground for
believing that such person has unlawfully imported or
brought in narcotic drugs.
Section 2. This information shall be exchanged between the Head,
Narcotic Division, Prohibition Unit, Washington, D. C, and the
Chief, Narcotic Division, Department of Health, Ottawa, Canada.
Section 3. If prompt information is necessary to enable the officers
of either government to apprehend a person in the act of smuggling
or unlawfully importing narcotic drugs, it may be communicated to
the appropriate officers of the other government by mail, or, if
necessary, by telegraph or telephone, at the expense of the
government receiving the information. A report containing the
substance of the communication shall be mailed to the officers
named in Section 2.
ARTICLE V
Section 1. In case documentary evidence or the testimony of any
officer or employee of the United States is desired in Canada under
the provision of Article V of the Convention, request therefor will
be made by the appropriate officer of the Canadian Department of
Justice through the Consul General of the United States at Ottawa,
to the Secretary of State, who will transmit the request to the head
of the Department or independent organization of the United States
Government having such evidence or employing such official.
After consideration thereof, the head of the Department or

independent organization will make the appropriate order in the
premises.
Section 2. In case documentary evidence or the testimony of any
official of Canada is desired in the United States under the
provisions of Article V of the Convention, request therefor will be
made by the proper officer of the Department of Justice to the
Secretary of State, who will transmit it through the Consul General
of the United States at Ottawa to the Minister of the Canadian
Government under whom the documentary evidence is to be found
or the officer or employee is employed. After consideration thereof
the Minister will make the appropriate order in the premises.
Section 3. Whenever any officer or employee of the United States
is required to go to Canada under the provisions of Article V of the
Convention, and whenever any Canadian officer or employee is
likewise required to go to the United States, transportation from his
official station to the place to which he is required to go, or
sufficient money to pay the same, shall be furnished to him by or
on behalf of the Government requesting his attendance before he
leaves his official station. All other expenses required by Article V
to be paid by the requesting nation shall be paid in full before he
departs from the place at which his testimony was required.
ARTICLE VI
Section 1. If, under Article VI of the Convention, a narcotic agent
or other officer of either the United States or Canada desires to
convey a prisoner charged with an offense against the narcotic laws
of his own Government across the territory of the other
Stat. Part 2, p. 2035), he may, in having the warrant or process
endorsed, or backed, by a judge, magistrate or justice of the peace,
or in obtaining the authority of the Secretary of State or of the
Minister of Justice, as the case may be, at the expense of his own
government, call upon the nearest United States Attorney or the
Department of Justice of Canada for advice and assistance.
Section 2. A United States Attorney or the Department of Justice of
Canada, so called upon by a narcotic agent or other officer of either
Government, will give advice and render assistance in accordance
with the law and the Treaty of May 18, 1908.

ARTICLE VII
Section 1. When a shipment of liquors is to be made to Canadian
Territory under Article VII of the Convention, a full description of
the packages, and contents thereof, will be furnished by Canadian
authorities to United States customs authorities at Skagway,
Alaska. A second copy thereof will be delivered to and retained by
the master of the vessel having such liquors on board for
transportation.
Section 2. Said shipment, consisting of the packages as listed and
described in the document furnished as required by Section 1, will
be locked securely in a separate and safe compartment on the
vessel transporting the same from the Canadian port to Skagway,
Alaska, and the owners and master of the vessel, under penalties of
the law of Canada and of the United States, will be responsible for
the safe delivery of said liquors to Skagway, Alaska.
Section 3. Before leaving Canada, said compartment will be placed
under Canadian and United States customs seals, and remain under
the two seals continuously until the vessel arrives at its destination
at Skagway.
Section 4. The shipment will be accompanied on the vessel by one
or more guards representing Canadian authorities.
Section 5. After arrival of the vessel at Skagway, Alaska, the seals
on the compartment will be broken in the presence of an officer of
the United States customs service, the Canadian customs officer at
Skagway and the master of the vessel or his representative. The
packages of liquor will be checked and will be removed from the
vessel under supervision of United States and Canadian customs
officers to a car of the White Pass and Yukon Railway. Such car
will then be securely locked and placed under United States and
Canadian customs seals. A Canadian guard or guards will
accompany the car and shipment until it arrives in Canadian
territory. Upon arrival at the point of exit from the United States the
car will be examined by a United States customs officer and, if the
seals are found intact, such officer shall certify to that effect upon
the carrier’s manifest, allow the car to proceed into Canadian
territory, and return to the Deputy Collector at Skagway the mail
copy of the carrier’s manifest as a certificate of exportation. If the
seals are not found intact, the customs officers of the two

governments shall prepare a joint report stating the condition in
which the shipment arrived at such point of exit, and the shipment
shall then be allowed to proceed to destination.
Section 6. If, at Skagway, or at such point of exit, the shipment is
not found intact when checked, the authorities of both
Governments will cooperate in proceedings to apprehend and
prosecute the person or persons responsible for the loss or
diversion of the liquor.
NOW, THEREFORE, I, Calvin Coolidge, President of the United States of America, considering
it expedient and necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of the said Convention
of June 6, 1924, that uniform regulations for that purpose be adopted by the two
Governments, do hereby approve the foregoing regulations to govern acts of officers of
the United States.
CALVIN COOLIDGE
THE WHITE HOUSE , September 19, 1925.

Chile:

Contents

Disinclination of the United States to grant
asylum during revolutionary crisis in Chile
[403] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[404] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[405] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[406] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[407] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[408] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

[409] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[410] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[411] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[412] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

[Document 403]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Nef, Bennett and Gomez Carreño prisoners.2 New junta de gobierno being formed
headed by Dartnell, inspector general of the Army, and Ortiz Vega, Minister of War,
who will ask Navy to designate third member possibly Aceveda. New junta speaking
for the Army declares that movement initiated by Army in September was for reform
not for reaction and has been betrayed by Altamirano and last junta. It is understood
that new junta is favorable to recall of Alessandri3 and immediate holding of
constitutional convention. No definite information as to situation outside of Santiago
nor as to attitude of Navy. Stones were hurled and shots fired at Union Club tonight.
All the regiments in Santiago seem to be in accord and persons sympathetic with
movement say that labor unions and university students are enthusiastic in its support
and that engineers of Navy and all its youngest officials will give their support. Latter
statement is however questionable.
COLLIER
1 The Palace of the Moneda.
2 Altamirano, Nef, and Bennett comprised the Junta de Gobierno de Septiembre, the
regime which assumed power following the revolution of that month. Gomez Carreño
subsequently became Minister of Marine in that regime. See Foreign Relations, 1924,
vol. I, pp. 357 ff.
3 Arturo Alessandri, Constitutional President of Chile, then in Rome.

[Document 404]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:03 a.m.]
9. [Paraphrase.] Alfred Houston, local attorney for [the Braden Copper Company], has
just come to see me at the request of Carlos Aldunate and two of his civilian colleagues
of the recent ministry which was overthrown yesterday. They want me to call upon
General Dartnell, with whom I am very well acquainted, and ask him to take measures
to prevent any possible violence being done to Altamirano, Nef, and Gomez Carreño. I
replied that I was unable to take such action, at least for the present, because the Acting
Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs had informed me that he has just seen the three
persons who are detained in the Moneda, that they are being courteously treated and are
in good spirits, and that he thought the Army and Navy might adjust the situation today
and the three men be released. However, Aldunate and his colleagues entertain grave
fears for the safety of the late junta except for Bennett who was not arrested and who
seems to be enjoying complete freedom. Personally I do not anticipate any violence
although there is considerable possibility of it.
The former Minister for Foreign Affairs is actively in sympathy with yesterday’s
movement and thinks there is a possibility of violence to the late junta, especially to
Gomez Carreño. Kindly instruct me what to do in case any person becomes an actual
victim of mob violence or if the life of any person appears to be in danger. I am well
acquainted with General Dartnell. [End paraphrase.]
Brazilian Ambassador has left and I understand that Argentine Ambassador also. Italian
Ambassador returns tonight from Viña del Mar. Carlos Aldunate and three other
civilians members of Cabinet were held in detention yesterday in Moneda for two
hours while young Army officer with loaded revolver walked up and down the room
holding them virtual prisoners and lecturing to them as to the purpose of military
movement and as to its having been betrayed by late junta and its ministry. Aldunate is
now in his own house at liberty and has given his word of honor not to leave Santiago.
In my opinion he is in no danger.
COLLIER

[Document 405]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
12. Situation continues very grave with possibility of civil war or even of a soviet
uprising. Navy continues firm in opposition to Alessandri’s return and in its demand for
immediate release of Nef and Gomez. Many rumors during the day that large part of
the Navy would join Army but information from Valparaiso consulate shows no
foundation for these. The consul at Concepcion reports engineers in navy yard
Talcahuano favor Army, one cavalry regiment Viña del Mar said to favor Navy and to
be ready for embarkation on war vessels which have full steam up. Conditions fixed by
Alessandri for his return as published by Associated Press are said to be unsatisfactory
to Army. Certain diplomatic colleagues have been informed that arms have been given
to the masses and that they are organizing Red companies. Movement in Army is
absolutely controlled by young officers mostly captains and lieutenants. General
Dartnell supposed to have no real power. Many of the young leaders are extremely
radical in their sentiments. Altamirano, Nef, Gomez are considered by many as being
held as hostages and very grave fear for their safety is still expressed, also that Dartnell
has assured many diplomats that he can guarantee safety of detained and also
protection of all foreign interests. Errazuriz, Unionist candidate for the Presidency, has
been seized by Army and is a prisoner in barracks. Attempts have been made to arrest
other very prominent Unionists. Morning and evening papers have stated that a North
American squadron was on its way to Chile to protect American interests.
[Paraphrase.] I have not been able to trace the origin of that rumor. In the present
situation I do not think it necessary to send ships to Chile but highly desirable to send
some very close to Chilean ports because complete breakdown of Army and Navy
discipline and manifestation of mob violence justify fear of dangerous situation. [End
paraphrase.]
COLLIER

[Document 406]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
Department that the members of the late regime in Chile are under guard by order of
the present authorities and that if their lives should be endangered it would be by the
action of the present authorities or possibly by a mob overcoming the guard established
by the present authorities. The Department feels, under these circumstances, that for
you to take any action in their behalf would not be justified, and you are instructed to
refrain from doing so.
HUGHES

[Document 407]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
is the Department’s position with regard to asylum: The Government of the United
States respects the principle that a sovereign state enjoys the exclusive right to control
and administer justice within its territory, and hence that it should not be resisted or
thwarted by an American diplomatic officer when its authorities demand the surrender
for purposes of prosecution of any person charged with crime who is not, by reason of
some connection with the mission, to be deemed exempt from the local jurisdiction.
Because the granting of shelter is oftentimes, if not commonly, accorded with a view to
withholding an individual from that jurisdiction such action cannot be regarded with
favor, save under very exceptional circumstances. As Secretary Root declared in a note
to the American Minister to Haiti on April 11, 1908, “instructions have made it clear
that this Government does not recognize a [the] so-called right of asylum” (Foreign
Relations , 1908, 435). The Department of State does not countenance “any attempt
knowingly to harbor offenders against the laws from the pursuit of the legitimate agents
of justice.”
While the Department has at times approved of the yielding by an American diplomatic
officer of temporary shelter to an individual when the safety of his life was threatened
as by mob violence in a country where conditions of great disorder prevailed, the
significance of such an exceptional situation should not be misconstrued. It is based on
the theory that disorderly conditions productive of mob violence, for example, have so
impaired the power or disposition of local authorities to administer justice as to render
inapplicable for the time being the principle above set forth. An American diplomatic
officer must therefore exercise utmost discretion in determining whether such
extraordinary conditions exist and continue to exist throughout the period of which
shelter is sought or granted; or whether on the contrary any shelter which he is asked to
accord is designed rather to thwart the common exercise of jurisdiction by the
territorial sovereign. That a refugee should be sought by his political enemies for an
essentially political offense would not necessarily bring the case within the exception
noted, at least if such an offense were one made punishable by the local law, and if
there was no reason to believe that the rights accorded an accused person for purposes
of defense would not be respected.

An individual fleeing before a mob might be given temporary refuge in an American
mission, if he entered the same in the course of flight, until the mob dispersed or until
the mission could turn him over to the authorities of the country, de facto or otherwise,
who were in a position to protect him from similar out-breaks of mob violence. The
fact that a person already in the custody of the local authorities is in danger of mob
violence would not suffice to justify intervention by American diplomatic officers.
Should the individual break away from the authorities in the face of a mob attack and
seek refuge in an American mission he might be given refuge until the authorities were
again in a position to resume custody of the fugitive and accord him protection from
mob violence.
The foregoing principles will guide you hereafter in the relevant situations with which
you may be confronted.
HUGHES

[Document 408]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
feeling of the Department that the presence of American war vessels in Chilean ports
would cause a most unfavorable impression. The Department would only consent to
send them if American lives were in actual danger. The Department has no desire to
interfere in any way with the Chileans in their efforts to work out their present
difficulties by themselves. Having received no evidence from you to the contrary the
Department does not anticipate that American citizens will be molested during the
present troubles. If American war vessels were to be sent nearer to Chile than they are
now at their present station in the Panama Canal they would have to be sent to Peruvian
ports. This is considered inadvisable in view of the present relations between Chile and
Peru.
HUGHES

[Document 409]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:58 p.m.]
13. Acute crisis appears to be settled. After day of greatest anxiety Army and Navy
signed an agreement constituting a new junta presided over by Emilio Bello Codecido,
former Minister of Foreign Affairs and Interior, General Dartnell and Admiral Ward.
Alessandri declared Constitutional President and to be asked to return; new
constitutional convention to be called at once and all political prisoners to be
immediately released.
COLLIER

[Document 410]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8:40 p.m.]
19. Due to imminent fear of revolution and mob violence, the superior of a religious
order founded in Spain and composed almost wholly of Spanish monks has been here
and at the consulate general at Valparaiso asking protection for all its property in Chile
on the ground that the title is in the name of an American citizen who it seems is a
monk of this order.
[Paraphrase.] I replied that my personal opinion was that such an attempt to secure the
protection of the Government of the United States was improper. Please instruct me.
[End paraphrase.]
An order of nuns founded in Germany maintaining a school here in which there is one
American nun duly registered in our consulate general sent a delegation to me asking
for protection and for permission to hoist American flag on their building. Request was
denied but the American nun was assured personal protection if unlawfully attacked or
threatened.
Situation continues very critical. There is constant intrigue to overthrow present junta.
Labor leaders who have openly formed republican guard to help Army to sustain junta
and bring back Alessandri assembled several thousand enrolled members in front of
Moneda night before last ready to fight. Public meetings are being arranged by them in
all parts of the country for Saturday night. Country is seething with social unrest. Latest
development is organization of rent payers in all cities to demand lower rents and better
housing and resist landlord’s demands and even their appeals to police for help and
protection.
[Paraphrase.] A priest just called on behalf of the nuncio and asked if I would receive
the nuncio and secretary in case they were attacked. I told him there was no apparent
danger now and that if they were attacked the diplomatic corps would undoubtedly take
what action was expedient for its members. [End paraphrase.]
COLLIER

[Document 411]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
appears to state, the property which is mentioned is actually owned by the order and
only the mere title to the same is recorded in the name of the American monk, do not
extend protection. If, however, the American is the actual owner of the property, inform
the Department when he acquired the property and when the title to the same was
recorded in him.
HUGHES

[Document 412]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
relations may be maintained with him. No formal communication or special action
necessary in this connection nor should any comment or explanation in so doing be
made.5
KELLOGG
4 Not printed.
5 Señor Alessandri resumed the functions of Constitutional President on March 20 (file

The Tacna-Arica question
China:
Contents

Renewal of civil war in North China and
refusal by the United States to lend itself to a
policy of intervention
[413] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[414] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[415] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[416] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[417] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[418] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[419] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[420] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[421] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[422] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[423] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[424] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[425] The Netherlands Minister in China (Oudendijk), Senior Minister, to the
American Minister (Schurman)
Peking, February 5, 1925.
[426] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[427] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
[428] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[429] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[430] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
Washington, March 27, 1925.
[431] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)

[432] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft)
Washington, March 28, 1925—noon.
[433] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[434] The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
[435] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
Washington, March 30, 1925.
[436] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
Washington, April 2, 1925.
[437] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[438] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[439] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[440] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[441] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[442] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, July 13, 1925.
[443] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[444] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[445] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[446] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[447] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[448] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[449] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[450] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[451] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[452] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[453] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[454] The Minister in Chirm (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[455] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[456] The Consul General at Tientsin (Gauss) to the Secretary of State
[457] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[458] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[459] The Consul at Chefoo (Putnam) to the Secretary of State

[460] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[461] The Consul at Mukden (Sokobin) to the Secretary of State
[462] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[463] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[464] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[Document 413]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Received 6:50 p.m.]
1. 1. Conditions both military and political are unsettled and obscure. The autumn’s
fighting eliminated Tsao Kun, Wu Pei-fu1 and last week also Chi Hsieh-yuan;2 but the
Chihli Party which is not a political but a military group is, though disorganized, still a
power in the Yangtze Valley and must either be overcome or conciliated by Chang Tso-
lin3 if he is to unify even North China. I am reliably informed that Chang himself has
completed plans to return to Mukden but that Minister of Communications, who as I
know positively has gone to Tientsin, was sent there by Chief Executive to persuade
Chang to remain, Chang’s forces have been moving through Tsinanfu during the last
week and 22 troop trains have continued southwards beyond Houchowfu [Hsüchowfu],
destination unknown.
2. Chang flushed with his first victory snubbed and alienated Feng Yu-hsiang4 whose
strength he underestimated. Feng is sulking in the Western Hills, sending in repeated
resignations to the Chief Executive proclaiming pacific intentions, but remaining a
military and political mystery. He controls Peking and has under him 60,000 troops of
whom half according to military attaché are well equipped and supplied. Feng and the
undefeated Yangtze Tuchuns today share the military power of North China with
Chang.
3. If Chang does not support Chief Executive with adequate military forces the
Provisional Government cannot long endure. That Government represents the triumph
of Japan in Chinese politics, as the Government resulting from coup d’état of October
23 though nominally Kuomintang may be regarded as a triumph for Soviet Russia. If
Marshal Tuan5 should be forced out, the next regime would probably be headed by Sun
Yat-sen6 and supported by Feng with a platform denouncing “unequal treaties” which
would commend it to Karakhan.7
4. Sun Yat-sen after a long delay in Tientsin arrived in Peking December 31st afternoon
by special train. He was met at the railway station by officials and by a crowd of his
followers. It is agreed by all who saw him that his sickness has been real and not
feigned. He issued at the station a short announcement in the dialect of the common
people, which the Chinese secretary translates as follows:

“To the masters of the Republic of China. I am certainly gratified for the
welcome accorded me by all you gentlemen on my arrival. This time I have
not come to fight for a position for myself nor for power. I have come
especially to save the country in cooperation with you gentlemen. Thirteen
years ago I with all you gentlemen overthrew the Manchu Government. This
was done in order to obtain freedom and equality for the people of China but
the freedom and equality of the people of China had already been sold to the
different nations by the Manchu Government through the unequal treaties. As
a result we still occupy the position of a secondary colony. Therefore we
must save the nation. The principles involved in saving the country are
numerous and there are many methods. It will be very easy to accomplish it. I
had the intention of speaking to you gentlemen about these things in detail
but as I am now sick it will be best to defer this until I am well. I wish to
thank you for your kindness. (Signed) Sun Wen.”
6. Chief Executive issued mandate December 24th promulgating regulations for the
reorganization conference whose purpose is stated to be the solution of the complicated
situation and the discussion of constructive plans including the organization of a
second citizens’ conference, reforms of the military system, financial liquidation, et
cetera. This reorganization conference will, it is believed, be composed of militarists
and politicians and the scheme receives little popular support and arouses little interest.
Sun Yat-sen has made political capital for himself by demanding a popular conference
and is sending emissaries to the provinces to explain his views.
7. It is expected that Sun will now hold conferences directly or indirectly not only with
Chief Executive but also with Feng and the other leaders of the coup d’état and also
with Karakhan. Sun will want to be foremost and will not be particular about platform.
He would find great opposition if he should attempt to return to Canton.

Consul at Swatow telegraphed December 30th:
General Chen Chiung-ming resumed office on December 27 as commander
in chief [of] the Kwangtung armies promising to take field at once against
Red troops in Canton. Chen alleges he has been promised strong financial
support by the Cantonese merchants and has raised $400,000 locally. General
Lin Fu has apparently finally agreed to support campaign against Sun Wen
but it is believed his allegiance to Chen remains very doubtful. General Lin
reported to be opening hostilities against Sun forces in Kiangsi.”

[8?] Soviet propaganda seems to have taken an anti-Christian turn during these
Christmas holidays.
Consul General at Canton telegraphs as follows December 29:
“December 29, 4 p.m. Considerable anti-Christian propaganda in Canton
during the holidays including speeches by former governor and other
politicians. Several American mission schools annoyed by agitators but no
serious disturbance. Report follows by post. Department was not informed.”
9. Similar agitation against Christianity in Chekiang Province; in Hangchow one anti-
Christian demonstration was held in which churches were denounced as tools of
foreign imperialism and capitalism; at Ningpo there was a violent campaign organized
by an “anti-Christian committee” of which the following is typical:
“Since the invasion of Christianity in China thousands of men and guns have
followed on the heels of the missionaries who come to us clad in black
gowns and carrying banners of evangelistic volunteers. Many ports have been
yielded; concessions have been granted and millions of dollars of indemnity
have been paid. So we must stand against Christianity because of its relation
to imperialism.”
10. If there has been any increase of antiforeign feeling there is no evidence of any
p.m.)9 probably confined themselves to foreigners to secure nonintervention of Chinese
and in expectation of larger funds, though Military Governor Chihli Province tells
consul general at Tientsin robbery was an attempt to discredit Fengtien regime.
Governor declares every effort is being made to apprehend culprits and if not
successful he will make himself personally responsible for the losses besides punishing
responsible officers in the section where the robbery occurred.
Repeated to Tokyo.
SCHURMAN
1 For the defeat of Wu Pei-fu and overthrow of President Tsao Kun, see Foreign
Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 361 ff.
p. 408.
3 Virtual ruler of Manchuria, who had estahlished his headquarters at Tientsin
following the civil war in the autumn of 1924.

4 Inspector General of the Chinese Army, who seized Peking in October 1924 and
ended civil war between forces of Wu Pei-fu and Chang Tso-lin.
5 Provisional Chief Executive and Prime Minister of China.
6 Leader of the Kuomintang Party.
7 Soviet Ambassador in China.
9 Not printed.

[Document 414]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
Tientsin for Mukden, Chang Tso-lin made following significant statement: “All my
troops will also be instructed to return to Mukden successively.”
SCHURMAN
10 Not printed.

[Document 415]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Received January 15—noon.]
to half a dozen chiefs of mission and had opportunity to talk with him alone and also in
company with my British colleague on the present situation. He professed complete
confidence that there would be no more fighting in the Yangtze provinces and stated, as
though it were very important and reassuring, that 19 out of 22 provinces had accepted
invitations to his rehabilitation conference.
2. That conference however is the subject of constant attack by the Kuomintang as
undemocratic, useless, and completely under the control of Marshal Tuan.
3. One of the ablest intellectual leaders of the Kuomintang Party and a close friend of
Dr. Sun talked with me here yesterday for an hour and a half with great frankness and
apparent sincerity. He said that Tuan was sitting on a volcano but did not know it; that
Dr. Sun if he were well enough would soon come to the Presidency but that no
individual could do much for China, which was too vast, complex, and chaotic for
human control, and that intelligent Chinese now were simply watching events with
fatalistic resignation. The same fatalistic view of China’s development and the futility
of foreign efforts to make any impression upon it was expressed privately by my
Belgian colleague, Everts, who has been here several years, on leaving Peking in
December for his new post as Ambassador to Germany.
4. But when I compare the China I saw 25 years ago with the China of today I am
profoundly convinced that many important salutatory [salutary?] changes have been
effected here whether intentionally or not through the influence of foreign sentiments,
ideas, science, inventions, industrial organization and economic and political
institutions.
SCHURMAN

[Document 416]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
p.m. Americans took position in conjunction with French as guards of
interned Chinese soldiers at Haig reserve school. Some two hours later, I am
informed by the French consul general, one interned Chinese was killed and
two wounded by gunfire of American sailor. In company with Jacobs and
Graham made investigation by interviewing French and Americans on guard
but am not able as yet to report who responsible for casualties, though French
state positively caused by Americans. Have asked American Navy to
investigate further and report tomorrow. Not repeated to the Department.”
SCHURMAN
11 This and other telegrams (not printed) reported the details of military conflicts and
looting in the vicinity of Shanghai.

[Document 417]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
telegram dated January 16, 8 p.m., he had just received from British Acting Consul
General Pratt, Shanghai, of which pertinent portion was as follows:
“The China Association representing leading British interests in Shanghai
have made representations to me that measures should be devised to prevent
a recurrence of fighting in immediate vicinity Shanghai. Various proposals
have been made involving the sending to Shanghai of an international
military force. The grave difficulties attending despatch of such a force are
obvious, nevertheless I am of opinion that the time has now come when this
step should be taken. Result of next conflict may well be that large bodies of
soldiers may wish to enter Settlement but may refuse to surrender their arms.
Specific measures taken is a military question but my own opinion is that it
would probably suffice to occupy two strategical points, namely, North
Railway Station and Lunghua Junction, thus denying use of loop line to
Chinese troops.”
2. I pointed out to my colleague that this telegram (1) did not state that the present
international naval forces and local volunteers were insufficient to protect life and
property in the settlement, and (2) did not claim that the military objective indicated
and military measures suggested had the approval of any military or naval authority. I
also said that the course proposed by Pratt and his China Association was an act of
forcible intervention on Chinese territory. I declared emphatically that my Government
was opposed to such a policy and that I would not even consider it unless the naval
authorities reported that it was imperative necessity for the protection of American and
other foreign lives in Shanghai. The British Minister shared these views and so
telegraphs Pratt January 17.
3. In case the Chief Executive succeeds his policy of detaching Sun Chuan-fang from
the alliance with Chi Hsieh-yuan under which aggressions [aggressive] hostilities
against Lu Yung-hsiang were begun in the neighborhood of Shanghai, it is probable
that Chi will be defeated and in that event his soldiers might get out of hand, might
refuse to give up their arms and might loot Shanghai. Bui: the alternative is equally

conceivable, namely, that these soldiers would make no trouble or if they did they
would be restrained by the victorious forces of Lu or Sun.
4. Foreign intervention in the way proposed would be a benefit to the present Peking
Government and the Anfu Party and disadvantageous to Chi whom it would shut off
from the arsenal. It is not improbable that it would be favored by the Japanese. Among
the British and some other foreign merchants in Shanghai there has been always strong
element in favor of military intervention in China and they may be utilizing the present
situation to get foreign governments committed to that program.
morning:
“The senior consul is addressing a protest to Marshals Chi and Sun against
the recent hostilities on the border of the French concession which were a
grave menace to foreign lives and property, and a demand that no Chinese
troops remain within rifle shot of foreign-inhabited area in the future and that
any such troops within such radius at present be removed at once. This is the
result of meeting this morning of consuls general for Italy, United States,
Japan, the Netherlands, Great Britain, and France.
That an international military force should be sent immediately to Shanghai
to ensure compliance with this demand, which is essential for security of
foreign settlements, was the unanimous opinion of the meeting.”
Foregoing will probably be considered by diplomatic body at a meeting which had
already been brought up [called for?] January 19th.
6. I have telegraphed Consul General Cunningham as follows:
“January 17, 10 p.m.
important proposal and raises a number of points upon which I
require information before reaching any conclusion: First, what do
you mean by ‘international military force’? Do you mean a force
composed army units or an increased naval landing force? Second,
is your last paragraph a recommendation of yours or is it advance
information of a recommendation which the senior consul intends
to address to the [consular body?]? Third, if by ‘international
military force’ you [mean] army forces, why do you consider that
naval landing forces supported by their ships are not adequate to
cope with any situation as has been the case in the past, notably
that of some days ago and of last September–October? Fourth,

were the protest and demand mentioned in your first paragraph
made after consultation with the senior foreign naval officers
present or were they made on the judgment alone of the consular
officers concerned? Also the same information relative to your
statement in last paragraph that compliance with the consular
demand is essential for security foreign settlement. Fifth, what
Chinese forces are now within the radius you define? Sixth, in your
meeting who took the lead and why, if such information available?
What was the attitude of the different consuls general?
2. I assume you realize the extreme seriousness of your proposal if
it entails landing of international army units and their occupation
Chinese territory while the powers concerned are at peace with
China.
Consult with Admiral McVay and telegraph me fully at once in reply to my
questions including any other information you may consider necessary or
helpful in enabling me to reach a decision concerning any recommendation I
may [make?] to the Secretary of State.”
7. We now have Sacramento and two destroyers at Shanghai. Barker, Bone and
Shanghai January 20th. Admiral McVay now at Shanghai stated at 1 o’clock today:
“Six destroyers sufficient for present needs. Subject to agreement Tsingtau
authorities 10,000 interned soldiers will be sent there today and tomorrow on
board foreign vessels. Conditions Nanking, Cliinkiang, Shanghai quiet but
with general feeling of unrest.”
British have two large cruisers and also river gunboats at Shanghai.

8. There are large concentrations of Chinese troops in and near Peking, Tientsin,
Hankow and Nanking as well as at Shanghai.
9. I intend sending an assistant military attaché to Shanghai by the first available
steamer. Train service very irregular.
SCHURMAN

[Document 418]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8:41 p.m.]
“1. The senior naval officers decided that the force available is sufficient to
keep defeated soldiers out of the concession and would do so by using such
force measures as the occasion required. Eighteen hundred of Sun troops left
for Soochow this morning. A large number of Chi troops are at Wuhsi
[Wusih?] which has been looted and on each side of the town the railroad is
out of commission and much damage done to the rolling stock. The first
report was incorrect and the board of investigation has cleared our sailors of
any responsibility for the shooting of the Chinese …
SCHURMAN

[Document 419]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:35 p.m.]
35. Following from American consul, Shanghai:
“January 14, 5 p.m. At meeting today of consuls general for Japan, Holland,
France, Italy, Great Britain and United States it was unanimously decided to
request the diplomatic body to authorize consular body to forbid right of
asylum to all Chinese military leaders so long as conditions are as unsettled
as at present. Military leader is understood to be any officer with rank of
general now or recently having active command of troops. If permission to
carry out this policy is granted it is the intention of the consular body to order
all of leaders within Settlement to depart as soon as possible and in future the
entry of such persons will be prevented.”
2. Following resolution drafted by me was adopted by Heads of Legation, diplomatic
body meeting of January 19th, telegraphed to senior consul Shanghai,
“Resolved, that with a view to maintaining the neutrality of Shanghai and for
the protection of foreign life and property therein the consular body are
authorized, as an emergency measure and during the continuance of fighting
and the presence of bodies of troops near Shanghai (but no longer) and
without referring the matter to the diplomatic body, in their discretion to
expel from the International Settlement (or to refuse admission thereto to)
Chinese military leaders (being any officer with the rank of general now or
recently having active command of troops) and political chiefs who serve the
internal affairs of such militarists who may, in the opinion of the consular
body, use the Settlement for fitting out military expeditions or otherwise as a
base of military operations or for political agitation.
“The French Minister is sending similar instructions with regard to the
French Concession.”

Scuurman

[Document 420]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
himself to Shanghai. From his report by radio January 23, 6 p.m., I extract following:
1. “Have had consultation with Cunningham and Admiral McVay. Confident
present force available from foreign war vessels and local volunteers ample
to handle present conditions or any that may arise.”
2. “I believe Admiral McVay and his colleagues have situation thoroughly in
hand and recommend no action be taken. I believe recommendations as to
foreign military forces result pressure on consuls by business interests. This
also opinion of Admiral McVay.”
SCHURMAN

[Document 421]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
McVay.
“… Have detailed a destroyer to anchor near the steamer Belgenland off
Woosung with 400 American tourists aboard. Yesterday General Wang sent a
letter stating that Woosung fort would not fire on foreign vessels during
daylight only. I have sent a letter to the senior naval officer present that,
while this would probably cause no interference with foreign shipping, my
Government was on record as desiring Shanghai kept open to the sea and that
I would convoy any American vessels desiring to leave or English [enter?]
during darkness. Only reported this morning that on Saturday another British
river steamer was held up, searched, and two Chinese passengers removed.”
SCHURMAN

[Document 422]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
January 27, from Admiral McVay:
Senior naval officers met and agreed following message to Carlisle at
Woosung: “Send an officer together with an officer from United States
destroyer at Woosung to inform commanding officer, Woosung fort, that
senior naval officers cannot accept the wireless warning issued last night,
Monday, January 26th, closing the forts during the night constituting an
interference with foreign shipping. Senior naval officers will, if necessary,
escort foreign vessels. Also inform him that search of any vessels including
Chinese inside Whangpoo River cannot be tolerated. Limit of the Whangpoo
River being [beacon] on outer end submerged breakwater. Inform him that if
foreign vessels are interfered with, we are prepared for making immediate
reprisal.12
SCHURMAN
McVay telegraphed on January 28: “Woosung fort has agreed to abide by notice sent
[Document 423]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 29, 1925.
[Received March 21.]
No. 2740

interned Chinese soldiers in Shanghai and to the report that one interned Chinese had
been killed and two wounded by one of the American guards.
As an indication of the procedure which a certain section of the foreign community in
Shanghai are advocating in dealing with the complex situation there, I have the honor
to transmit herewith enclosed clippings of an excerpt of an article and an extract of a
letter to the North China Daily News which appeared in the January 17th edition of that
publication.13 The article proposes the establishment by the interested powers of a
neutral zone outside the settlement, and in the letter it is suggested that each of the
powers send to Shanghai a force of 1000 men for the protection of the International
Settlement. The opinion is expressed that the sending of five destroyers to Shanghai
from Manila would not prove particularly effective.
The American community in Shanghai is quite as insistent in its demands for protection
as the British, and I venture, therefore, to request the Department’s instructions as to
the policy which will be adopted by our Government in the eventuality of a repetition
of a situation such as has recently prevailed in Shanghai.
I have [etc.]
JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN
13 Not printed.

[Document 424]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
“General Chang Tsung-chang14 with about 10,000 troops has arrived
Shanghai and taken charge. State his force will not go beyond Lunghua.
Local civil officials are being changed. Practically no disturbance Shanghai
and vicinity. Am leaving for Hankow Saturday night. Consider it advisable
that present force less Stewart remain in Chinese waters for a while.”
2. Chang Tso-lin is now master of the eastern section of North China from Harbin to
Shanghai.
3. Military Attaché Barnard leaving Shanghai for Peking today.
SCHURMAN
14 Commander of detachment of Chang Tso-lin’s Manchurian army.

[Document 425]
The Netherlands Minister in China (Oudendijk), Senior Minister, to the
American Minister (Schurman)15
PEKING, February 5, 1925.
Circular No. 30
Subject:—Situation in Shanghai.
Referring to Circular No. 2116 the Senior Minister has the honour to circulate herewith
among his Honourable Colleagues the translation of a Note, dated February 4th, which
he received from the Wai Chiao Pu in reply to his Note of January 27th,16a on the
subject of the situation in and around Shanghai.
A copy of this translation has been sent to the Senior Consul in Shanghai.
[Enclosure—Translation]
Note From the Wai Chiao Pu to the Netherlands Minister (Oudendijk)
PEKING, February 4, 1925.
MONSIEUR LE MINISTRE: I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s
Note, dated January 27th, to the effect that renewed hostilities between Chinese
military leaders again threaten the lives and properties of the foreign residents, and
requesting, in the interest of all the inhabitants, that the strictest order be given by
telegraph to the authorities in Kiangsu province that no troops be allowed to come
within the neighbourhood of the foreign habitations in or near the foreign Settlement
and Concession, and expressing the hope that the Chinese Government assumes
responsibility for the protection of foreign lives and properties and will not fail to
maintain normal conditions in and around Shanghai.
In reply I have the honour to inform Your Excellency that I have duly transmitted the
contents of this Note to the Office of the Chief Executive with the request that the
necessary instructions be given by telegram to the Senior military officers in Kiangsu
province.

Hoping that Your Excellency will be good enough to inform the other Foreign
Ministers in Peking of the above, I avail [etc.]
SEAL OF THE WAI CHIAO PU
15 Copy received by the Department on April 6.
16 Not printed.
16a Not printed.

[Document 426]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, February 5, 1925—noon.
59. On January 15th Tuan issued mandates ordering conversion Shanghai Arsenal to
industrial uses and on ground Shanghai is important commercial port ordering that
henceforth no troops nor military organizations should be located there.17
The consular body Shanghai has now requested the foreign ministers to take steps to
induce the Chinese Government to dismantle the Woosung forts and evacuate troops
there.

Does the Department desire me to join in a suggestion or request to the Chinese
Government in line with consuls’ request? Please telegraph instructions as soon as
possible.
SCHURMAN

[Document 427]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
the Chinese Government to convert the Shanghai Arsenal and to take other measures
designed to safeguard the commercial interests centered at that port. With respect,
however, to the proposal that the foreign ministers join in a suggestion to the Chinese
Government to dismantle the Woosung forts and evacuate the troops there, the
Department does not feel that it should depart from its past policy in matters of this
kind and it cannot therefore authorize you to join in representations of the character
described. In this connection, you are referred to the Department’s telegram No. 184,
HUGHES
19 Not printed.

[Document 428]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
SCHURMAN

[Document 429]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
interview and according to American consul’s written report “made it plain that he was
determined first to oust Feng, Hu and Sun;21 second, that he and Wu Pei-fu were on
excellent terms; and, third, that hostilities would start in the very near future. Further,
more as an intimation, that he himself would establish the next government in Peking.”
Consul adds small local coin currency “depreciating for some time and in the past few
days the drop in the value of this currency has been quickened considerably. The
symptoms are the same as were present last autumn just before the outbreak of
hostilities between Wu and Chang.”
Chang informed consuls he was reorganizing his army and expected within a month “a
large consignment of arms and ammunition at present en route from Europe.”
Consul believes it is Chang’s intention “once he overcomes Feng in the spring to install
himself as the ruler of China.” Both consuls surmise that Chang’s reason for the
interview was that he “was probably looking forward to the time when the question of
the recognition by the foreign powers of his government with himself as head in Peking
would come; he would not want to be in the position of not being granted recognition,
after he had gone to so much trouble.”
I believe it inevitable that Chang should fight it out before long with Feng. Probably his
motive in sending for the consuls was (1) to feel out how much moral support he might
get from their countries in his warfare against what he calls the hosts of Bolshevism,
and (2) to ascertain by subsequent percussions what were the relations of their
countries with Feng and his military associates. The military attaché on the basis of
reports from Mukden, etc., does not expect fighting in the immediate future.
SCHURMAN
20 At Mukden.
21 Hu Ching-yi and Sun Yu-eh, lieutenants of Feng Yu-hsiang.

[Document 430]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 27, 1925.
No. 309
SIR: Information has been received by His Majesty’s Government which leads them to
fear that civil war on an extensive scale may again break out in the near future in North
China, and that the rival forces are likely to be commanded on the one side by Chang
Tso-Lin and on the other by Feng Yu-Hsiang and his associates. I need hardly
emphasize the deplorable results which would follow any such outbreak and the serious
damage which would be caused to the country in general and its arteries of
transportation in particular.
In these circumstances, His Majesty’s Ambassador at Tokio has been instructed to
ascertain from the Japanese Government, as the Great Power most directly concerned,
whether they desire to make any proposals with a view to international consultation or
the use of diplomatic pressure upon the rival Chinese groups so as to prevent the
hostilities now threatened. It appears to His Majesty’s Government that this is an
opportune moment for Japan to submit constructive proposals calling for joint pacific
action, and it is scarcely necessary to add that any such suggestions emanating from the
Imperial Government would both carry great weight with and would be warmly
welcomed by Mr. Secretary Chamberlain.
In furnishing you with the substance of the instructions which have been sent to Sir C.
Eliot, I am directed to solicit the cooperation of the United States Government in this
important matter and to say that His Majesty’s Government would appreciate an early
expression of their views upon the questions dealt with in this note.
The situation which unhappily seems likely to arise in China has also been brought to
the notice of the French Government, to whom the attitude of my Government has been
made known.
I have [etc.]
ESME HOWARD

[Document 431]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)22
[Paraphrase]
56. Department today received from British Embassy following note: [Here follows
text of note printed supra.]
Please send me as soon as possible your comments on this proposal. At present it is my
opinion that it would not be wise for us to join in a request to the Japanese Government
to offer suggestions for united peaceful action, as it would rather appear to commit us
to join in such action if a plan should be formulated by Japan. I somewhat fear that
antiforeign feeling in China would be aroused by such a move. This matter should be
carefully considered by you.
Repeat for information to Embassy in Tokyo as our No. 35.
KELLOGG
22 See last paragraph for instructions to repeat to Tokyo as No. 35.

[Document 432]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 28, 1925—noon.
36. Our 35 yesterday, quoting British note, repeated to you from Legation in China.
Telegraph as soon as possible any pertinent information you may have and also your
opinion of proposal. Department’s course has not been definitely decided as yet, so do
not make any inquiry of Japanese officials.
KELLOGG

[Document 433]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 6 p.m.]
1. Frequently and recently I have warned the Department that further fighting
will inevitably take place in China.
2. For the last three years the grounds for the action now proposed in the first
paragraph of the British note have existed not less flagrantly in substantially
the same form with only slight change of names. The Chinese have suffered
terribly during all this time and foreign trade has been greatly handicapped.
Transportation by railway was almost completely paralyzed from September
1924 to February 1925. The Peking-Mukden, Tientsin-Pukow, and Shanghai-
Nanking lines, in which controlling financial interest is British, were among
the railways included.
3. The statement in the British note that Japan is the great power most
directly concerned, is not true, the British standing foremost in the
commercial interests for which all nations alike cultivate China. The leading
position of Japan is true only in respect to the imperialistic position which
has been acquired forcibly in Manchuria by the Japanese. The Soviet Union
is a formidable rival in this respect as well as in geographical proximity. I
believe that this British proposal reestablishes in effect the Japanese
contentions as to her dominant position in relation to China which was
crystallized in the Lansing-Ishii Agreement23 which the Washington
Conference happily canceled,24 or at least that it offers an opportunity to
reestablish these contentions.
4. Probably railway construction in China and the development of commerce
are not the chief motives of the British Government. Since the World War,
Great Britain is more than ever dependent upon foreign trade for its
economic life. Owing to military and political disorders the Chinese market
has come far short of the expectations of the British financial and trading

community in Shanghai and the treaty ports. Japan is as much interested in
advancing her Chinese trade which has suffered both from general causes and
from boycotting. To appeal to both the trading and imperialistic instincts of
the Japanese is a clever play on the part of the British Government. There is
reason to expect cooperation by France because of French policy toward
China. Because of our “hands off” policy, American cooperation is the least
to be expected.
5. The British have another motive. Great Britain has been unpopular with
the Japanese and has been the object of constant criticism from them ever
since the Anglo-Japanese Alliance was abrogated. The policy of the British
regarding the base at Singapore has greatly intensified this feeling. The
sending of the present British note to the Japanese Government is a means of
improving the British position in Japan without disadvantage, unless, indeed,
the United States should offer criticism because the British are not adhering
to the American policy of masterly inactivity in China. Another consideration
is whether the French and Japanese might not use this move to improve their
own relations with the Soviet Union.
7. Ostensibly the purpose of the British proposal is to prevent hostilities
which now threaten. The means to be used is international consultation or the
bringing of diplomatic pressure upon the rival Chinese factions. Japan is to
be the primary agency, the Japanese Government being requested to offer
constructive proposals for united, peaceable action.
8. As the initiating agent, Japan will consider her own interests and almost
certainly will support Chang as she did in last fall’s fighting. If Chang and
Tuan need a modification of the arms embargo for the benefit of the national
government or a new loan to enable them to carry on, the Japanese would
probably give them support.
9. The means proposed for carrying out this suggestion, whether international
consultation, peaceful action, or pressure, would not be effective with any
party except Chang Tso-lin. He would become the protégé of the foreign
governments. All his rivals, especially the Kuomintang, Feng Yu-hsiang, the
Communists, radicals, and students (a most powerful factor in the existing
political situation) would appeal to racial and national feeling against the
foreign imperialists, who, by using the military, would dominate China. I
fully agree with you that antiforeign feeling would be aroused in China by
the suggested program.

10. The program suggested would not obtain the end sought. It would not
prevent hostilities if they are to occur. Foreign powers cannot independently
settle China’s political and military problems. China herself alone can solve
these problems. The powers can only facilitate a settlement. They should
avoid even the appearance of intervening on the side of any faction or group
in the conflict which impends, but should give all appropriate recognition and
encouragement to any governmental authority which may emerge
independently with reasonable likelihood of authority and stability. The first
three paragraphs of the Department’s telegram No. 293 of November 25,
entirely concur with the views there stated.
11. The existing military and political chaos is a standing menace to China
and to the peace of the world as well as a great obstacle to commerce. Upon
the collapse of a dynasty such chaos has been a common phenomenon in the
history of China and sometimes has lasted for decades. Intelligent Chinese
realize, however, that the annihilation of time and space and the contact with
foreign countries make it necessary that they establish a new and workable
government within a shorter interval than in bygone centuries. It is my
deliberate opinion that sympathetic, thoughtful, and helpful cooperation with
the Chinese is the wisest policy for the United States to pursue in the present
crisis; the same policy which we have always followed in the past.
This telegram is repeated to Tokyo.
SCHURMAN
24 The Lansing-Ishii Agreement was not canceled by the Washington Conference. For
cancelation of the agreement, see Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. II, pp. 591 ff., and ibid.,
1923, vol. II, pp. 455 ff.
Ambassador in Great Britain, ibid., 1924, vol. I, p. 423.

[Document 434]
The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
March 27 British Ambassador asked if I had heard anything. He told me that Debuchi27
had just informed him that Foreign Office had no news of impending strife between
Chang Tso-lin and Feng Yu-hsiang. Yesterday’s papers printed long denial by Chang
that there was any unfriendliness, hostility, or disagreement between him and Feng or
the government of Tuan Chi-jui. For the reasons you state I consider form of British
suggestion to be objectionable. Another objection is that it might be taken that the
suggestion was made after a consultation between Great Britain and the United States
and that the powers should cooperate directly in framing a plan for united action as
well as in carrying out the plan.
My suggestions are as follows: 1. That inquiry be made of France and Japan as to what
information they have on the reported imminence of a conflict. Because of superior
facilities Japan generally has received earlier and more accurate information
concerning events in China than have the other powers. 2. That the United States ask
Japan directly for suggestions. 3. That you then make your decision as to American
policy. There does not seem to be anything in the present situation greatly different
from the situation last fall when the understanding was that no action should be taken.
BANCROFT
27 Japanese Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[Document 435]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
WASHINGTON, March 30, 1925.
No. 877
which you refer to the recent civil warfare in the vicinity of Shanghai and request the
Department’s instructions as to the policy which will be adopted by the Government in
the eventuality of a repetition of a situation such as has recently prevailed at that port.
The Department regards it as impracticable to lay down in advance, otherwise than in
very general terms, its attitude toward a particular situation such as you describe; for its
attitude must depend largely upon the existing circumstances. The complexity and
uncertainty of political events in China at the present time require, for the appropriate
protection of American interests, that the traditional principles of American policy with
respect to that country receive, in their application to particular situations, a flexibility
of treatment which shall at the same time leave their integrity unimpaired and afford no
basis for possible charges of inconsistency or ulterior motives on the part of this
Government.
With regard to the suggestion appearing in the Shanghai press that the interested
Powers establish a neutral zone outside the Settlement and that each of the Powers send
to Shanghai a force of 1000 men for the protection of the Settlement, the Department
approves of the view which you expressed to the British Minister, as reported in your
on Chinese territory, that the American Government would be opposed to such a policy,
and that you would not consider it unless the naval authorities reported that it was an
imperative necessity for the protection of American and other foreign lives in Shanghai.
In this connection, reference is also made to the statement of Admiral McVay, reported
decided that the force available was sufficient to keep defeated soldiers out of the
Settlement.
With reference, generally, to the question of protection of American citizens throughout
China, the Department desires to refer to the statement made in its instruction No. 600
of March 15, 1924,29 that “the extent of possible protection, is, and must remain,
substantially that which may be obtained by diplomatic means and by the presence,

actual or potential, of our naval forces in Chinese waters”. In the absence of some
actual, or definitely threatened emergency, imperilling American lives, such as the
Boxer uprising of 1900, it is unlikely that any other or greater degree of protection will
be afforded Americans in China than that specified in that instruction.
For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW

[Document 436]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, April 2, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 309 of March
27, 1925, in which it is stated that the British Government fears that civil war may
again break out in the near future in North China to the serious detriment of the country
in general and to its arteries of communication in particular. In view of these
circumstances, you state that the British Ambassador in Tokyo has been instructed to
ascertain from the Japanese Government whether it desires to make any proposals with
a view to international consultation or the use of diplomatic pressure upon the rival
Chinese groups so as to prevent the hostilities now threatened. You add that it appears
to the British Government that this is an opportune moment for Japan to submit
constructive proposals calling for joint pacific action and that you have been directed to
solicit the cooperation of the American Government in approaching Japan upon this
important matter.
The seriousness of the present situation in China, with its menace of a further outbreak
of civil war, has not failed to cause this Government also the greatest concern; and it
has therefore given the most careful consideration to the proposals of the British
Government as stated in your note. As a result of a thorough review of the matter, I
venture to submit the following observations as briefly summarizing the views of this
Government:
(1) The use of diplomatic pressure upon the rival Chinese groups so as to
prevent hostilities would in effect constitute a form of interference in the
domestic affairs of China. In the recent hostilities, it has been the carefully
observed policy of the principal Powers concerned, including Japan, to
abstain from such intervention, a policy which this Government believes has
had much to do with the comparative immunity of foreign persons and
property within the areas affected. It does not appear that the hostilities now
threatened are likely to be of a character essentially different from such
conflicts as have hitherto occurred, and this Government is scarcely inclined
to believe, in view of the declared policy of the Japanese Government of non-
interference in such matters, that a suggestion to that Government that it
initiate a démarche of the character described, would prove acceptable. In
this connection, the speech of the Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs at the
recent opening of the Diet appears most pertinent,—particularly the

statement that the Japanese Government had no intention whatever of
interfering in the domestic affairs of China and that it had consistently
conformed to that policy.
(2) Irrespective, however, of the attitude of the Japanese Government toward
a proposal to apply diplomatic pressure with a view to the prevention of
hostilities, this Government is of the view that pressure limited to joint
pacific action would not prove effectual and would in all probability be
disregarded by whichever faction sought to profit by taking the offensive.
(3) Aside from the question of the doubtful efficacy of the course proposed,
this Government cannot escape the conviction that such an effort to influence
by external pressure the course of Chinese domestic politics would almost
certainly aggravate, and perhaps render critical, the present wide-spread anti-
foreign sentiment among certain classes of the Chinese people. As the British
Government is aware, the last few months have seen a recrudescence of such
sentiment, which has manifested itself acutely at various places throughout
China and has appeared in different forms, opposing foreign capital, foreign
education, and foreign Christian missions. While this Government has no
desire to exaggerate the dangers of this situation, it is reluctant to assume the
risk of exacerbating such sentiment by adopting a course which seems likely
at the same time to prove ineffectual for the purposes in mind, and to afford a
basis for a possible charge of favoring one faction as against another.
This Government, therefore, while viewing with the greatest sympathy the objects
which the British Government has in mind, and not wishing to close the door to a
consideration of any practical suggestion which may be evolved, regrets that it cannot
see its way to adopt the course of action proposed in your note of March 27.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 437]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Feng Yu-hsiang continues to receive steady stream of munitions from
Urga. Delivery of the 5,000 machine guns anticipated in near future.
Apparently no attempt any longer to conceal supply of munitions from
Russia to Feng. Understood all motor cars in Urga being requisitioned for
this purpose. Mongolian forces under Soviet control being strengthened;
5,000 instructors, of whom 500 are Russian, introduced into Inner Mongolia.
I am informed that on April 29 Fengtien army authorities took over
temporar[il]y at Shanhaikwan and ordered mobilization of rolling stock there.
Chang Tsung-chang recently mandated Tupan of Shangtung, which, on paper
at least, consolidates Chang Tso-lin’s position from Mukden to Shanghai
through Tientsin and Nanking. Tariff war tax [between?] Chinese Eastern and
South Manchuria Railway continues. Efforts by Soviets to control Chinese
Eastern increasing with Chinese opposition thereto strengthening. Soviet and
Chinese railway officials openly quarreling.
2. All these circumstances make clash between Chang Tso-lin and Feng Yu-
hsiang appear more imminent and possibly immediate. If this conflict takes
place, while forces of Chang and Feng would do actual fighting, at least for
the present, Japan and Soviets, in my opinion, would be real contenders for
control Northern China. Military attaché requests War Department be
informed. Substance transmitted to commander in chief.
Copy by mail to Tokio.
MAYER
30 Not printed.

[Document 438]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Chang Tso-lin’s Peking representative states that Marshal Chang is coming
to Tientsin on 27th or 28th May and probably to Peking almost immediately
thereafter.
2. Representative likewise states Chang Tso-lin intends to secure military
control of Peking and environs in order to be in a position to head a
government should Tuan vacate office. This military control to be obtained
by substitution of Chang Tso-lin troops for Feng Yu-hsiang troops and
attaching gendarmerie and police to Chang. Thus substitution seemingly now
in peaceful progress.
3. Impossible at this juncture to forecast under what guise, legal or otherwise,
Chang might attempt to assume national leadership.
4. Information obtained by military attaché strengthens opinion expressed in
5. Repeated to Tokio.
MAYER

[Document 439]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
MAYER

[Document 440]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. General situation as concerning Chang Tso-lin and Feng Yuhsiang
apparently as follows: Former still Tientsin with train ready to start at any
moment for Mukden. On the other hand Chang continues to state his desire to
crush Feng—that he intends to do so shortly and come to Peking and take
over control of affairs. He is making desperate efforts to obtain British
support both civilian and governmental principally of financial character.
2. Emissaries of Chang have called upon British Chargé d’Affaires recently
who has given them verbal negative reply. Chang’s position appears to be
that he may at any moment for some reason or other either return to
Manchuria or come to Peking and assume control, fighting Feng or not,
dependent on latter’s attitude … In addition to financial stringency Chang is
said to be threatened with disaffection among troops and subordinate leaders.
3. Substantially Feng’s position is the same as Chang’s. He is undecided
whether to force matters vis-à-vis Chang on present issues and is supported
and undoubtedly urged on by Soviet and radical Kuomintang assistance and
incitement. Anything may overturn the balance in his case as in Chang’s and
send him here to forestall a possible coup by the Fengtien forces. Feng
continues to issue increasingly fiery and rabid statement[s] addressing his
soldiers in a fervid antiforeign manner and particularly anti-British. He
openly asserts war should be declared against Great Britain. Naval attache
has information from highly reliable source that Feng has about completed
preparations for seizure of the Government and is only awaiting signal from
Canton.
MAYER

[Document 441]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., July 9, 1925.
[Received July 10.]
No. 686
SIR: I have the honour to invite reference to the recent communications which I have
addressed to you on the subject of events in China ending with my note No. 684 of the
7th instant.32 Owing to the rapid developments of the situation and to the dangers with
which it is fraught, His Majesty’s Government consider it to be of the utmost
importance that their future policy towards China, as also that of the other interested
Powers, should be clearly defined at the earliest possible moment. I am accordingly
instructed to lay before you the following summary of the situation as it now appears to
His Majesty’s Government which, for purposes of convenience, is grouped under
geographical headings according to the areas affected by the present disturbances.
(1) North China.
Chang, after making overtures (which have not been encouraged) for support to enable
him to crush Communist elements which are fomenting the present anti-foreign
agitation, seems to be drawing in his horns with a corresponding increase of Feng’s
military power in and around Peking. Chang is apparently embarrassed by Russian
activities in that part of Northern China, which he is himself primarily concerned to
maintain as the basis of his operations. Thus the situation, as viewed by His Majesty’s
Government, is increasingly propitious for the emergence of Feng, who has a
considerable and well trained force at his disposal, and is being supplied with
munitions of war from Russia, as a national patriotic leader, pledged, with Russian
encouragement, to destroy the position of the foreign powers in China, He has already
openly declared himself in favour of war upon His Majesty’s Government. The present
state of Chinese feeling, which is being systematically and deliberately exploited by
Soviet agents, therefore makes it necessary seriously to consider the possibility that
Feng may at any moment translate his words into deeds with results which must be a
matter of grave concern to other treaty Powers as it is to His Majesty’s Government.
(2) Yang Tze Valley.
Here there have been a series of disorders which, as the latest information at the
disposal of His Majesty’s Government indicates, may at any moment be repeated and

endanger the safety of treaty ports on this waterway. The resulting adverse effects upon
the whole position of foreign interests in China hardly require to be emphasized.
The aggressive attitude of the Communist Government now installed at Canton is
proved by recent events and it is impossible not to feel considerable uneasiness
regarding the position of the foreign community at Shanghai [Shameen?] who are on
the defensive; the danger presented by Canton is not purely local. The Canton
authorities possess in the Whampoa Officers’ Training School, an institution which His
Majesty’s Government are reliably informed is a distinctly military asset. It is partly
staffed with Russian instructors and must be regarded as the possible nucleus of a
military force which, under conditions now prevailing, may seriously affect the whole
Chinese situation. Indeed, recent events appear, in the opinion of His Majesty’s Naval
authorities, to indicate the possibility of a Russo-Chinese attempt to blockade the
passage of the Canton river. In these circumstances, it is subject for consideration
whether immediate steps ought not to be taken if possible to avert and, failing
prevention, to provide against a combination of dangers which, if they materialize,
must inevitably lead to forcible action on a considerable scale for the protection of
foreign interests, life and property.
In deciding what policy they should adopt to cope with the exigencies of the situation,
His Majesty’s Government are above all anxious that their attitude should in all
respects possible correspond with that of the United States Government. I am
accordingly instructed to enquire whether the United States Government are in general
agreement with the foregoing summary and, in the affirmative event, I should be
grateful to learn at the earliest opportunity, what steps your Government consider
should be taken to meet the situation, together with a statement of their reasons for any
action proposed.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 442]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, July 13, 1925.
general accord with the British Government as to the seriousness of the situation in
China as described under the geographical headings used by you. This situation is
being very carefully watched by the Government of the United States and by the
commanders of its military and naval forces in the Far East, and, in accord with their
advice, a sufficient force of naval vessels is being maintained at the Asiatic Station to
cope with the conditions now in existence. I have no doubt His Majesty’s Government
is fully informed of the classes of these vessels, their location and the number of men in
their crews. In addition, the United States has a military force of a thousand men
cooperating with the expeditionary forces of the other protocol Powers for the purpose
of maintaining communication between Peking and the sea.
After consultation with the Naval and Military authorities of this Government I find
that no request has come from the commanders of the American forces in the Far East
asking for additional assistance. I am informed that in their opinion American forces
there are adequate for all present purposes.
This Government will be glad to be informed of the views of the British Government or
any specific suggestions which it may have to make in regard to coping with the
exigencies of the situation now existing. Up to the present this Government has not
considered any action other than that described above, which has been taken for the
purpose of protecting the lives and property of its citizens. Without in the least trying to
minimize the dangers to foreigners it is very difficult for this Government to state what
steps it will be necessary to take in order to insure adequate protection as it seems
necessary, to a large extent, to rely on the judgment of the commanders who are on the
ground and have a full knowledge of the situation.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 443]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Mukden.
MACMURRAY

[Document 444]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., July 27, 1925.
[Received July 29.]
No. 712
SIR: I have the honour to refer to recent correspondence on the situation in China and to
inform you that, according to reports which have reached His Majesty’s Government,
the position has eased to some extent and there is less cause for anxiety than during the
first half of the present month. In these circumstances, His Majesty’s Government have
taken no special precautionary measures beyond despatching H. M. Aircraft Carrier
Hermes to Hong Kong with the necessary complement of aeroplanes.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 445]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. Although no overt acts of hostility have yet been reported, there has come
to exist a situation of great tensity between the forces of Chang Tso-lin in
Kiangsu and the Chekiang forces under Sun Chuan-fang who is believed to
be acting upon an understanding with Feng Yu-hsiang and Wu Pei-fu for the
purpose of driving Chang back into Manchuria and eliminating him from the
coalition which has been supporting Tuan Chi-jui in power here. It is possible
that Sun is seeking merely to increase area of his individual power and will
be content with obtaining possession of Shanghai. If, however, he actually
brings on a conflict with Chang forces it will apparently indicate that Wu has
aligned himself with Feng for the purpose of obtaining definite control over
Central Government to the exclusion of Chang and forestalling the possibility
that Tuan might intrench himself in power as a consequence of increased
revenues to be derived from the results of Customs Conference.34
2. Should that prove to be the case it seems likely that the whole of North
China will be involved in a new civil war between Feng and Chang with the
possession of Peking as the principal objective. It is only possible to
conjecture the course of such a struggle; but it would seem that Feng is in
stronger position to obtain control of the Capital and of such authority as still
rests with Central Government. It seems likely that in that case he would
eliminate Tuan. It is possible that, if the new administration established by
him were to be recognized by the powers, Feng would ask the Tariff
Conference to stop; but it is at least equally probable that Feng who is
strongly under Soviet influences and beholden to them for the very large
quantities of arms and ammunition with which he has recently been able to
supply his armies would refuse to have anything to do with the conference
and would emulate Turkish example of baldly denouncing so-called unequal
treaties.
3. Should Feng accomplish his purpose against Chang, there is, nevertheless,
prospect that the coalition between him and Wu would break down as it is

based only upon an immediate community of interest in restricting Chang to
Manchuria, and is understood not to involve any reconciliation of antagonism
created by Feng’s treachery towards Wu a year ago.
4. I report these somewhat speculative matters merely in order that you may
be prepared to envisage the possibilities in the event that a new situation is
suddenly created by hostilities in the neighborhood of Shanghai.
MACMURRAY
33 Not printed.

[Document 446]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
451. Following from Shanghai:
“October 17, 1 p.m. Forces of Sun Chuan-fang have completely occupied
Shanghai without resistance, and advance guards are reported to have
reached outskirts of Soochow. It is reported that retreating Fengtien soldiers
have blown up one of the bridges near Soochow. Since there are no other
troops in this vicinity to oppose Sun no fighting is expected here. Jacobs.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 447]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. It is reported that negotiations between representatives of Chang Tso-lin
and Feng Yu-hsiang for peaceful division of power have failed. Chang now
appears to be confronted by three leading antagonists, Feng, Wu Pei-fu, and
Sun Chuan-fang. Also reported that Tuan will side with Feng against Chang.
2. Feng’s troops are mobilizing and 30,000 reported moving towards Peking;
5,000 Russian troops reported to be near Kalgan cooperating with Feng and
two additional Red divisions entering Mongolia from Chita.
with more constantly entering through Shanhaikuan. Reported that Chang’s
forces include 1,500 Japanese and 1,200 White Russians in China uniform.
4. Early conflict in Jehol area and between Peking and Tientsin not unlikely.
5. Chang’s representative Ou Tsing (see Legation’s despatch 2767, February
Chang to fight both Wu and Feng. He stated Chang is entirely confident of
success in such a conflict, claiming total 400,000 men with rifles. Chang’s
representative conveyed very confidential offer from Chang to assist the
powers to reach a reasonable agreement with the Chinese Government in
tariff matters in case the Government’s demands are excessive and also
offered assistance in protecting foreign interests generally. Chang evidently
continues to desire to be accepted as champion of foreign powers against
Nationalist extremists.
6. Information and views herein regarding military matters are based on
reports from military attaché.
please communicate to War and Navy Departments.
MACMURRAY

35 Nant nrinted.

[Document 448]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. Information from several reliable sources indicates that possibility of
immediate conflict in the north, that is, between Chang and Feng, appreciably
diminished. It seems certain that, in typically Chinese fashion, a compromise
agreement has suddenly been arrived at between them which it is rather
generally believed will tide over the difficulties between them for the next
few months. According to this agreement it would appear that Chang will
remove his troops from Paotingfu and Tamingfu and probably as far as Lutai
on the Peking-Mukden Railway some 50 miles north of Tientsin, thus
evacuating all positions held between Nanking and Tientsin, and that the
latter port will be made available to Feng for import of munitions, etc. Feng
on his part agrees to withdraw from vicinity of Peking northward, thus
leaving a neutral zone in Chihli. Superficially Chang appears to give up more
than Feng but it is quite likely that Chang is only too glad to be given a face-
saving excuse for the withdrawal of his too widely extended line and
commitments south of Tientsin.
2. There remain of course the several independent factors, such as the Honan
situation, which is very complicated by Sun Chuanfang, and the Yangtze
provincial leaders with Wu Pei-fu nominally at their head. While it is true
that the tension as regards an immediate conflict between Chang and Feng,
which has been on the increase until the past few days, has now been very
greatly lessened, it would be unwise to consider the possibility of war past
since the equilibrium may be disturbed at any time by the action of the
factors noted above over whom neither Chang nor Feng exercises effective
control.
3. Through train service south from Peking is now completely suspended;
express trains on Peking-Hankow line taken off; express from Mukden from
5 to 15 hours late; and while Peking-Suiyuan Railway running on fairly
regular schedules, passengers are prohibited from disembarking at Great Wall

and Ming Tombs which are now in military zones delimited by Marshal
Feng.
4. Respectfully request repetition to War and Navy Department[s].
MACMURRAY
36 Not printed.

[Document 449]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5:24 p.m.]
1. Japanese Legation confirms reports that Marshal Chang Tso-lin and his
chief of staff, General Yang Yu-ting, have been placed in confinement at
Mukden by order of Manchurian General Kuo Sungling and that there is
dissension among Manchurian commanders at Shanhaikwan.
2. It also appears the [a?] fact that there is factional fighting among
Manchurian forces at Chinwangtao and Changli and that General Li Ching-
lin at Tientsin has declared independence of Chang. The railway is cut at
Lanchow and trains run only to Tangshan.
3. Honanese officers are arranging billets some 5 miles west of Peking.
4. In these circumstances and considering general military and political
instability throughout China I have recommended to commander in chief
Asiatic Fleet that one division of destroyers be kept available at Shanghai for
the present; that a second division be held in readiness for possible despatch
to Chinese waters in the near future; and that similarly to last year a force of
some 500 marines be in readiness at Cavite for immediate despatch to China
should situation here develop warranting such action.
5. Please repeat to Navy and War Departments as at request of naval and
military attachés.
MACMURRAY

[Document 450]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
[Received 7:49 p.m.]
Latest information is that while Yang Yu-ting has fled to Dairen [and] serious defection
among Fengtien forces south of the Wall amounted to factional fighting, there has been
no coup d’état at Mukden and Chang Tso-lin is still in control there. Although the
situation is still undefined it would seem that General Kuo Sung-ling and the
Manchurian forces between Tientsin and the Wall, having come to an agreement with
Marshal Feng Yu-hsiang, attempted to march on Mukden with the purpose of ousting
Marshal Chang, which attempt was blocked by loyal Manchurian forces at
Shanhaikwan.
MACMURRAY

[Document 451]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
1. On November 28th some thousands of students and workmen without interference
from police or Feng’s soldiers held demonstrations and destroyed property in the
residences of the Minister[s] of Finance and Education and elsewhere. The
demonstrators attempted for 3 hours to enter Chief Executive’s residence but soldiers
prevented this.
2. Among mass of leaflets and cartoons distributed were some issued under name of
Chinese Communist Society but more under Kuomintang. Following is portion of a
typical leaflet:
“Recover unconditionally the right of customs autonomy. Cancel all unequal
treaties. The people want real and actual independence in assembling
meetings, forming societies, in speech and in publications. Expel the
representatives of the various powers at the Customs Conference. Release all
fighters arrested in demonstrating against imperialism. Establish the military
strength of the masses. Overthrow imperialism. Support the people’s Military
Government of Canton. Expel Tuan Chi-jui; execute Chu Shen (former chief
of police); assemble a people’s conference truly representative of the people.”
MACMURRAY
37 Paragraph 4 not printed.

[Document 452]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
“December 6, 11 a.m. Chang has suffered complete debacle. Young Chang
retreated to a place very near to Mukden; position of Chang absolutely
hopeless. There is a general exodus from the city. I do not expect any danger
to any foreigners. Have heard Marshal will leave today.”
MACMURRAY
38 Not printed.

[Document 453]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
“December 8, 1 p.m. Chang and his son are determined to make hard fight.
Young Chang has a strong position on the Liao. There is still a small
possibility that the Marshal can hold on. The city quiet.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 454]
The Minister in Chirm (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
intercepted messages from international train to General Connor, and other official
sources: International train which left Peking December 10, 8 a.m., for return trip to
Tientsin fired upon by Li Ching-lin artillery 4 miles south of Yangtsim presumably
early this morning. Train slightly damaged by shrapnel but no casualties; returned to
Yangtsim. Two of Feng’s armored trains were immediately behind international train
and it is possible international train was fired upon in view of this circumstance.
Foreign commandants at Tientsin are protesting to Li. General Connor obtained
permission to send relief train at 2 o’clock today to Yangtsun with food, etc., and to
bring passengers to Tientsin. Contingent of Feng’s forces has occupied railway station
at Yangtsun and the area surrounding it with one or more batteries of artillery which
have begun firing on Li’s troops who are returning fire. Passengers on the train sought
safety underneath cars during the battle which is now raging with shells falling about
them. French Legation guard has direct telephone communication with Yangtsun and
promises to give me half-hourly bulletins concerning state of affairs there.
2. Senior minister, on behalf of Heads of Legation, and myself are now leaving to call
upon General Lu Chung-lin, representative of Marshal Feng Yu-hsiang in Peking, to
maintained that this article gives foreign railway guards exclusive right to occupy
Yangtsun and other points named in article 9. We will endeavor to persuade Feng to
withdraw his forces from Yangtsun and to accord international train every possible
protection. Likewise we will protest against international train being closely followed
by any military trains.
3. Following as background. Telephone communication with Tientsin has been
interrupted for 2 days; regular train service has likewise been interrupted for that period
owing to heavy troop movement, removal of rails at various points, and at least partial
blowing up of Bridge 31 at Yangtsun. International train in question left Tientsin at 10
the delay being occasioned by the necessity of repairing the bridge at Yangtsun and the
rails at various points and likewise on account of congestion of troop trains.

International train is under the command of Captain Cope of the American Army forces
at Tientsin.
4. Repeat to War and Navy Departments at request of military and naval attachés.
(Section two and last.)
1. General Lu Chung-lin informed Netherlands Minister and myself that in
the circumstances it was impossible for him to suggest to Marshal Feng
immediate withdrawal of his troops from Yangtsun since the struggle for
Tientsin is now at a critical stage, an ultimatum having been delivered to Li
Ching-lin’s forces either to accept by tonight certain terms offered to them or
take the consequences. Lu stated there was every reason to expect heavy
fighting tonight nearer Tientsin and expressed grave doubt whether
arrangement could be made to get train through. It was finally arranged that
Peck, Chinese Secretary of Legation, and Mr. Tang, representing General Lu,
should proceed at once by automobile to Yangtsun for the purpose of
facilitating the return of train to Peking or if advisable its proceeding to
Tientsin. It seems advisable to leave the decision of this point to the
discretion of commander of train in consultation with Peck. The British,
French, Italian and Japanese Ministers concur in arranging for the return of
train if deemed advisable. I have communicated in this sense with General
Connor by radio, requesting him to communicate accordingly to the train
commander which he can do by radio.
2. According to Lu fighting has advanced some miles beyond Yangtsun
towards Tientsin leaving Yangtsun quiet and out of danger. A simultaneous
report from commandant of the French post at Yangtsun however is to the
effect that the battle continues but that passengers safe and comfortable.
3. Repeat to War, Navy Department, at the request of military, naval attaché.
MACMURRAY
39 Telegram in two sections.
40 Brig. Gen. William D. Connor, U. S. Army, commanding American forces in China.

[Document 455]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
with all on board unhurt and well.
MACMURRAY

[Document 456]
The Consul General at Tientsin (Gauss) to the Secretary of State
Communication with Peking now limited to radio. Li Ching-lin, Military Governor of
Chihli, successfully resisting advance Feng Yu-hsiang forces from Peking on a line
more than 6 miles from Tientsin. Feng’s forces however attempting encircling
movement to the east and Feng’s troops at Tangshan also advancing against Tientsin.
Military Governor expects reenforcements from Shantung without which his position
appears hopeless.
GAUSS

[Document 457]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
528. 1. I have communicated confidentially to General Connor at Tientsin substantially
as follows: It was decided at meeting today of ministers representing signatories of the
Boxer protocol42 that it would be inadvisable to force an issue by ordering international
train to proceed regardless of consequences inasmuch as present interruption of railway
to Tientsin results from temporary conditions incident to hostilities that are in no way
antiforeign. However, aforementioned ministers are protesting to the Chief Executive
through the senior minister who is seeking earliest opportunity to present the following
aide-mémoire upon which he will enlarge.
2. “I am desired by their Excellencies the Ministers for America, Belgium, France,
Great Britain, Italy, Japan and Spain, representatives of the signatory powers of the
protocol of 1901, to draw Your Excellency’s most serious attention to the fact that as a
result of serious hostilities between contending Chinese armies it has been impossible
during the last few days to proceed from here either by road or by train to Tientsin, and
to the circumstance that trains which the foreign guards intended to run themselves to
Tientsin had to return to the capital in order to avoid unfortunate incidents.
3. “I am further desired to urge that the necessary measures be taken to remedy at once
this state of affairs and to bring about the resumption of free communication between
here and Tientsin in accordance with the protocol of 1901.”
4. Fighting around Tientsin still indecisive.
MACMURRAY

[Document 458]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
substantially as follows: International train under Japanese command which left
Tientsin for Shanhaikuan the morning of 22nd was fired upon by Feng forces near
Hsinho and compelled to halt about 1:30 p.m. A subsequent attempt to proceed was
prevented by an armored train. Brigade commander of Feng forces boarded and
inspected train against the protest of the train commander. Officer in command of Feng
forces on that front, General Connor was informed, direct[ed] that the international
train return to Tientsin and [warned?] that he would open fire if the train did not retire
at once. Infantry and an armored train belonging to Feng’s forces were put in position
to resist an advance by the international train; its commander’s request for time to
report to senior commandant at Tientsin by radio was refused. Train returned to
Tientsin at 6 p.m.
2. Senior minister this morning conveyed these facts to Feng’s local diplomatic
representative with whom this Legation has been in negotiation concerning
arrangements for running of the international train back to Tientsin from Peking. He
surmised Feng’s commander on Tangku front had not yet received instructions as to
Feng’s approval of arrangement for operation of the international train (see below) but
promised to telegraph immediately to Feng urging that this commanding officer be sent
prompt orders. Senior minister likewise has addressed a note to the Chinese
Government which after reciting the facts states as follows:
“I have to invite Your Excellency’s attention to the above-stated facts which
constitute a very grave violation of article 9 of the protocol of 1901 and to
ask that immediate instructions be issued to permit the passage of the
international trains which it is proposed to send from Tientsin to Shanhaikuan
in the near future.”
week’s time arrangements for operation of international trains have been approved by
Feng, these arrangements meanwhile having been agreed to by Li Ching-lin. They

comprise provision for identification, prohibition of close pursuit of international train
by Chinese trains, and other provisions quite properly desired by contending forces for
their protection. The return of train from Peking to Tientsin scheduled for this morning
is again delayed owing to destruction of 22,000 meters of track and part of a bridge.
Repeated to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

[Document 459]
The Consul at Chefoo (Putnam) to the Secretary of State
The following telegram has been received for transmission from the consul general at
Tientsin:
“December 24, noon. Li Ching-lin forces are retreating from Tientsin after
stubborn resistance during a 2 days’ attack. Much confusion and disorder as
well as some looting in the native city but the foreign residential areas have
not been disturbed. Feng’s troops are now entering the city.”
PUTNAM

[Document 460]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. Meeting of interested ministers this morning; agreed to send the following identic
telegram to their respective Governments.
“In spite of the assurances given by the commandants of the forces several
attempts to restore the operations of the international train between Peking
and Tientsin on the one hand and Tientsin and Shanhaikwan on the other
were unsuccessful, the train from Shanhaikwan having had to return in face
of the danger of being fired on.
The interested representatives, believing that this apparently deliberate
violation of the protocol may be utilized in a campaign for the abolition of
existing treaties, think it desirable, independently of the protestations already
made, to affirm the necessity of effectually maintaining free communications
with the sea.
The use of force may be necessary and it being likely to lead to
complications which it would be preferable to avoid, they request instructions
of their respective Governments.”
2. Senior minister was also requested to telegraph senior commandant of international
forces at Tientsin that ministers think it at present inadvisable to renew attempt to run
international train to Shanhaikwan unless in the judgment of the commandants that
may be done safely and without incurring attack.
3. Since the meeting the senior minister has received word from the local representative
of Marshal Feng that the latter has already telegraphed instructions to the division
commander concerned that the international train must be allowed to pass without let or
hindrance.

4. It now appears that Feng forces have today occupied Tientsin.

5. Arrangements have been made by which international Peking train now here should
be able to go through to Tientsin immediately upon completion of necessary repairs to
the line.
MACMURRAY

[Document 461]
The Consul at Mukden (Sokobin) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8:42 p.m.]
It is reported that Marshal Chang has completely defeated Kuo.44 Most of the forces of
Kuo have surrendered. Kuo fled.
SOKOBIN
44 Kuo Sung-ling, commander of Manchurian forces attempting to overthrow Chang
Tso-lin.

[Document 462]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
Unless lives of American citizens are actually in danger, the Department would
disapprove of the use of force; and from statement in fifth paragraph of your telegram it
is assumed that the necessity to use force, which was apparent when the identic
telegram was drawn up, no longer exists.
GREW

[Document 463]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking. Commercial service resumed with depleted equipment.
MACMURRAY

[Document 464]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
2. Dated December 26th, Tuan yesterday issued three important mandates as follows:
1st, Tuan admits that he has failed to carry out his plans for political reforms and the
peaceful unification of the country, and he therefore ordains the adding of a responsible
cabinet to the system of the Provisional Government, and he intimates that he will not
oppose the cabinet’s measures; 2d, the system of the Provisional Government is so
modified as to abolish supreme control by the Chief Executive and vest it in the latter,
the Premier, and cabinet members jointly; 3d, Hsu Shih-ying is appointed Premier (see
last issue of the China Year Book). This appointment is understood to meet with the
approval of Feng Yü-hsiang and Kuomintang as well as of Tuan and the latter’s
political associates.
On December 25th mandates appointed Sun Yüeh, commander of the Third Army of
the Kuominchun, as Military and Civil Governor of Chihli in place of Li Ching-lin.
MACMURRAY

Decision by the United States and other
powers
to
accredit
Ministers
to
the
Provisional Government of China45
45 For previous correspondence concerning relations with the Provisional Government,
see ibid. , pp. 416 ff.
[465] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
[466] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[467] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[468] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[469] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[470] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[471] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[472] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[473] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[474] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[475] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[476] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[477] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[478] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[Document 465]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
[Paraphrase]
69. President Coolidge wishes to appoint Mr. John V. A. MacMurray, Assistant
Secretary of State, to succeed you as Minister in China. For MacMurray’s previous
record, see the Register of the Department of State.
Report by telegram whether the Chinese Government will consider this appointment
acceptable.
KELLOGG

[Document 466]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
for Foreign Affairs that MacMurray’s appointment as our Minister in China will be
satisfactory to the Chinese Government which will heartily welcome him. At the same
time the Minister for Foreign Affairs requested that our new Minister be ready to
present his credentials to Tuan Chi-jui.
I have been informed that the Belgian and French Ministers have not presented their
credentials as yet. I am seeking interviews with them to find out just what the facts are.
As soon as possible I will telegraph further on this subject.
SCHURMAN
46 Not printed.

[Document 467]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
colleagues. I learn that they were also urged to present their credentials, which they
declined to do, the French Minister saying that his credentials had not come and the
Belgian Minister stating that his were addressed to former President Tsao Kun. Their
real reason was that Tuan’s government is only de facto and that it would constitute de
jure recognition should they present their credentials. They expect that when the time
comes for de jure recognition, if it does, the powers will confer and act together. The
French and Belgian Ministers sent copies of their credentials to the Minister of Foreign
Affairs for his information.
SCHURMAN

[Document 468]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. In spite of previous assurances to his French and Belgian colleagues of his
solidarity with them in respect to presentation of letters of credence and only
having notified them after the audience with Tuan Chi-jui for purpose of
presentation had been arranged, the Spanish Minister, who arrived in Peking
after the French and Belgian Ministers, presented his letters of credence April
24th last with usual remarks which in no way referred to provisional
character of government or reserved any rights regarding de jure recognition.
Monsieur Garrido alleged to act in accordance with instructions from his
Government which he had not requested and assured the French and Belgian
Ministers that this formality did not imply de jure recognition. Spanish
Minister’s letters of credence were in the name of the President of the
Republic.
2. The French and Belgian Ministers have telegraphed for instructions,
stating that in these circumstances without agreeing with the Spanish
Minister they consider it necessary not to delay longer the presentation of
their letters of credence in order not to be anticipated by the new American
Minister who must soon be arriving.
3. From conversation this morning with French and Belgian Ministers, I
concluded that they are not interested in hastening the presentation of their
letters of credence but only wish quite properly to safeguard themselves as
regards their diplomatic posts at Peking. French Minister anticipates his and
American Government will discuss the matter; and if our Government agrees
not to have new American Minister present credentials before French
Minister, opportunity will be afforded for further discussion of this question
of presentation of letters of credence and de jure recognition.
MAYER

[Document 469]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Belgian Minister has received telegraphic instructions authorizing him to
present his letters of credence if he considers that the collective declaration of
December 9, 1924,47 permits him to act without preliminary agreements with
the other representatives of the countries signatory to the Washington treaties.
The Belgian Government requested a speedy response as the Chinese
Minister at Brussels has requested the hastening of the deposit of his letters
of credence by the Belgian Minister at Peking.
2. The question of the presentation of letters of credence will be discussed
May 6th at meeting of Washington Conference powers.
3. Belgian Minister is notifying his Government of above meeting reporting
he considers it would be preferable if Governments concerned consulted
together in the matter since diplomatic representatives at Peking not in a
position to decide whether presentation of letters of credence implies de jure
recognition. I share above opinion and respectfully suggest at instance of
Belgian Minister that if Department consulted with French Government in
above request it do so likewise with Belgian Government.
MAYER

[Document 470]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
and impractical to consider in connection with the presentation of letters of credence
the qualifications which may have been attached to the recognition of the present
of the relations that the Powers are actually maintaining with that régime. It is not
apparent that the presentation of letters of credence would import any substantial
modification of the attitude already adopted by the Powers as instanced by the
conclusion of the gold franc agreement49 by which France appears to recognize the
present Peking Government as competent to create obligations binding upon any
succeeding Government of China. You may so inform your colleagues.

If inquiry should be made of the Department by the Belgian, French or other
representatives here, reply will be made as indicated above.
KELLOGG
Foreign Office and the French Minister in China settling the controversy regarding
payment of the French share of the Boxer Indemnity in gold francs are printed in the

[Document 471]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. The representatives of the powers signatory to the Washington treaty50 in a meeting
this morning decided to send the following identic telegram to their respective
Governments. Translation:
“The British and Italian Governments consider that the presentation of letters
implies de jure recognition. The American and Japanese Governments
consider on the contrary that it does not entail de jure recognition and can
consequently take place independently. The representatives of the
Netherlands and of Portugal are without instructions. Since it results from the
instructions from Washington that the new Minister of the United States of
America will present his letters, the Ministers of Belgium and of France
propose that their respective Governments shall consult with Rome, London,
The Hague and Lisbon in order that the presentation of letters of credence
may not imply in the eyes of these Governments de jure recognition of the
Provisional Chinese Government.”
p.m., I expressed myself as believing the Government of the United States had it in
mind that, in view of the present abnormal conditions in China which might endure for
a long period of time, the foreign powers should not be too technical or theoretical in
dealing with such situations as presentation of letters of credence and the like; that the
state of affairs here was entirely anomalous and should be treated accordingly.
3. French Minister stated gold franc settlement was not a treaty but merely the
regularizing of current situation by an exchange of letters. All representatives except
Japan and myself either by virtue of instructions or from personal opinion expressed
themselves categorically to the effect that presentation of letters of credence If could
not but imply de jure recognition unless such letters were from Minister of Foreign
Affairs to Minister of Foreign Affairs, as in the case of a chargé d’affaires, or contained
specific reservations concerning de jure recognition. General opinion was that unless
such reservations were made Chinese Government would undoubtedly consider

presentation of letters of credence meant de jure recognition. Minister for Foreign
Affairs reported to have so expressed himself in respect of Spanish Minister’s recent
presentation of letters.
MAYER

[Document 472]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
not intend to question that presentation of letters of credence would evidence de jure
recognition but intended, as interpreted in your paragraph 2, to convey the belief that
the practical necessity of maintaining relations with the Chinese Government has
already brought about a situation in which the Powers are dealing with the Tuan régime
as though it were a fully recognized Government; and that there would be no advantage
in withholding action which would merely confirm a relationship already practically
existing.
HARRISON

[Document 473]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
mean that new American Minister will present letters of credence thereby evidencing
recognition by United States of Tuan regime as de jure Government of China.
I respectfully submit preferable not to accord such recognition.
2. Tuan regime has been from beginning and continues to be avowedly transitional,
designed to function only pending establishment of formal government, and it has been
p.m. Despite Lincheng payment51 and gold franc settlement, Tuan regime has not
actually advanced toward permanency, continuing to exist not through any inherent
strength but solely because neither Chang52 nor Feng53 has cared to displace it; an
affair of day-by-day compromise. On April 24th by mandate Chief Executive
promulgated regulations for citizens’ conference, first article reading in part “The
Provisional Government for the purpose of making a constitution hereby convenes a
conference of the representatives of the people”; thus form of future de jure
Government as well as date of its establishment conjectural. Quite probable citizens’
conference will prove ineffectual as was reorganization conference but its convocation
is further evidence that even Tuan and Chinese themselves consider his regime only
provisional.
3. In the circumstances I respectfully suggest advisable to treat this anomalous state of
affairs accordingly, consonant with interpretation of Department’s point of view
letters of credence to Chief Executive of Provisional Chinese Government who actually
exists rather than to President of the Republic of China who does not exist thus
squaring our action with the facts and avoiding recognition of unstable transitional
Tuan regime as de jure Government of China.
4. I respectfully request to be informed by telegraph of Department’s decision in above
regard and authorized to acquaint colleagues concerned therewith. Responsive to
courteous cooperation of French and Belgian Ministers in question at issue, I suggest
likewise that French and Belgian Embassies at Washington be so informed.

MAYER
52 Chang Tso-lin, commander in chief of the Manchurian forces and virtual ruler of
Manchuria.
53 Feng Yu-hsiang, commander in chief of the Peoples’ Army and director general of
the Northwest Frontier Defence.

[Document 474]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
dated May 16, 1925, from the British Embassy:
“His Majesty’s Government feel that the present Chinese Government,
whatever degree of stability it may enjoy, and however good its intentions,
does not on its own showing rest on any constitutional basis, and further, that
there is a risk that any of its acts, including any agreements that Foreign
Powers might conclude with it (for instance, as a result of the forthcoming
tariff conference) might lawfully be repudiated by some succeeding
Government claiming to be established with constitutional sanction.
In these circumstances, and whatever might be the political advantages or
disadvantages of falling in with the suggestions made by the French and
Belgian Governments, His Majesty’s Government would be very glad to
learn the views of the United States Government as to whether recognition is
at present possible.
At the same time, I have the honour to suggest that in view of approaching
tariff conference, it would be desirable that the Governments who will take
part in that conference should instruct their representatives at Peking to point
out to the Chinese Government that there are difficulties in the way of a
conference being held so long as the Chinese Government is not fully
recognized. In making this démarche, the Corps Diplomatique might also
suggest to the Chinese Government that they would, for this reason, do well
to place themselves upon such a constitutional and representative basis as
would remove any technical objection to their full recognition by the Powers.
In this connection you will recollect that the Corps Diplomatique at Peking
recently raised the question whether newly appointed diplomatic
representatives should present letters of credence. It seems to His Majesty’s
Government difficult to understand how a Minister can be accredited to
Government at Peking without admitting that that Government is the de jure
Government of China, while on the other hand, the Government so
recognized would yet remain one with which agreements could not safely be
concluded.

In the light of the above, His Majesty’s Government trust that the United
States Government will suspend action as regards the presentation of letters
of credence until the question of full recognition, of the Chinese Government
is settled, and I have the honour to ask the favour of your early observations
on the points raised in this note.”
In an interview with the British Ambassador on May 18 concerning this matter I
suggested that the letters be addressed to the “Chief Executive of the Provisional
Government of China”; that at the time of the presentation of his letters of credence Mr.
MacMurray in his formal address, would refer to the declaration communicated on
December 454 concerning the provisional character of the present Government. I
pointed out that this would seem to be recognizing nothing but the provisional
government and the formal address by MacMurray would definitely state that it was
just such recognition which is made necessary by the admittedly provisional character
of the government. I explained to the British Ambassador that we had to accredit the
new Minister to some Government and that this plan would clearly prevent any claim
by China that we had extended de jure recognition to a provisional government. He
agreed with me that this program would be sufficient to meet the situation but said he
would communicate my oral reply to his Government.
You may acquaint your colleagues with the above and the French and Belgian
Embassies in Washington will likewise be informed.
KELLOGG

[Document 475]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
116. The French Embassy yesterday presented the following memorandum:
“According to information received by the French Government, the Italian
Government is very anxious that Foreign Ministers in Peking should only
present their credentials when the claims concerning the payment in gold of
the Boxer Indemnity have been given satisfaction.
“The French Government would be willing to modify in the above sense their
instructions to the French Minister in Peking, M. de Martel, if the United
States Government were ready to postpone the presentation of Mr.
MacMurray’s credentials.
The French Embassy would be greatly obliged to the Secretary of State for an
expression of his views on this matter.”
Department replied informally that under present circumstances it did not feel justified
in instructing MacMurray to postpone the presentation of his credentials on the basis
set forth in the French memorandum.
Inform MacMurray on arrival and request him to cable his comment.
KELLOGG

[Document 476]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
French Minister July 1st. In both instances letters were original ones brought to China
by the respective representatives and addressed to the President of China. French
Minister at presentation referred to joint note of the representatives of the Washington
Conference powers of December 30th last55 and spoke of the present Government as
provisional. Not informed regarding remarks of the Belgian Minister although I assume
they were similar.
Repeated to Shanghai for the information Minister MacMurray.
MAYER

[Document 477]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
266. From MacMurray: Arrived today. Mayer will remain in charge pending
consultations with colleagues as to proposed presentation of letters of credence to Tuan
as Provisional Chief Executive.
MAYER

[Document 478]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 15, 1925—noon.
273. I have today presented my letter and have assumed charge.
MACMURRAY

Acceptance of the Soviet Ambassador as
dean of the diplomatic corps at Peking and
establishment of an informal organization of
Heads of Legation56
56 For previous correspondence concerning relations with the Soviet Ambassador, see
Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 443 ff.
[479] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
[480] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[481] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
[482] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[483] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[484] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[485] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[Document 479]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
of the Soviet representative as Dean of the Diplomatic Body cannot be ignored and that
he is therefore entitled to participate in meetings of the Diplomatic Body, the scope of
whose deliberations, however, it may be anticipated will henceforth be limited to
matters of a purely formal or ceremonial character.
You are authorized whenever it may seem expedient to join your colleagues in
conveying to the Soviet representative an intimation that you are prepared to cooperate
with him in such matters as remain of general concern to the entire Diplomatic Body.
In view of the provisions of Articles III and XII of the Sino- Russian agreement of May
31, 1924,58 it would not appear necessary or appropriate that he should be admitted to
participation in meetings of the foreign ministers dealing with questions of treaty rights
such as those established by the Boxer protocol59 or with respect to extraterritoriality.
It is considered that the custody of the archives of the Diplomatic Body, with the
exception of those which are concerned with the deliberations of the whole Diplomatic
Body, as above referred to, should remain with the Senior Minister.
HUGHES
57 Not printed.

[Document 480]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
1. I called meeting of Legation heads, March 3, to consider admission of
Karakhan as member and dean diplomatic body. Excepting Dutch and
Belgian representatives, who had not heard from their Governments, all
agreed in substance to plan of limiting diplomatic body, as in all other
capitals, to ceremonial functions and entrusting care of special and common
interests of treaty powers to suitable group or groups of diplomatic
representatives.
2. Meeting adjourned after prolonged discussion. Dutch and Belgian
representatives having in few days reported to me their instructions, which
were favorable, I called another meeting for March 10th. I opened it by
advocating, in addition to a ceremonial diplomatic body, one group
embracing all ministers now in Peking as unofficial instrument for
transaction common treaty business with Chinese Government and consular
bodies. Others advocated special committees such as protocol powers, etc.
Obvious point was made against plan of having one group with all ministers
in it, that some countries had no special treaty rights and Karakhan might
equally with their representatives claim seat in such a group. German
Minister, who is persona grata to all his colleagues, said that he had no more
right to be included than Karakhan. It was pointed out in reply that the
proposed body being informal could constitute itself as it liked and Karakhan
would have no more right to demand admission than to a social gathering.
After long discussion this plan was unanimously adopted.
3. It was suggested we communicate the result orally to Karakhan and the
Chinese Government. I expressed the opinion however that in view of the
radical change we were making in the character and functions of the Peking
diplomatic body we should send written communications. This view
prevailed and I appointed Italian Minister (who is friend of Karakhan) and
British Chargé (whose Government had sent very definite instructions and
with whom I had conferred in advance) a committee to draft for submission

to a later meeting the necessary notes. I trust the whole subject can be
disposed of next week.
4. So long as Soviet Russia claims to be a protocol power it will be necessary
to find some modus vivendi with Karakhan when the group is handling
protocol business. Those who know Karakhan best think this will not be
difficult once he is given recognition as dean, the lack of which he has
hitherto keenly felt.
5. Recently Karakhan sent the protocol powers a note protesting against the
erection of hurdles by the American guard on what he called the “Russian
glacis.” He was informed by powers in reply with appropriate references to
the protocols of 190160 and 190461 that there was no “Russian glacis”; that
the entire glacis was international property; that the American guard in
holding the portion of it adjoining the Russian Legation property were merely
discharging the duties which had been assigned them by the senior
commandant and that equitation was a part of their military training.
SCHURMAN
61 John V. A. MacMurray (ed.), Treaties and Agreements With and Concerning China,

[Document 481]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
that the communications of the Ministers to Karakhan and to the Chinese Government
should be as informal as possible, and should avoid any intimation that his status as a
member and as Dean of the Diplomatic Body results from the action of the Ministers
rather than from the fact of his recognition by the Chinese Government as Soviet
Ambassador.
KELLOGG

[Document 482]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
the Italian Minister communicate the following orally to Karakhan and to Chinese
Government and authorize[d] Mr. Cerruti to leave an aide-mémoire in both cases if so
requested. Translation:
“The Ministers and Chargés d’Affaires accredited near the Chinese
Government have examined the communication which His Excellency the
Ambassador of the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics has been good
enough to bring to their notice through the Italian Minister in regard to his
position in the diplomatic body.
His Excellency Mr. Karakhan having been accredited by his Government and
agreed to by the Chinese Government as Ambassador, the Ministers and
Chargés d’Affaires consider him as dean of the diplomatic body with the
prerogatives and functions which this charge carries with it in all the capitals,
notably from the point of view of protocol on the occasion of receptions,
ceremonies and other official meetings to [at?] which the diplomatic
representatives are to be present in a body.”
A copy of this message has been mailed to Tokio.
MAYER
62 Not printed.

[Document 483]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. When Italian Minister informed Karakhan regarding deanship, latter
expressed desire to enter into social relations with chiefs of mission of
powers which have not recognized Soviets and inquired whether if he left
cards on aforementioned diplomatic representatives they would return their
cards to him.
2. Netherlands Chargé is telegraphing for instructions while Belgian Minister
is prepared to return Karakhan’s card. Despite fact that Soviet Ambassador is
now recognized as dean for ceremonial purposes, I see no reason why
representative of the United States should enter into even slightest social
relations with him or further official relations than above recognition implies.
In this connection I refer to Department’s instruction to American Minister at
3. Telegraphic instructions respectfully requested. I should greatly appreciate
any mail instructions Department may care to give concerning attitude I
should adopt in respect of relations with Karakhan as doyen of diplomatic
body.
MAYER
64 Not published.

[Document 484]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Legation at Helsingfors is quoted for your guidance with regard to your relations with
Karakhan:
“There should be no difficulty in informal and courteous relations, as
between two gentlemen, with respect to the representative at the capital to
which you are accredited, of a régime not recognized by this Government. I
had no difficulty when I attended the celebration of the Centenary of
Brazilian Independence at Rio de Janeiro in 1922 in meeting and having
cordial relations with the representative of Mexico, although this
Government had not recognized the Mexican Government. Of course such
personal and private relations largely depend on the character and bearing of
others, but ordinary courtesies of a personal nature need never embarrass this
Government in maintaining its attitude of non-recognition. Hughes”
The fact that we have not recognized the Moscow regime should cause you no
embarrassment in your social relations with the members of the diplomatic corps in
Peking. While you should avoid entering into any relations with Karakhan of an official
character, this should not be interpreted as precluding those purely social and unofficial
relationships which tend to arise out of association in the diplomatic corps and the
special position of Karakhan in that body. You should receive Karakhan informally if
he should call on you, and in return for his call or for his card should send your official
card, writing on it “The Dean of the Diplomatic Body” in order to avoid any possibility
of its being made to appear that you are entering into relations with him officially in his
capacity as representing the Soviet Regime. In the course of any subsequent social
relations with him you should make use of your personal card.
Repeat to Tokyo as #53 for information.
KELLOGG

Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. II, p. 676.

[Document 485]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 4, 1925.
[Received June 3.]
No. 2962
and April 25, 11 a.m., respectively, relative to the recognition of Mr. Karakhan,
Ambassador of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics at Peking, as Dean of the
Diplomatic Corps for ceremonial purposes.
I now wish to report that at the time that Mr. Cerruti, the Italian Minister notified Mr.
Karakhan of his recognition as Dean, the latter requested to be informed whether he
was also Dean of the Protocol Powers. The Italian Minister reported this question to the
Diplomatic Body. Considerable discussion ensued, in which the French Minister and I
expressed the point of view that we should not take the Soviet Ambassador too
seriously; that, if we viewed his request too technically, we should undoubtedly be led
into a very unfortunate situation. We stated that we were of the opinion that Mr.
Karakhan was sui generis and should be so treated, that we were opposed to admitting
him as either Doyen or a participant in meetings of Chiefs of Mission respecting the
Protocol. The British Chargé expressed himself of the same opinion, and stated that he
had received categorical instructions from his Government against permitting Mr.
Karakhan to participate as a representative of a Protocol Power.
In concluding, it was unanimously agreed that the Heads of Legation, since the
Diplomatic Body had now been abolished in its previous form, should simply meet
together, when occasion demanded it, as officials with a common interest and in this
way could include in such meetings only those persons with whom they desired to
meet. The Italian Minister was, therefore, requested to reply in a negative manner to
Mr. Karakhan’s request, and in the above sense. This Mr. Cerruti has done.
There is transmitted herewith enclosed, for the Department’s information, a copy of an
article in regard to Mr. Karakhan’s recognition as Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, which
I have [etc.]
FERDINAND MAYER

£8 Not reprinted.

Further consideration by the American and
British Governments of means for effectively
preventing the traffic in arms with China67
67 For previous correspondence concerning efforts to prevent the traffic in arms with
China, see Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 530 ff.
[486] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
Washington, March 12, 1925.
[487] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
[ Washington ,] March 16, 1925.
[488] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
Washington, March 25, 1925.
[489] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
Washington, April 8, 1925.
[490] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
Washington , April 15, 1925.

[Document 486]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 12, 1925.
No. 252
SIR: With reference to the Honourable Charles E. Hughes’ Note of the 24th of December
last68 and previous correspondence respecting the suggested prohibition of export of
aircraft to China and the possibility of strengthening the Arms Embargo Agreement of
1919,69 I have the honour to state that I have received instructions from His Majesty’s
Principal Secretary of State to submit to your attention the following observations.
His Majesty’s Government do not consider, after an exchange of views with the French
Government, that there is any hope of success for a tripartite agreement prohibiting the
export of aircraft to China, but Mr. Chamberlain70 would be glad to instruct His
Majesty’s Ambassador at Paris to support his United States Colleague there in any steps
that the latter may be instructed to take to that end. I am further desired to state that Mr.
Chamberlain is consulting the French Government as to the general question of the
export of munitions of war to China.
As regards this latter question Mr. Chamberlain however agrees with the views of the
United States Government as expressed in Mr. Hughes’ note to me of December 24th
last, namely, that it is now doubtful whether further progress can be made in
strengthening the China Arms Embargo on the lines contemplated at the Washington
Conference. He also agrees that what has been effected is not wholly unsatisfactory.
His Majesty’s Government intend, for the present at any rate, to continue their policy of
doing all that lies in their power to make the embargo a reality. They will continue to
maintain, for instance, the stringent administrative measures which penalize British
merchants and manufacturers for the benefit of their continental competitors who
supply China with weapons and explosives; and they will continue to discourage
British Subjects from participating in any way in such transactions even though this
involves the loss of much profitable business to the London insurance market. To this
end His Majesty’s Government have published a declaration explaining their attitude
and the Administrative measures by which their policy is enforced.
I have [etc.]
ESME HOWARD

70 J. Austen Chamberlain, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

[Document 487]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
AIDE MEMOIRE
Referring to his Note No. 252 of March 12th respecting the suggested prohibition of
export of aircraft to China and the possibility of strengthening the Arms Embargo
Agreement of 1919, Sir Esme Howard has been instructed by Mr. Chamberlain to bring
the following points to the attention of Mr. Kellogg.
It appears not altogether improbable that at the forthcoming Conference on Arms
Traffic to be held at Geneva in May71 the question may arise whether China should be
scheduled as a prohibited area.
There is no doubt that there is cause for grave disquiet as regards the present state of
China. Sooner or later the change in the conditions of Chinese internecine warfare,
brought about by the increasing supply of modern weapons, may involve the Powers in
increased military commitments in the Far East. This is a matter of international
concern and it is for consideration whether, since the present Arms Embargo
Agreement has not proved capable of arresting the progress, some more comprehensive
international remedy should not be sought. With this end in view Mr. Chamberlain
recently invited the views of His Majesty’s Minister in Peking, Sir R. Macleay, of
whose reply Sir Esme Howard begs to enclose a copy.72
In the opinion of His Majesty’s Government the Powers, so long as they are unable or
unwilling effectively to prevent their nationals from making money out of a traffic that
merely increases the miseries of the Chinese people, are exposed to some measure of
moral reproach and are in a position less strong than they would be otherwise to deal
with the calumnies of the agitators who exasperate anti-foreign feeling by representing
the sufferings of China as due to the “imperialism” and greed of foreigners.
Again, so long as they cannot keep arms out of China, the hands of the Powers are pro
tanto weakened for any pacific influence they may wish to exert to promote the
evolution of a stable and effective Government in China which is their prime interest in
the Far East—That is impossible so long as China swarms with hordes of soldiers who
are indistinguishable from brigands and the difficulty of disbanding these hordes is
perpetuated so long as military adventurers can obtain copious supplies of modern
weapons from Europe.

His Majesty’s Government would therefore be very glad to know how the United States
Government consider that this serious situation can best be met, how they would view a
possible proposal to place China on the list of prohibited areas and, failing this,
whether they can suggest any other means of effective international cooperation to cope
with this evil which experience has shown the Arms Embargo Agreement is insufficient
to check. His Majesty’s Government have themselves no intention of bringing forward
this proposal but they are earnestly desirous of cooperating with the United States
Government in any way possible in order to find an exit from the present impasse.

Sir Esme Howard would be grateful to learn the views of the United States
Government on this subject as soon as possible in order to communicate them to Mr.
Chamberlain without delay.
[ WASHINGTON ,] March 16, 1925.
72 Not printed.

[Document 488]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 25, 1925.
No. 302
SIR: With reference to my Aide-Memoire of March 16th which I had the honour to
communicate to you in my letted of the same date73 regarding the Chinese Arms
Traffic, I have the honour to inform you that I learn from His Majesty’s Principal
Secretary of State that they have been obliged to yield to the persistence of the French
Government that aircraft and parts certified by the Government of the country of origin
as being of commercial type cannot legally be detained in transit to the Far East.
Mr. Chamberlain has instructed me to add that should the United States Government
see their way to exert pressure on the French Government to stop this traffic it would,
in the opinion of His Majesty’s Government, be most useful.
In communicating to you the above, I have the honour to ask that you will be so good
as to inform me at your earliest convenience of the views of the United States
Government on this question.
I have [etc.]
(For the Ambassador)
H. G. CHILTON
73 Covering letter not printed.

[Document 489]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, April 8, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Notes No. 252 of March
Agreement of 1919 and the suggested prohibition of the export of aircraft to China, and
to express my appreciation of the offer of the British Government to instruct its
Ambassador at Paris to support his American colleague in any steps that the latter may
be instructed to take with reference to obtaining the assent of the French Government
to a tripartite agreement concerning aircraft. This Government, however, shares the
view of the British Government that there is little, if any, hope of success for the
conclusion of such a tripartite agreement at the present time, and it does not therefore
now contemplate approaching the French Government on the matter. This Government
feels itself the less disposed to do so in view of the fact that it would, as stated in Mr.
the matter without reservation concerning the legal limitations of its competence with
regard to the export of aircraft.”
Although this Government does not feel, in view of its own limitations, that it can
propose to the French Government an absolute prohibition on the export of aircraft to
China, it purposes, nevertheless, to continue, as it has in the past, to draw; the attention
of the French Government to important cases of exportation of aircraft, emphasizing
the non-existence of commercial aviation in China and the view that, for all practical
purposes, all aircraft destined for China should be considered as within the scope of the
embargo. Such is the position which this Government has taken administratively; and,
as was stated in the note above mentioned, it has for a period of over two years (and
with entire success, as it understands) discouraged the exportation of any kind of
aircraft to China since it appears that at present there is no commercial aviation in
China and since the experience has been that shipments of this character have
invariably fallen into the hands of militarists and been utilized by them for military
purposes.
With reference to the question of the possibility of strengthening the China Arms
Embargo Agreement of 1919, I am glad to note that the views of the British
Government are in accord with those of this Government as expressed in its note of
December 24, 1924,75 to which you refer. I also note with much satisfaction that it is
the present purpose of the British Government to continue to do all that lies within its

power to render the embargo more effective. Being convinced that, apart from other
considerations, the present disturbed conditions in China, which show no signs of
abating, require the rigorous suppression of the export of arms and munitions to that
country, this Government likewise purposes to do all that it can to make the embargo
thoroughly effective. In this connection, your attention is invited to the action of the
United States Court for China at Shanghai, which recently fined and sentenced to a
year’s penal servitude the master of the American sailing ship Talbot for a violation of
the American laws upon this subject.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 490]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency, the Ambassador of
Great Britain, and has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of confidential Aide
on the exportation of aircraft to China and the possibility of strengthening the China
Arms Embargo Agreement of 1919. It is noted that the Ambassador suggests that it is
not altogether improbable that the question of traffic in arms with China may come up
for consideration at the proposed Conference at Geneva on May 4 although the British
Government has no intention of bringing forward this subject.
The Ambassador kindly transmits for the consideration of the Department a copy of a
memorandum prepared by Sir Roland Macleay,77 the British Minister at Peking, setting
forth his views with respect to the China arms question. It is noted that the Minister
considers that it would be impracticable to include China in the category of prohibited
areas provided for in a draft convention for the control of the traffic in arms which
convention is to be considered at Geneva on May 4.
In the light of recent correspondence, it seems unlikely that a general international
agreement could be reached at this time for further effective measures of control of the
traffic in arms with China, such for example, as contained in the resolutions proposed
in 1922 at the Conference on the Limitation of Armaments.78
This Government therefore doubts whether any useful purpose could be served by a
discussion of the China arms question at the Geneva Conference, the purpose of which,
it is understood, is to deal with the question of the general international trade rather
than with remedies for the special, and it is to be hoped temporary, conditions which
now prevail in China.
It may be added that this Government would not be inclined to support the suggestion
that China should be placed in the so-called prohibited areas as it is felt that such a
proposal would serve merely as an irritant without tending toward a more effective
supervision of the trade in arms with that country. The view of this Government with
respect to the China arms question is set forth more fully in its note of April 8, 1925.
WASHINGTON , April 15, 1925.
76 Latter not printed.

77 Not printed.

Participation by the United States in efforts
to
solve
problems
arising
from
the
disturbances at Shanghai, May 30, 1925
[491] The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
[492] The Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Shen) to the Italian Minister in
China (Cerruti), Senior Minister
Peking, June 1, 1925.
[493] The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
[494] The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
[495] The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
[496] The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State

[497] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham)
[498] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[499] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[500] The Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Shen) to the Italian Minister in
China (Cerruti), Senior Minister
Peking, June 4, 1925.
[501] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[502] The Secretary of the Navy (Wilbur) to the Secretary of State
Washington, 6 June, 1925.

[503] The Italian Minister in China (Cerruti), Senior Minister, to the Chinese
Minister for Foreign Affairs (Shen)
Peking, June 6, 1925.
[504] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Grew)
[Washington,] June 6, 1925.
[505] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[506] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[507] The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
[508] The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
[509] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham)

[510] The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
[511] The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
[512] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[513] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[514] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[515] The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
[516] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[517] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[518] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[519] The Italian Minister in China (Cerruti), Senior Minister, to the American
Chargé (Mayer)
Peking, June 26, 1925.
[520] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[521] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[522] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[523] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)

[524] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[525] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[526] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[527] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[528] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[529] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[530] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[531] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[532] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
[533] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[534] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[535] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
[536] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
[537] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, August 3, 1925.

[538] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
[539] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
[540] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[541] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[542] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[543] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[544] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State

[545] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
[546] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[547] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
[548] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[549] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[550] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
[551] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State

[552] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[553] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[554] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[555] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[556] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[557] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[558] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)

[559] The Netherlands Minister in China (Oudendijk), Senior Minister, to the
American Minister (MacMurray)
Peking, September 15, 1925.
[560] The Netherlands Minister in China (Oudendijk), Senior Minister, to the
American Minister (MacMurray)
Peking, October 3, 1925.
[561] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[562] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[563] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[564] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[565] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[566] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[567] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[568] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[569] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[570] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
[571] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[572] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[573] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[Document 491]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
Yesterday students from local schools and strikers from Japanese mills began
organizing tour of speech making and parade in International Settlement protesting
against killing of Chinese laborers in Japanese mill, prosecution of strikers in the
Mixed Court and contemplated measures of rate payers regarding press regulations and
wharfage dues. The police ordered discontinuance which was ignored, whereupon
several leaders were arrested and taken to Louza police station on Nanking Road. Soon
the students became a threatening mob assaulting 2 foreign police constables,
completely held up traffic on Nanking Road and finally attempted to force an entrance
to Louza police station threatening the lives of foreigners. The order was given to fire
wounded. The police are considered to have acted in the only possible way consistent
with the situation. The mob distributed violent circulars of Bolshevik character
proclaiming that present conditions were due to imperialism of Great Britain, United
States, France and Japan, the anti-Japanese circulars being strongest in language and
most numerous. Reserve police called out yesterday and certain volunteer organizations
ordered to stand by.
Some indications that there will be a general strike soon, probably tomorrow.
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 492]
The Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Shen) to the Italian Minister in
China (Cerruti), Senior Minister79
[Translation]
PEKING, June 1, 1925.
MR. MINISTER: I have the honor to call the serious attention of Your Excellency to the
following unfortunate fact which occurred on May 30th last, in the International
Concession at Shanghai:
“Following the arrest of students and acts of violence against Chinese
workmen, several of whom were wounded, a certain number of students from
different universities of Shanghai went, in the afternoon of May 30th last, to
the Police Station of the International Concession as a sign of protest and
made speeches. The armed intervention of the Police resulted in the arrest of
more than forty students, four students being killed on the spot, six students
being seriously wounded two of whom succumbed shortly after, and
seventeen passers-by being wounded three of whom died later.”
In learning with emotion of the fact mentioned above, I beg leave to state that whatever
may be the character of their demonstration, the students who are young men of good
family, very patriotic and unarmed, cannot, in any case, be treated as ordinary
malefactors and that instead of quieting them by appropriate means, the Police resorted
to extreme means which are essentially condemned by humanity and justice.
I find myself, therefore, absolutely obliged to address to Your Excellency the most
formal protest, reserving the right to make, as soon as subsequent reports giving
complete details reach me, all the claims which will result from this deplorable
incident, for which the authorities of the Concession are entirely responsible.
Moreover, I would ask Your Excellency to be good enough to inform the Ministers of
the interested Powers of the foregoing, and to give the necessary urgent instructions to
the Consular authorities at Shanghai to set at liberty immediately the arrested persons
and come to an agreement there with the Special Commissioner for Foreign Affairs of
that city, in order to prevent the possible recurrence of such cases.
I have [etc.]

[File copy not signed]
79 Transmitted by the American Minister in China as an enclosure to his despatch No.
telegram No. 198, June 2 (not printed).

[Document 493]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
SHANGHAI, June 3, 1925—noon.
Summarizing events since my telegram of May 31, 2 p.m., after several hours’
deliberation on May 31, 7 p.m., general strike resolutions were passed by students and
street associations to become effective June 1st and demands were made and wild
resolutions passed on all conceivable questions. June 1st Chinese business houses in
the International Settlement were closed in obedience to strike resolutions. Students
have massed repeatedly on Nanking Road and twice have been repulsed by the police
with casualties.
The chairman of the Chinese general Chamber of Commerce joined in some of the
resolutions adopted but thereafter he assured the chairman of the Municipal Council
that the chairman was not in sympathy with what had been done and that he gave his
assent under compulsion. The same sentiment has been conveyed to officials during the
night and it is hoped that the Chamber of Commerce is not in sympathy with the
resolutions and will use its influence to restore law and order. It is believed that
subsequent events have placed the Chamber of Commerce as officially supporting the
above-named strike although leading members are unquestionably silently endeavoring
to secure an adjustment so that normalcy may be restored.
Also on June 1st the bankers’ association after several hours’ deliberation decided to
present demands to the Shanghai Municipal Council to punish police officers and
demand compensation for the killed and wounded. This is regarded as most
significantly serious.
June 1st chairman of the Municipal Council requested the consular body to secure
naval force adequate to insure an aggregate landing party of two thousand men to guard
public utilities and also to convince antistrike party of the ability of foreigners to
protect those willing to continue work. The request was transmitted to the Legations by
the interested consuls.
On June 1st Municipal Council proclaimed a state of emergency and the Shanghai
volunteer corps was fully mobilized.
Second telegram will follow.

C UNNINGHAM

[Document 494]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
Continuing my June 3, noon. Forty-nine who were arrested Saturday and Monday were
arraigned in the Mixed Court today before Assessor Jacobs and Magistrate Kuan on
charge of rioting. Two were discharged proving alibis, seven were remanded without
bail, five on $100 bail, and the remainder on $5 bail.
The rate payers’ meeting called for 5 o’clock on the 2nd, which has been the target of
the students, met without quorum and therefore no action was taken on the questions
proposed. Five o’clock 200 American and 200 Italian bluejackets were landed to guard
light and water supplies.
At 6 p.m. several Chinese fired upon volunteers and police from the street near and
later within the new World Building on Nanking Road, wounding a volunteer, Dr. T. G.
McMartin, an American. Please notify his mother through George Williams, 1100 Cobb
Building, Seattle, that McMartin’s [injuries?] consist of only slight wounds. This attack
was severe and lasted perhaps one-quarter of an hour and indicates that the municipal
authorities are to be attacked in future in a clandestine manner. With the introduction of
sniping by students the immediate need additional war vessels is increased. Two British
cruisers are expected today.
Conditions are regarded exceedingly serious and indications are that the activities will
not be entirely confined to Shanghai and also there are persistent rumors that the
Chapei police and volunteers will possibly join students. It is believed that the
municipal authorities have conditions well in hand and it is certain that the commercial
interests, foreign organizations and individual Chinese are working to secure
restoration of normal conditions. All shops in the International Settlement are still
closed. The strike has extended and includes aside from cotton-mill workmen probably
fifty thousand.
Third telegram will follow.
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 495]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
resolutions were passed by various meetings such as: 1st, that police officers must be
humiliated and intimidated; 2d, groups of men should be sent to create disturbances;
infliction of damage upon property of persons opposed to the students; 6th, that
measures be taken to cut off supplies of provisions and materials used for industrial and
business purposes; 7th, creation of disturbances at various residencies; 8th, boycott of
foreign bankers be rigidly enforced; 9th, all schools in Shanghai to be requested to join
the general strike. Handbills circulated have denounced foreigners for murdering
Chinese and advocate the extension of the strike to the public utilities and workmen
indispensable [to?] foreigners, that is, electricity department, Shanghai Water Works
Company, Shanghai Gas Company, Shanghai Mutual Telephone Company, Shanghai
Tramway Company, all chauffeurs, cooks, clerks, policemen and detectives. It is hoped
that the propagandists will not realize all their demands.
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 496]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
New developments today include strike of dining-room boys, Astor House and some
other hotels, Shanghai club and domestic servants. Strike seems to be extending and is
certainly more effective.
Chinese Chamber of Commerce is now approaching foreign chambers of commerce to
bring about better conditions.
Great Eastern and Burlington Hotels were searched this morning and considerable
Bolshevik literature and munitions was [were] found in certain rooms. All public
wharves expecting [excepting?] Dollar and Jardine Matheson are closed on account of
strike. Chinese banks have been closed for 2 days.
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 497]
The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham)
Your June 4, 6 p.m. and previous telegrams same subject.
Department approves the measures taken by you and the Commander-in-Chief as
reported by you for the protection of the lives and property of American citizens at
Shanghai. Conferences have taken place here with a view to affording further facilities
for this purpose should they be necessary. While regretting the turn of events, the
Department is anxious that all needful measures should be employed to prevent the
further spread of the trouble and to afford adequate protection to American lives and
property. Should any action be contemplated which goes beyond this function
Department desires to be promptly informed.

Department suggests that in telegraphing the Legation concerning developments at
Shanghai you state whether similar information is being telegraphed the Department.
This will avoid duplication. Repeat to Peking.
KELLOGG

[Document 498]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5:45 p.m.]
harangued passers-by on Shanghai incidents and violently upheld following demands
which also were printed on handbills: Punishment of those responsible for Shanghai
killing from consuls to Indian policemen; release and indemnification of arrested
students; apologies from foreign governments to Chinese people; aid strikers in
Shanghai, Tsingtau, Japanese mills; abolition of foreign concessions and
extraterritoriality; withdrawal of foreign military forces from China including war
vessels; abolition of unequal treaties and special privileges; economic boycott against
foreigners; refusal to afford foreigners service or food; overthrow traitorous Chinese
Government; overthrow imperialism.
Japan and Great Britain singled out for most bitter attack. Latter apparently considered
responsible for Shanghai police.
2. In the afternoon orderly parade some thousands of students representing 23
schools including missionary institutions conducted demonstration along
above lines. Called on President and Minister for Foreign Affairs. On being
refused permission to enter Diplomatic Quarter most acquiesced but small
band extremists headed by woman student attempted forcible entrance and
failed as gates were closed. Other entrances guarded but no clash occurred.
Street lecturing continues today and it is rumored that students plan
systematic continued demonstrations. Apparently little local interest except
among students and Chinese journalists.
3. American educational institutions apparently embarrassed by desire of
their Chinese students and faculties to issue violently denunciatory
statements. In an effort to curb these extravagant declarations and yet
convince Chinese people of their impartial and just position, faculties of
some American and union missionary institutions have published statements
reflecting on actions of Shanghai police and sympathizing with demands for
the abolition of “resented privileges” enjoyed by foreigners. In informal
conversations with representative American missionaries, Legation has
indicated grave inexpediency of such pronouncement at this stage.

4. Chinese Government has sent Tsai Ting-kan and Vice Minister for Foreign
Affairs Tseng to Shanghai to report on facts and method of peaceful
adjustment. On request Legations concerned have asked their consuls at
Shanghai to give friendly assistance. Lo, who was recently sent to Foochow
by Foreign Office, likewise proceeding Shanghai on similar mission though
informally and probably confidentially.
MAYER
80 Not printed.

[Document 499]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Following note handed today to Foreign Office by senior minister and
made public:
[“](a) I have the honor in the name of my colleagues and in mine to
acknowledge the receipt of the letter dated the 1st of this month82
which you were good enough to address me in regard to the
disorders which occurred in the International Settlement of
Shanghai on May 30, last.
(b) While deploring with you the events referred to during which a
certain number of unfortunate victims were killed and where others
have been seriously wounded, we believe it necessary to specify
the circumstances under which the police was led to make use of its
arms.
(c) Demonstrating groups who were in the act of distributing
subversive and clearly antiforeign pamphlets in the Concession on
Nanking Road were requested to disperse and the leaders were
arrested. The crowd which refused to obey the orders of the police
then attacked them and attempted an assault on the police station.
(d) It was then only that the police made use of their arms.
(e) It would therefore result that the responsibility of the events
which followed rests on the demonstrators and not upon the
authorities of the Concession.
(f) On the other hand subsequently the same authorities gave proof
that they were very well disposed and the Mixed Court before
whom the culprits who were arrested had been summoned ordered
their provisional release on bail.

(g) While awaiting further information, we hope that the Chinese
Government will continue to envisage this unfortunate incident
with the same conciliatory spirit which inspires the arrested
[interested] diplomatic representatives to the end that order and
tranquillity may be reestablished at Shanghai with the least possible
delay.”
2. Unless otherwise instructed will not telegraph in full Chinese
Government’s note of June 1st which is going forward next pouch.83
3. Senior minister authorized at a meeting today of Heads of Legation to seek
interview with Chief Executive to discuss Shanghai incident in order to show
Chinese Government our [apparent omission] and conciliatory attitude.
4. Japanese Minister at meeting stated he had seen Tuan Chi-jui84 yesterday
and had told latter that students to blame in Shanghai for not obeying police
and attacking station. Tuan replied too many students killed; that he had
appointed a committee to investigate and would await report that not
advisable for Chinese Government to suppress students “rashly” but would
do so “gradually.”
5. According to Rosta, Karakhan85 has just addressed note to Wai Chiao Pu
expressing great regret over Shanghai incident, sympathy for killing of
students and requesting that his condolences be conveyed to their families. …
MAYER
81 Not printed.
84 Chief Executive of the Provisional Government of China.
85 Soviet Ambassador in China.

[Document 500]
The Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Shen) to the Italian Minister in
China (Cerruti), Senior Minister86
[Translation87 ]
PEKING, June 4, 1925.
MR. MINISTER: With regard to the sanguinary affair at Shanghai, I had the honor to address
to Your Excellency on the 1st instant a note in which I begged you to issue urgent
instructions to the consular authorities of Shanghai in order to immediately set at
liberty the arrested persons and to come to an agreement with the Special
Commissioner for Foreign Affairs of that city, to prevent a repetition of similar
incidents.
Contrary to my expectation, fresh reports of an ominous character continue to come to
me, reports according to which the police of the International Concession of Shanghai
those persons who had been arrested have not all been set at liberty. Other reports are to
the effect that the greater number of the victims have been wounded in the back while
none of the police were either killed or wounded, which proves that the firing was in no
way justified.
The violent attitude of the authorities of the International Concession, which has
excited the dissatisfaction of the public in general, has created the gravest
consequences, notably the declaration of strikes by merchants and Chinese workers of
Shanghai.
So little respect for the elementary principles of humanity is disclosed by the
authorities of the International Concession, who are entirely responsible, that I find
myself constrained to address once more to Your Excellency a protest of the most
energetic character.
Moreover, I pray Your Excellency to be so good as to communicate the foregoing to the
Ministers of the interested powers and to send without delay the most urgent
instructions to the consular authorities of Shanghai so that firing, which was the
original cause of this incident, shall cease immediately, in order to avoid further
bloodshed.

[File copy not signed]
86 Transmitted by the American Minister in China as an enclosure to his despatch No.
87 File translation revised.

[Document 501]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. I deem it advisable for the information of the Department to quote below in full note
sent by Karakhan to Foreign Office regarding Shanghai incident.
“Having learned with a feeling of profound grief of the shooting of several
tens of Chinese workers and students at Shanghai, I wish to express to the
Chinese people deepest sympathy and sorrow, certainly shared by the peoples
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
I have the honor to request Your Excellency to accept the expression of my
condolences and convey them to the bereaved families.”
2. Yesterday Karakhan as dean of the diplomatic body sent identic notes to the Heads of
Legation transmitting copy of telegram of violent protest begging diplomatic body to
intervene in the name of justice and instruct Settlement police force to cease outrages,
received by him from the Shanghai Union of Teachers. His note states that he has
telegraphed teachers’ union that he has transmitted their message to diplomatic body as
requested.
MAYER

[Document 502]
The Secretary of the Navy (Wilbur) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, 6 June, 1925.
SIR: The Navy Department is in receipt of a despatch from the Commander-in-Chief,
Asiatic Fleet, in which it is stated that on June 1st, 1925, consular representatives at an
international conference at Shanghai had requested an international naval force
sufficient to land 2,000 men. The disposition of United States naval forces was given as
destroyers Truxton, Pope, and Pillsbury and from the El Cano and Penguin.
On June 5th there was due to arrive at Shanghai the destroyers Hart and Stewart,
transporting the Flagship Huron’s marines and there was also due in the Isabel the
Commander of the Yangtze Patrol, Rear Admiral Chas. B. McVay, Jr.
On June 8th the Jason is due transporting 125 marines and the Gunboat Sacramento is
due on the same date.
On June 3rd other war ships in port were three British, three French, one Japanese, and
one Italian.
Respectfully,
CURTIS D. WILBUR

[Document 503]
The Italian Minister in China (Cerruti), Senior Minister, to the Chinese
Minister for Foreign Affairs (Shen)88
[Translation]
PEKING, June 6, 1925.
MR. MINISTER: I have the honor, in the name of my colleagues and in mine, to acknowledge
the receipt of the note dated the fourth of this month which Your Excellency was good
enough to address to me in regard to the disturbances at Shanghai.
While it is observed that the information received by the Chinese Government is
incomplete, since it does not mention several attacks on foreigners, my colleagues and
myself prefer to reserve our judgment until the receipt of additional information.
For this purpose the diplomatic representatives have decided to send to Shanghai,
without delay, a delegation which will study the situation there and report to them.
In any case I wish to state to Your Excellency that the authorities of the International
Concession, far from taking the violent altitude which the Chinese Government seems
to attribute to them, maintained the greatest self-command, as is shown by the fact that
during the last four days and in spite of numerous provocations, no serious incident has
occurred at Shanghai.
I can renew to you the assurance already given orally that the Police of the
International Concession has always had instructions to use its arms only if attacked
and if it found itself in imminent danger. These orders have been renewed, specified,
and will be strictly observed. No one desires more than the diplomatic representatives
and the authorities of the International Concession to avoid further trouble.
Kindly accept [etc.]
V. CERRUTI
88 Transmitted by the American Minister in China as an enclosure to his despatch No.

[Document 504]
Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Grew)
[WASHINGTON,] June 6, 1925.
THE SITUATION AT SHANGHAI
The Chinese Minister called on me and said that he had talked the other night at the
British Embassy with the Secretary who suggested that he come to the Department if
he had any concrete proposals to make. The Minister said that no doubt we had much
more information regarding the situation in Shanghai than he had, but that nevertheless
he desired to leave nothing undone to cooperate with us with a view to bringing about
the termination of the trouble. He said he had sent one of his young secretaries who
was a student last year to the meeting of Chinese students in Washington the other
night and had persuaded them materially to modify the resolution which they were
sending to the Chinese students in Shanghai. Unfortunately, he had not had an
opportunity to see the resolution in its final form or he would have endeavored to
secure the elimination of the term “brutal assault”.

The Minister said that the purpose of his visit was to ask if we would not make
representations to the British Government to avoid extreme measures. I informed him
subsequently, through Mr. Lockhart, that we did not feel ourselves in a position to
make such representations at the present moment. (The Secretary had told me that he
desired to take no step which might in any way interfere with the solidarity of the
Powers.) I then told the Minister that our instructions to our authorities in Shanghai
were to the effect that they should take adequate measures for the protection of
American lives and property, but to do nothing more. The Minister said it would have a
very salutary effect if he could be authorized to let this be known in Shanghai. After
consulting with the Secretary I asked Mr. Lockhart to inform the Minister, who was
then in his office, that the Minister might telegraph to his Government and let it be
known in Shanghai that our naval forces and marines were present in Shanghai only for
the purpose of protecting American lives and property and that no other action was
contemplated at the present time.
The Minister said that he considered it unfortunate that we had permitted the
publication of Mr. Cunningham’s despatch stating that the killing of the Chinese
students was justified. It would have been all right if we had added that the killings
were justified in order to protect American lives; that the Chinese students here had

jumped at the conclusion that the attitude of the Consul General was that wholesale
murders of Chinese were justified without giving adequate reasons therefor. He said he
had explained to the Chinese students the meaning of the Consul General’s message.
J[OSEPH] C. G[REW]

[Document 505]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. At meeting of Heads of Legation this morning it was decided at my
suggestion that Heads of Legation should send delegates to Shanghai leaving
Peking June 8th to study the situation on the spot and report back to us. The
principal reason for this action is to make a gesture to the Chinese
Government and people evidencing conclusively our grave concern in the
state of affairs at Shanghai with its attendant repercussions throughout China
as well as our great interest in its proper solution at the earliest moment
possible. We considered some such action imperative in order likewise that
we should not be placed in a false light and open to accusations of inactivity
and in order to afford the Chinese Government and those Chinese and
foreigners seeking to calm the situation something for their use to this end.
Our action is being given widest possible publicity.
2. Shanghai consular body is being assured that our action in no wise critical
of them or in derogation of their authority but rather to assist them.
3. The delegation consists of Messrs. Tripier, acting counsellor of the French
Legation, chairman; Greene of the American Legation; Shigemitsu, first
secretary of the Japanese Legation; Vereker, first secretary of British
Legation; Scaduto, first secretary of Italian Legation; and Ullens, first
secretary of Belgian Legation.
4. We are giving the delegation confidential written instructions to put
themselves at once in accord with the consular corps at Shanghai, to get in
touch with the Chinese commissioners mentioned in paragraph 4 of my 202,
June 4, 5 p.m. and to inquire into certain matters.
5. Following is résumé of further note from Foreign Office to Heads of
Legation of June 4th and our reply thereto of even date:89 Note energetically
protests alleged violent [sic] International Settlement resulting in general
strike and asks urgent instructions to Shanghai consular authorities to cease
from further bloodshed. Reply states judgment of facts reserved by the

diplomatic representatives concerned until receipt of further information. To
secure this the interested diplomatic representatives will send to Shanghai
without delay a delegation to study the situation and report. Reply gives most
explicit assurance that police orders in the Settlement are to use arms only if
attacked and that these orders have been renewed and will be strictly
enforced and that none more desirous than foreign diplomatic representatives
and Settlement authorities to avoid new troubles.
6. I have telegraphed Cunningham that while law and order must be
maintained by all necessary force, if conciliatory measures will contribute to
bring return to normal conditions I consider these should be used whenever
possible.
MAYER

[Document 506]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
211. 1. Heads of Legation at meeting today decided on my initiation to suggest to
consular body at Shanghai the reembarkation of part of the landing force if the local
situation permitted, and other contingents thereof successively, such action to be left to
the discretion of consular body. Heads of Legation suggested further that publicity be
given to such measures if taken and consular body were requested to inform us of their
decision in the matter in order that we might give publicity here.
2. Since situation at Shanghai apparently much improved, law and order generally
prevailing there, I believe the above-suggested action strongly advisable in order to
demonstrate to Chinese Government and people our desire to withdraw landing forces
at Shanghai as soon as practicable, a desire evident to us but I believe not generally
realized here. It is hoped that this in conjunction with the despatch of our delegation
this morning to Shanghai will materially assist in relieving present universal tension in
China without giving erroneous impression that we are not fully prepared to take
necessary measures of defense.
3. Marshal Chang Tso-lin90 yesterday caused me and other diplomatic representatives
to be informed of his decision to send son to Shanghai to inquire into situation and to
despatch forces to maintain order in the Chinese city. In order not to give foreigners a
false impression these troops to be limited to two battalions of student officers
expressly sent from Mukden in the belief that they would be more intelligent and better
disciplined than ordinary soldiers. Consular body informed of above facts and our
delegation directed to get in touch with Marshal Chang’s son in accordance with the
Marshal’s expressed desire.
MAYER
90 Military overlord in Manchuria.

[Document 507]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
Referring to my telegram of June 3, 5 p.m. Trial of the rioters is proceeding today and
the suggestion was made several days [ago?] to Assessor Jacobs that great leniency be
extended. Chinese representatives are manifesting general interest and employing
counsel and consequently the trial will consume an unusual time, possibly days.
I propose that I support at the consular body meeting the appointment of an
international foreign mission to investigate actions of the police on May 30th and that a
Chinese representative be invited to watch the proceedings. Many Chinese and some
Americans have urged that a Sino-foreign mission be appointed for this purpose but
while theoretically this would contribute to the reconciliation of the Chinese, it is felt
that it would be too great a sacrifice on the part of the administration of the
International Settlement. Chinese will not be appeased until there is a public
investigation of the actions of the police.
It is important to avoid, if possible, a boycott after the settlement of the strike and
particularly boycott of American goods, and the advocacy by me of the above proposal
would possibly contribute to the continued allegation [sic] good feeling of the Chinese
toward Americans. There is a great probability that the Municipal Council will receive
with favor the first proposal but the second would meet with decided opposition.
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 508]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
Summarizing events since my June 3, 5 p.m.
American mission schools continue open although most classes are suspended allowing
students freedom of coming and going at will. There is an exception in St. John’s
University which closed on the 2nd because students were agitators. The action of St.
John’s is commendable.
Shanghai University, not connected with any mission school, a purely Bolshevik
institution recently organized, was closed by the police on June 4th.
June 6th, Chinese advisory committee of the Shanghai Municipal Council tendered
resignations “in view of the tragic and cruel affair of last Saturday and of added
casualties of these few days, and in view of the absence of any desire on the part of the
Shanghai Municipal Council to punish the culprits and to do justice to the Chinese.”

Also on June 6th, consular body in replying to Commissioner of Foreign Affairs stated,
“There will also as a matter of course be an investigation by the authorities concerned
into the action of the police officer in question, besides which the competent courts
stand ready to deal with any complaints.”
June 7th, Chinese general Chamber of Commerce issued instructions that the situation
be maintained while the high commissioners were investigating, which has had an
excellent effect. The high-water mark of danger was reached on the 3rd and 4th. Since
then ostensibly conditions have inclined to improve in every way except in regard to
the strike. Strike is becoming more deep seated and extended, some workers returning,
others going out. Shops have remained closed and also native banks. On the 5th shops
were closed in the French Concession and reopened on the 7th.
British and [Italian] 110. These are doing police work and replacing strikers in public
utilities such as water and light. It would be extremely hazardous for the force to be
reduced materially until the conclusion of the Mixed Court trial.

The question of the reduction of the force is being considered this afternoon by the
municipal and consular authorities. There are only 15 percent of the Chinese police of
the Settlement on strike and 15 percent of the volunteers have been demobilized.
The police on June 8th discovered 18 different new handbills all containing antiforeign
sentiment. Protestations of organizations have been particularly bitter against British
and Japanese as have been the handbills. Other organizations insist that the move is not
antiforeign but is a protest against the police action and is directed against British and
Japanese. …
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 509]
The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham)
Your June 9 4 p.m. Regarding the proposal that the Consular Body appoint an
international foreign mission to investigate actions of the police the Department calls
your attention to the investigation now being made by a commission of diplomatic
secretaries and suggests consultation with this Commission and with the Diplomatic
Body with a view to avoiding any conflicting judgment or duplication of effort. The
Department agrees that in view of the peculiar status of the International Settlement the
appointment of a Sino-foreign mission would be inadvisable.
Repeat to Peking your June 9, 4 p.m. and reply.
KELLOGG

[Document 510]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
[1.] General conditions appear greatly improved but strike is not subsiding
perceptibly though many shops are opening.
[2.] Strike has extended to British and Japanese coast and river steamers,
which is deplorable; but as no freight is available it is less serious than it
would otherwise be.
3. Food Control announces ample supply.
4. Please announce that at present there is no cause for alarm for the safety of
American lives and property and should conditions change the Department
will be advised.
5. Admiral McVay, senior naval officer, has compiled the following notes in
regard to up-river ports.
Naval vessels by mutual agreement have been stationed at practically every treaty port.
Local civil and military authorities have situation well in hand and give ample
assurance of protection, rendering unnecessary the landing of guards except in isolated
cases and practically all of these have been withdrawn.
Above has been repeated the Legation.
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 511]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State
SHANGHAI, June 12, 1925—noon.
Following telegram to the Legation repeated for the Department’s information.
in the Mixed Court of rioters of May 30th, these were completed yesterday.
Of the accused, 33 forfeited bail and 18 after trial were required to sign
personal bond to keep the peace. None were imprisoned or fined, the assessor
believing that extreme leniency should be extended. All of the accused were
students except 3, one of whom was a photographer, one an actor, and one a
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 512]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
107. Recent press articles appearing here commenting upon the present situation in
China carry the suggestion that there exists a plot on the part of European Powers and
Japan to draw the United States into action oppressive of China in order to further their
own interests. The articles suggest that the troubles at Shanghai are not anti-foreign, but
were due to British and Japanese aggressions. The writers of these articles advise that
the United States must be careful not to become involved with those governments in
repressive measures directed against the Chinese and vaguely intimate that they are
voicing the views of officials of this Government.
The Department is concerned over the possibility of cabled reports of such articles
appearing in the press in China, and desires to state for your information that these
articles have received no sanction whatsoever from the Department, which deprecates
any attempt to take advantage of this situation to promote the interests of one country at
the expense of another.
Repeat to Tokyo as No. 61 and Shanghai.
KELLOGG

[Document 513]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Following résumé of note of June 11 from Wai Chiao Pu to senior minister.
Note criticises action of Settlement authorities, again condemns killing of
Chinese and in view of nation-wide grief and indignation considers
Settlement police should be disarmed and all troops withdrawn in order to
facilitate negotiations. Requests issuance of urgent instructions to consular
body, Shanghai, to this effect.
2. To which reply drafted at meeting of Heads of Legation this morning in
substance as follows: Desiring to clear up as soon as possible distressing and
dangerous situation, diplomatic representatives have instructed their
delegation at Shanghai to consider with consular body and Chinese
Government delegates, Shanghai, best means of finding remedy therefor.
Diplomatic representatives recall to the attention of the Chinese Government
its grave responsibility for maintaining order at Shanghai, Peking, and
throughout China.
3. In presenting this note to Minister for Foreign Affairs, Monsieur Cerruti
was authorized by Heads of Legation to call the attention of Chinese
Government to advisability of its taking appropriate steps to put stop to
further student agitation and demonstrations with particular reference to
inflammatory handbills and placards depicting Chinese murdered by
foreigners and advocating death to foreigners and the like.
Yu-hsiang93 with their principal generals have telegraphed Chief Executive
regarding Shanghai disturbances. Chang upholds innocence of Shanghai
student demonstrators, presents entirely inaccurate facts, refers to strikes and
national excitement and predicts damage to international relations through
British disregard of principles of justice. Places blame entirely on British.
Promises full support to the Chief Executive and urges firm stand in
protection of the people. Feng telegram also entirely exculpates Shanghai

demonstrators, places blame on the British and stigmatizes police action as
greatest disgrace to China in years. Telegram urges Chief Executive take firm
stand; and states that if the British Government confesses crime and makes
amends so much the better, but if not signers of telegram will support the
union on behalf of justice, humanity, national sovereignty and people’s lives
even if signers perish in attempt in order to calm agitation and redress
national humiliation. It is quite evident from these telegrams that militarists
are making every effort to use present situation in order to cause Chinese
people to forget antimilitarist feelings.
5. In this connection I am becoming increasingly concerned with question of
harmful reaction upon the anticipated special conference94 of continued
student agitation and refusal or inability of Chinese Government to control
situation. … I apprehend that continuation of student agitation and despatch
of notes by Foreign Office to Heads of Legation will eventually result in
eliminating Government’s foreign sympathy and producing an atmosphere
calculated to militate against successful conference. The singling out of Great
Britain for attack which is increasing in animosity is singularly unfortunate in
my opinion since as in the Washington Conference we and China must to a
great extent depend upon British cooperation to achieve constructive action
in special conference. I fear Chinese Government, so called, has not kept
sufficiently in mind the bigger questions in its desire to use the present so-
called patriotic agitation of the students and the attitude of the militarists
indicated by the two proclamations summarized above to consolidate
Government’s position.
[Paraphrase.] I talked informally and confidentially yesterday with the
secretary of the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I expressed myself to him to the
above effect, of course omitting any reference to the desire of the Chinese
Government to reap a benefit as suggested above. I suggest that it might be
advisable for the Department to call the Chinese Minister’s attention to this
matter and to ask him to communicate to his Government on the subject.
6. At the beginning of the Shanghai incident the Japanese were reviled as
much as the British but during last two days the British have been given most
of the attention. It will be noticed that Chang and Feng did not mention Japan
in their telegrams. I have reason to think that there is an effort to weaken the
present prestige in China of the United States and the resulting influence of
our country with the Chinese Government, the purpose of this effort being to
enable Japan to pose as China’s chief foreign friend. [End paraphrase.]
7. Thus far I have believed Chinese feeling is, generally speaking,
nationalistic rather than antiforeign with the exception of Great Britain where

again I do not consider it antiforeign in the sense of Boxer days. However the
material at hand is very inflammable and a continuance of agitation and its
manipulation by distribution of funds and otherwise throughout China may
with some new incident create a situation full of menace to foreigners.
MAYER
92 Commander in chief of the Manchurian forces and virtual ruler of Manchuria.
93 Commander in chief of the People’s Army and director general of Northwest
Frontier Defence.

[Document 514]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
improved situation part of defence forces have been withdrawn. Full publicity being
given.
MAYER

[Document 515]
The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
conveyed purport to Foreign Minister who expressed gratification.
BANCROFT

[Document 516]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Number 1. Our delegation at Shanghai departed last night for Peking since
unable to come to agreement with Chinese Government commission in
regard to fixing the basis for possible accord between the diplomatic
representatives concerned and the Chinese Government in respect of
Shanghai incidents. We had restricted our delegation to the following four
points: (1) indemnity to the victims, (2) simultaneous suspension of the
Chinese chief of police and the inspector of Louza police station,
commencement of [pending?] an administrative inquiry by the Municipal
Council into the subject of the technical responsibility of the inspector, (3)
agreement by the Chinese authorities to maintain order in all the Chinese
districts of Shanghai outside the concessions and agreement for a return to
work, this return to work to be followed automatically by (4) reembarkation
of all the landing force and the complete demobilization of the International
Concession. The Chinese delegation had received instructions to negotiate
for a settlement on the spot believing that the Mixed Court question,
representation on the Municipal Council and the like were questions directly
connected with the Shanghai incidents, whereas we had limited our
delegation’s authority as above. These divergent instructions prevented
successful negotiations at Shanghai.
2. At meeting of the Heads of Legation this morning the senior minister was
authorized to inform the Chinese Government immediately that the interested
diplomatic representatives decided to begin negotiations without delay; that
in their opinion the immediate return [settlement?] of the Shanghai incidents
themselves on basis of equity and justice must be object of the first
agreement; that likewise if the Chinese Government expresses the desire the
interested diplomatic representatives are disposed to request of their
respective Governments authorization to discuss in the most friendly spirit
the propositions presented to their delegation at Shanghai concerning both
the [re]organization of the International Settlement and the administration of
justice in the said Settlement. This is being given widest publicity in the hope

that it will prevent any unfortunate repercussion from the departure of our
delegation from Shanghai and in order to demonstrate to the Chinese
Government and people our earnest desire to settle the Shanghai incident
itself at the earliest moment possible and to cooperate with the Chinese
Government [in] the broader questions of a reorganization of the
International Settlement if authorized to do so by our Governments.
3. The Heads of Legation decided to constitute the Italian Minister, the
French Minister and myself a committee to negotiate with the Chinese
Government in the above regard.
4. I believe this morning’s démarche is a very wise step along the line of
proper conciliation whenever possible. It likewise divides into two sections,
for negotiation with the Chinese Government, the question of the actual
shooting affrays themselves at Shanghai and the broader matter of a
reorganization of the International Settlement. Not to make this
differentiation and maintain it, would be to cause endless confusion and in
effect in my opinion jeopardize the success in either direction. I construe the
present state of affairs extremely critical; that the prescribed [sic] movement
and agitation is essentially nationalist in character rather than antiforeign;
that we foreigners must make some concession to the Chinese before the
agitation will subside and that if we do not do so speedily there are grave
fears for the future. In my opinion the widespread agitation centers
psychologically in the Shanghai incident; that therefore we should settle this
as satisfactorily as possible at once when it is hoped the agitation throughout
the country will subside temporarily at least.
5. The readjustment now going on between China and the foreign powers is
greatly accelerated and exacerbated by the Shanghai incident and its
widespread repercussion and is likewise being exploited in every manner
possible by the Soviets. Just how much they had to do with the actual
initiation of the Shanghai incident is at present impossible to say. While the
situation in China is not yet out of [hand] I am alarmed at the potentialities
unless something is done speedily and satisfactorily as regards a solution
thereof.
MAYER

[Document 517]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. When Minister for Foreign Affairs informed by senior minister of proposal
as outlined in paragraph 2 of above, former expressed emphatic preference
that negotiations should take place in Shanghai; that Peking was not desirable
for that purpose, disturbances being likely in event of unsatisfactory course
of negotiation. Likewise difficult for witnesses to be questioned at Peking.
Senior minister enumerated distinct advantages of Peking over Shanghai in
our opinion. After 2-hour discussion Minister for Foreign Affairs maintained
attitude but said he would consult Tuan Chi-jui. Latter has now caused us to
be informed of his preference for Shanghai as place for negotiations. Quite
evident that one reason for this attitude is fear of Minister for Foreign Affairs
in particular and Chinese Government in general of taking responsibility of
direct negotiation at Peking.
2. At meeting of Heads of Legation this morning senior minister authorized
to reply to Minister for Foreign Affairs that we consider there are substantial
objections to satisfactory negotiation at Shanghai; that we trust Chinese
Government will modify their attitude; that we shall hear report of our
delegation arriving back today, and give final reply to Chinese Government’s
proposition thereafter. General opinion of Heads of Legation that, while
greatly preferable negotiations should take place in Peking, we could not in
the last analysis categorically refuse Chinese Government’s proposition and
would agree thereto even if same remained unchanged.
3. Argument by senior minister that much time would be saved if
negotiations at Peking, did not appear of especial importance to Minister for
Foreign Affairs who gave senior minister distinctly to understand that there
was no especial hurry for settlement; that if achieved in two or three weeks it
would be quite satisfactory. This is a distinct change in attitude of Chinese
Government who heretofore have in every way urged a speedy settlement.
4. I shall telegraph later in regard to this change in attitude.

Maver

[Document 518]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
242. Following from consul general at Shanghai:
by Chinese press decision of Chamber of Commerce to withdraw strike
yesterday and today. Saturday afternoon after prolonged session and under
student duress the spineless Chamber of Commerce rescinded its former
decision to withdraw strike. Shops showing increasing inclination to open but
remain nominally closed. All Chinese banks are closed. It is believed there
will be no relaxation in strike until 26th. Conditions practically unchanged
for 10 days.
General Chang has about 4,000 Fengtien troops here. They will be increased
to 6,000 by the 24th. His assurances are satisfactory but practical assistance
in maintaining order in Chinese territory not yet substantiated.”
MAYER

The Italian Minister in China (Cerruti), Senior Minister, to the American
Chargé (Mayer)95
[Translation96 ]
PEKING, June 26, 1925.
Circular No. 187 bis
Subject: Events at Shanghai
The Senior minister has the honor to circulate herewith a note concerning the events at
Shanghai which was addressed to him by the Waichiaopu June 24.
[Enclosure—Translation96 ]
The Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Shen) to the Italian Minister in China (Cerruti), Senior Minister
PEKING, June 24, 1925.
MR. MINISTER: With reference to the killing of Chinese by the police of the International
Settlement of Shanghai, the Chinese delegation presented 13 points for discussion at
Shanghai with the delegation which was sent by the Ministers. Unfortunately they
could not reach a settlement.
As it has now been decided to transfer the negotiations to Peking, I have the honor to
submit to Your Excellency the proposals formulated by the Chinese delegation at
Shanghai, as well as the views of the Chinese Government, on the subject of the
revision of the treaties which is considered hereafter to be absolutely necessary. The 13
demands mentioned above are as follows:
1. Abolition of all extraordinary military measures.
2. Release of all Chinese who have been arrested in connection with this
affair and reopening of all schools closed or occupied in the International
Settlement.
3. Punishment of those to blame, who, pending their trial (on very grave
charges), should be immediately suspended from their duties.

4. Indemnity to the victims (dead and wounded) and to the laborers,
merchants, and students who have suffered loss as a result of this affair.
5. Formal apologies.
6. Restitution of the Mixed Court to the Chinese Government.
7. The Chinese employed in the factories and homes of foreigners, seamen,
and workers who have struck because of the agitation produced by the
incident shall be reinstated without reduction of pay for the period of the
strike.
8. Liberal treatment for laborers, i. e., no punishment shall be inflicted if they
wish to abstain from work.
9. Regarding the status of the International Settlement:
(a) The Chinese shall participate in the Municipal Council and rate
payers’ meetings. The rate payers will choose their representatives
in proportion to the amount of the taxes paid by them. In voting
they will have the same rights and privileges as the foreign voters.
(b) In determining the right to vote, examination shall be made to
see whether properties actually belong to the titleholder, or whether
he is simply an agent or representative. Only the actual owner will
have the right to vote and if the property is held by an agent it is the
real owner who will vote.
10. The Municipality shall not construct roads outside of the International
Settlement; those which are already so constructed shall be ceded back
unconditionally to the Chinese Government, which will have the control of
them.
11. The regulations concerning the press, the rights of wharfage, and the
stock exchanges should be repealed.
12. Chinese in the International Settlement shall have freedom of speech, of
assembly, and of the press.
13. The Secretary of the Municipal Council, Benbow-Rowe, shall be
dismissed.
These 13 demands represent only a part of the questions which must be settled in
connection with the Shanghai incident. The Chinese Government is of the opinion that

in order to assure definitely friendly relations between China and the foreign powers
and a permanent peace, all the unequal treaties which have been concluded in the past
must be revised. For this purpose I have had the honor to address to Your Excellency
today a note which you will receive at the same time and which explains the reasons
for this demand.98
I beg Your Excellency to be good enough to communicate this note to the interested
ministers and hope that negotiations thereon will be opened as soon as possible in order
to arrive at a prompt settlement, which is my most heartfelt desire.
I avail [etc.]
SHEN JUI-LIN
95 Copy (in French) received by the Department on September 9. The Chargé in China
reported the receipt of the enclosed note from the Chinese Foreign Office in telegram
No. 255, July 2.
96 Supplied by the editor.
96 Supplied by the editor.
portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637].

[Document 520]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
252. Following from consul general, Shanghai:
“June 26, 5 p.m. All Chinese banks and most shops reopened this morning
after having been closed since June 1st. Desperate attempt was made late last
night by extremists to have agreement to reopen rescinded on account of
affair at Canton.99 There is a general appearance of normalcy except in the
mill districts and harbor which remain unchanged. Mill strike settlement was
deadlocked by an attempt to secure recognition of the labor unions.[”]
MAYER
portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623].

[Document 521]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received July 3—5 p.m.]
1. Simultaneously with presentation of identic note, reported in my 247, June
willingness that negotiations respecting the Shanghai incident take place
Peking but setting forth 13 points which the Chinese Government considered
should be the basis for such negotiations. Even with the most sympathetic
attitude towards the Chinese Government’s desires in the matter these points
entirely unacceptable. They include matters not even germane to precise
question to be decided, such as arrangements between employer and
employee, dismissal of an official against whom there is no charge but that of
having an irritating manner, and the like.
2. Through the senior minister the Heads of Legation concerned have
informed Foreign Office that the 13 points for reasons above stated could not
seriously be considered as affording basis for negotiations.
3. When the senior minister so acquainted the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
latter stated that the two notes of June 24th must together form basis for
anticipated negotiations. That is, Shanghai negotiations must include
question of readjustment of treaty relations between China and the powers.
Minister for Foreign Affairs still maintains position despite efforts by
Monsieur Cerruti to show scope of our negotiations of necessity could not
include the question of readjustment of treaty relations which we had referred
to our respective Governments. The Chinese Government have asked Messrs.
C. T. Wang, W. W. Yen and Admiral Tsai Ting-kan to constitute committee to
negotiate with French and Italian Ministers and myself on behalf of interested
diplomatic representatives. Heads of Legation have drafted agenda for
negotiations which now being submitted to Chinese Government.
4. C. T. Wang has called upon me informally to ascertain my ideas regarding
scope of the anticipated negotiations. He stated that without any doubt the

question of readjustment of treaty regulations should be included in the
anticipated negotiations, that otherwise neither he nor W. W. Yen would
consent to serve. I told Dr. Wang that I could not speak authoritatively for my
Government in respect of the question he raised having referred the note of
June 24th to it for instructions. However I expressed personal opinion that
any foreign government, no matter how sympathetically it might be inclined
toward the aspirations of the Chinese in regard to readjustment of treaty
relations, would need to feel certain that Chinese Government [was] capable
of assuming additional obligations and responsibilities which revision of
treaties would place upon it before foreign governments could consent to
such revision. I asked Dr. Wang whether in his opinion present Chinese
Government could satisfy this condition precedent. He replied emphatically
that it could; that the source of all trouble and difficulties were [was] the
special privileges and immunities of the treaties and once these were
removed peace and order would prevail in China and a stable, effective
government would ensue. I fear he is overoptimistic if sincere in these
expressions and is putting the cart before the horse.
5. Three Chinese delegates referred to above are apparently jockeying for
position vis-à-vis Foreign Office in an effort to escape responsibility for the
settling of Shanghai incident. From reliable reports it would seem that the
Chinese delegates have either resigned or told Foreign Office they will only
negotiate Shanghai incident as part of larger subject including revision of the
treaty. This makes it most difficult if not impossible for us to hasten
settlement of Shanghai incidents in which apparently Chinese Government
has lost interest in view of bigger question of treaty revision which it is now
pushing to the fore. Should negotiations for settlement of Shanghai incidents
not be begun early next week, through continued dilatory tactics of Chinese
Government, I believe Heads of Legation must seriously contemplate
informing Chinese Government that either latter shall cooperate immediately
to [the] end that negotiation be begun, otherwise Heads of Legation will
conclude that Chinese Government is willing to rely upon any settlement
which foreign authorities may regard as just. In this connection action taken
pertinent.
I refer as last resort of settlement Shanghai incidents to Permanent Court of
International Justice in conjunction with League of Nations, discussed informally at
meeting of Heads of Legation. Would Department favor such action? See Department’s
MAYER

2 Not printed.
6 Infra.

[Document 522]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received 2:30 p.m.]
257. Heads of Legation yesterday sent following instructions to senior consul at
Shanghai in respect of the vicinity of Shanghai International Settlement involved in the
incident of May 30th, last, and containing recommendations concerning revision of
police regulations. It is proposed shortly to make public and inform Foreign Office of
all except penultimate paragraph of the instruction. I shall report to the Department
when release may be made:
“The representatives of the powers concerned consider it impracticable [sic],
after a thorough examination of the incidents which took place on May 30th,
last, at Shanghai, and, after having taken cognizance of the report of their
delegates, have come to the following conclusions:
1. It is to be regretted that the chairman of the Municipal Council, although
aware of the situation and of the developments likely to ensue, did not cause
all adequate precautionary measures to be taken especially in regard to the
police.
Consequently the heads of missions feel compelled to express the opinion
that his conduct is not devoid of blame.
2. Colonel McEuen, commissioner of police, after being informed of the
events which were impending, nevertheless considered himself justified in
leaving his post, indeed more than an hour and a quarter elapsed between the
moment when the demonstrators entered the International Settlement and that
when the shots were fired but during all this time Colonel McEuen was not at
his post. Finally, it does not appear that he made the necessary arrangements
to disperse the demonstrators and obtain control of the demonstration. He
thus showed negligence, lack of judgment and lack of professional ability.
His is the responsibility therefore primarily involved.
The diplomatic representatives concerned consider that he should be
replaced.

3. Inspector Everson being a subordinate official could not do otherwise than
carry out the orders given him, the more so as he was necessarily
apprehensive of the sacking of the Louza police station. He can at most be
criticised for a certain lack of judgment in having refused reenforcements
owing to his belief that the demonstration would not assume a dangerous
character.
4. The diplomatic representatives concerned, being of the opinion that the
police regulations are defective especially those dealing with disturbances
and riots and that they constitute one of the causes of the incidents, consider
that they must be modified and made public. It is indispensable in such
circumstances that any recourse to arms by the police should be preceded by
a warning (such as the sounding of a bugle) comprehensible to all and
capable of being heard at a distance.
In acquainting the Municipal Council with the arrangements described above,
the diplomatic representatives concerned, desirous of settling the incident in a
spirit of justice and equity, recommend to it the immediate adoption of the
measures mentioned under numbers 2 and 4 which will, they consider, do
much to allay public opinion and bring back a normal state of affairs.
Having thus given proof of their sincere desire as far as practicable they are
concerned to ascertain and fix the responsibility in the matter. The diplomatic
representatives concerned feel bound to declare that they are satisfied that
arrangements for the demonstrations were made on Chinese territory. The
Chinese Government must, therefore, on their part, take energetic measures
to fix responsibility where it belongs and inflict penalties upon the officials
responsible. Moreover, in order to prevent the recurrence of similar incidents,
it is indispensable that in the future the authorities of the Chinese city and
those of the Concession shall maintain a close contact with the object of
assuring an effective collaboration for the maintenance of order.”
MAYER

[Document 523]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
settlement of Shanghai incidents the Department desires that you make every effort to
see that the Chinese point of view receives fair and just consideration. Department
desires to be kept informed by telegraph of developments.
KELLOGG

[Document 524]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Heads of Legation at a meeting this morning was [were] informed of reply
from senior consul at Shanghai to instructions to consular body set forth in
my telegram aforementioned requesting a delay to July 6th in presentation to
Municipal Council of decisions arrived at by Heads of Legation in respect of
Shanghai incident in order that consular body might have time to provide for
whatever steps might be necessary in consequence of notification to
Municipal Council.
2. Heads of Legation are telegraphing consular body that instructions
aforementioned must be carried out; that however in view of practical
difficulties Heads of Legation accede to request for delay until Monday
morning, July 6th, when decisions of Heads of Legation aforementioned will
be given to Chinese Government and to Peking press. Reply to consular body
concluded with the statement that Heads of Legation hope consular body can
persuade Municipal Council not to resign but even if it does this must not
impede execution of instructions of Heads of Legation.
3. From telegrams received by my Japanese and British colleagues I
understand American consul general, Shanghai, has joined with Japanese and
British consuls general, Shanghai, in telegraphing direct to their respective
Governments urging reconsideration of decisions of Heads of Legation. I
cannot too strongly request the Department’s support in this regard. I
consider decisions of Heads of Legation just and proper; that they are also
wise from point of view of general political expediency; that as set forth in
order to place us on solid ground vis-à-vis Chinese public opinion in the
event that negotiations for the settlement of the Shanghai incident be long
delayed or impossible of achievement. On the other hand if negotiations are
initiated this spontaneous action indicating serious view taken by the Heads
of Legation of the Shanghai incidents will strengthen rather than weaken our
position.

4. While appreciating the stress under which Mr. Cunningham is working I
cannot but greatly regret his action in derogation of my authority and
responsibility if the information given me by my British and Japanese
colleagues as above noted is correct.8
MAYER
8 The Acting Secretary of State telegraphed the Chargé in China July 7 as follows:
[Document 525]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 6, 1925—noon.
1. British Government has instructed its Chargé d’Affaires to cause
suspension of communication of decisions of Heads of Legations to Chinese
Government and to press, and to await further instructions. Heads of
Legations acting accordingly, since no longer unanimity through suspensive
veto of British Government.
2. Assumed consular body carrying out our instructions to communicate our
decisions to Municipal Council which instructions of British Government to
its Chargé do not seem to embrace.
3. I shall keep the Department advised telegraphically in above regard.
Meanwhile respectfully request no release to press.
MAYER

[Document 526]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[Paraphrase]
Permanent Court of International Justice or to the League of Nations, you should be
careful to refrain from joining in any move to refer to either body any question in
which our Government is concerned. Await the arrival of Minister MacMurray at
Peking before taking final action such as proposed in fifth paragraph of your telegram.
GREW

[Document 527]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER MASS., July 7, 1925.
[Received July 9.]
No. 684
SIR: I have the honour to draw your attention to the proposal of the Corps Diplomatique
at Peking to communicate to the press and Chinese Government the findings which
they have arrived at as a result of their investigations into the circumstances attending
the recent anti-foreign riots at Shanghai.
His Majesty’s Government have carefully considered this proposal and in order that
their attitude may as far as possible correspond with that of the United States
Government, I am instructed to inform you that their views in the matter are as follows:
In the first place, His Majesty’s Government are uncertain whether the decisions of the
Corps Diplomatique may not meet with resistance when put into practical execution. In
particular, and quite apart from possible doubts as to whether such a decision is legally
enforceable, it appears to His Majesty’s Government that an awkward situation would
arise were the Municipal Council of Shanghai to refuse to give effect to the finding
regarding the dismissal of the police Commissioner at that port. Furthermore, His
Britannic Majesty’s Consul General at Shanghai has protested against the findings of
the Corps Diplomatique, and it is understood that his attitude enjoys the support of the
Consuls General of the United States and Japan.
For the above reasons, His Majesty’s Government have instructed their Representative
at Peking to satisfy himself, as a preliminary to any further action, first that the
decisions of the Corps Diplomatique will not meet with any effective resistance and
secondly that his United States and Japanese colleagues have been officially authorized
to make the proposed communication.
As regards the text of the communication itself His Majesty’s Government entirely
concur in the substance of the findings arrived at by the Corps Diplomatique. They
consider however that the findings are susceptible of alterations in form before their
actual publication takes place and should more especially contain modifications
calculated to meet the legitimate personal susceptibilities of the Chairman of the
Municipal Council of Shanghai and others concerned. Thus the Chinese authorities
should be left in no doubt regarding their share of the responsibility for the excesses
committed. The fact that the demonstrations were organized on Chinese territory

should be dwelt upon at length and with emphasis and placed in the forefront of the
document—immediately following this should come a statement that the Chinese
Government must take steps forthwith to fix responsibility and to punish the offenders.
Subject to these and to other emendations of a minor nature, His Majesty’s
Representative at Peking has been informed that His Majesty’s Government are in
agreement with the terms of the proposed communication—provided always that prior
to its dispatch, the heads of Missions concerned are fully assured that sufficient
evidence is forthcoming to support each finding and that there is no prima facie reason
to suppose that the publication of the document will provoke a still more serious
situation in Shanghai or elsewhere, particularly by undermining the authority of
foreigners occupying positions of grave responsibility in the present crisis.
His Majesty’s Government trust that their views, as set out above, will meet with your
concurrence, and I am to express the hope that the United States Government will be
disposed to address instructions to their representative at Peking similar to those which
have already been sent to His Majesty’s Representative.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 528]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Meeting of the Heads of Legation yesterday further to discuss the effect of
British interposition in action proposed by the Heads of Legation respecting
the Municipal Council. In this connection I understand the British
Ambassador has communicated to you the desire of his Government. Senior
minister informed colleagues that the senior consul had telegraphed that the
conclusions of the Heads of Legation had been transmitted to the Municipal
Council.
2. French Minister evinced considerable animus toward the British
Government characterizing its action as a most regrettable interference with
decisions of Heads of Legation and urged that, in view of the British action
described in the telegram above mentioned and elaborated in further
instructions to the British Chargé d’Affaires here, settlement of the Shanghai
incident should be negotiated with the Chinese Government by the British
Government alone. Several of the colleagues expressed agreement with the
French Minister. Mr. MacMurray9 who was present at the meeting along with
me expressed opinion that the other powers concerned in the Shanghai
International Settlement could not abandon their rights and responsibilities by
agreeing to negotiation of solution of matter by British Government alone.
British Chargé d’Affaires did not seem quite to understand extreme
seriousness of the trend of discussion. He stated believed action of his
Government due to insistence of the British consul general at Shanghai
backed by British community there and strength of mercantile interest both in
China and Great Britain.
3. At this juncture I suggested a compromise which I hoped would be
satisfactory to Heads of Legation, British Government and Municipal
Council, to the effect that Municipal Council be informed that Heads of
Legation would be willing to agree that they would not communicate their
conclusions to Chinese Government or to press but would permit Municipal
Council to take as on own initiative action envisaged by their conclusions,

council to announce publicly that their action [was] taken after discussion
with consular body at Shanghai and with approval of the representatives of
the powers concerned at Peking. MacMurray developed this suggestion
observing that the chairman of Municipal Council had given him to
understand when in Shanghai that Municipal Council would find less
difficulty in falling in with desires of Heads of Legation if not compelled to
act under obvious pressure. MacMurray further observed that from
interviews with Chinese at Shanghai he had gained the impression that
Chinese generally would be measurably appeased if Municipal Council
would admit some responsibility for the events of May 30th.
4. At this stage of discussion Japanese Minister stated he was informed from
Shanghai that Municipal Council intended to resist conclusions of Heads of
Legation and French Minister insisted upon the necessity of determining
fundamental issue—whether Heads of Legation have or have not power to
control action of Municipal Council and in the last resort dismiss it and
substitute an administration of the Settlement by the consuls. Both
MacMurray and I expressed considerable doubt whether Heads of Legation
were legally competent to dismiss Municipal Council. French Minister then
proposed identic telegrams to our respective Governments asking for
instructions, assuring us of the confidence of our Governments in respect to
our attitude in Shanghai incident and our right to dissolve Municipal Council
and institute other administrative organ in Shanghai. Both MacMurray and I
considered such identic telegrams would be unfortunate as it was in a
deplorable belligerent spirit and definitely raised hypothetical question which
MacMurray felt Department of State would either be loath to answer or
would answer in the negative, thereby preventing us from associating
ourselves with our colleagues in any action which Heads of Legation might
all believe indicated by resistance on the part of Municipal Council.
5. A long discussion then ensued in which MacMurray supported by Danish
colleague expressed the hope that all possibilities of amicable solution
between Municipal Council and Heads of Legation should be explored before
taking any step which would precipitate issue on the question of control over
the Settlement. An impasse appeared to be reached and rather delicate
situation arrived at by insistence of French Minister that identic telegrams
either should be sent or if no unanimity on the subject the various interested
diplomatic representatives would be left to individual action thus breaking up
the solidarity heretofore existing among Heads of Legation.
6. At this point senior minister proposed that the representatives of powers
having nationals on Municipal Council, namely, Great Britain, Japan and the
United States, telegraph identically to their respective consul[s] general in

Shanghai in the sense of my suggestion aforementioned. This proposal was
adopted and, in the afternoon after consultation among British and Japanese
Ministers, MacMurray and myself, identic telegrams were sent to Shanghai
as authorized by Heads of Legation. I sent further telegram to Cunningham
giving him background as herein described and urging him to use his best
efforts to bring about a successful and amicable arrangement between Heads
of Legation and Municipal Council in the manner suggested in the identic
telegram. Continuation to follow.
MAYER
9 Newly appointed American Minister to China, who had not yet assumed charge of the
Legation nor presented his credentials to the Chinese Government.

[Document 529]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10:47 p.m.]
consular channels communication dated July 8th in which Shanghai Municipal Council
declined to accede to conclusions of the diplomatic representatives. No reply has been
received to the communication sent in behalf of diplomatic representatives to the
American, British, and Japanese consuls on the 8th.
2. Diplomatic representatives met this morning to consider situation. British Chargé
d’Affaires has received copy of instructions telegraphed by his Government to its
consul general at Shanghai directing him to use every effort to obtain the agreement of
the Municipal Council to the conclusions of the diplomatic representatives. Telegram
from senior consul furthermore contained slight intimation that the Council might
reconsider its position. In view of the possibility of such reconsideration diplomatic
representatives decided to await further word from Shanghai consular body before
taking action on the Council’s letter; but because of the strong probability that the
Council would remain obdurate in the hope that the present crisis would enable it
advantageously to force the long-standing issue as to its claim to practical autonomy on
the part of the Shanghai administration, they felt it advisable to seek without delay such
instructions as would enable them to meet that issue with full authorization to
undertake if necessary negotiations for the modification of the existing land
regulations. They therefore agreed to send their respective Governments the following
identic telegram the substance of which was suggested by MacMurray instead of the
telegram proposed by the French Minister at the previous meeting:
“The Shanghai Municipal Council, having received on July 6th the
conclusions adopted by the diplomatic representatives as a result of the
sending of the diplomatic commission, has now replied with an absolute
refusal to agree to them, claiming that it is ‘primarily responsible only to the
electorate of the International Settlement of Shanghai’, the interested
diplomatic representatives apprehend that it will prove impossible to induce
the Council to modify its position.
In view of the anomalous situation arising from a denial by the Settlement
administration of the authority and responsibility of the diplomatic

representatives with respect to matters which are of direct political concern in
the relations between China and the powers by virtue of whose authority the
Settlement was created and is maintained, the diplomatic representatives find
themselves under the necessity of asking of their Governments authorization
to reconsider, if need be in consultation with the Chinese authorities, the
status of the Settlement administration as now constituted under existing
regulations, with a view to the definite establishment of the Settlement upon
a basis eliminating any possibility of doubt that the diplomatic
representatives have an authority commensurate with their international
responsibilities.
In requesting such authorization the diplomatic representatives suggest that
any exchanges of views on this subject among the interested Governments
should be carried on in London in order to expedite a conclusion which is
urgently necessary for their guidance in a situation which is rapidly becoming
more complicated.
3. [sic] The diplomatic representatives fully realize that negotiations
regarding any fundamental change in the land regulations could at the present
time be carried on only under the most serious tactical disadvantage vis-à-vis
the Chinese but it is in the first place recognized that certain modifications in
detail must in fact be considered incidentally to the settlement of the
Shanghai crisis; and it is furthermore felt that a knowledge of the danger of
inaugurating any fundamental revision of the land regulations will act as a
powerful inducement to the Council to reconsider its position.”
4. MacMurray and I earnestly recommend that the Department give the authorization
requested, although we are hopeful that the mere possession of such authorization by
the several diplomatic representatives would in fact furnish the means of obviating the
necessity for availing ourselves of that authorization for the purpose of any
fundamental revision of the regulations.
5. It should be recalled that in previous communications to the Chinese Government
the diplomatic representatives have agreed to seek the authority of their respective
Governments for discussion with the Chinese Government, after settlement of
Shanghai incidents and as germane thereto, of some form of reorganization of the
Shanghai International Settlement such as inclusion of Chinese on the Municipal
Council and the like should the Chinese Government so request. I consider that this
constitutes a further argument in favor of our being empowered in such a manner as to
be able to prevent Shanghai municipal authorities from rendering abortive our
negotiations in respect of matters concerned with the carrying out of major policy in
China at this critical time.

Maver

[Document 530]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Prior to yesterday’s meeting of the Ministers the French Minister
circulated to his colleagues a statement to the general effect that, in view of
the divergences of opinion developed at the meeting of the 8th with particular
reference to MacMurray’s reluctance to join in the telegram which he had
proposed, he felt unable to continue as a member of the commission of three
heads of mission deputed by the diplomatic representatives to negotiate in
their behalf with the Chinese authorities for the settlement of the Shanghai
incident.
2. At the meeting MacMurray took occasion to remark that the difference of
viewpoint developed was one merely as to procedure rather than as to
substance. Count Martel while expressing thanks for this statement said that
his decision to withdraw remained unchanged. After the meeting he frankly
told MacMurray that he had welcomed the opportunity to withdraw from
participation in the negotiations.
3. This frank avowal together with the attitude displayed by him as reported
in my 267 seems to indicate a definite desire on the part of the French
representative to dissociate himself from all responsibility in connection with
the situation in Shanghai International Settlement. Considering that the
French interest is in their own Concession rather than in the International
Settlement, his desire to hold aloof is perhaps natural and only important in
that it tends to weaken statement of the powers and manifests an intention on
the part of the French to exploit the present situation to their advantage at the
expense of other nationalities. …
4. [Paraphrase.] As yet there has been no decision as to who will take the
place of the French Minister on the commission. [End paraphrase.]
MAYER

[Document 531]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Chinese authorities, to reconsider the status of the administration of the International
Settlement at Shanghai as now constituted under existing regulations with a view to the
definite establishment of the Settlement upon a basis eliminating any possibility of
doubt that the diplomatic representatives have an authority commensurate with their
international responsibilities. London informed.
KELLOGG

[Document 532]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
LONDON, July 17, 1925—noon.
[Received 9:13 p.m.]
on coming to Foreign Office I found there also French and Japanese Ambassadors.
Chamberlain stated he wished to limit conversation to the difficulties between the
diplomatic corps at Peking and the Municipal Council at Shanghai. He made a
statement of the facts as they had been presented to him and then stated that his
Government was unwilling to accept the resignation of the chief of police believing a
proper and judicial inquiry should be made into the affair especially since the
Municipal Council had offered to accept and abide by any decision reached by such an
inquiry. Chamberlain said he would like both to instruct British Chargé d’Affaires,
Peking, advising him of British Government’s decision as above and also send an
informal message to Municipal Council pointing out absurdity of their position and
stating frankly that they could not regard themselves as responsible only to their own
electors and at the same time rely upon foreign powers for protection. I asked if in view
of public attitude of Municipal Council some retraction on their part would not be
advisable before beginning inquiry. Chamberlain replied that any effort to discipline
Council brought in Chinese and opened up a very wide subject for discussion and was
believed therefore to be inadvisable.
Chamberlain then read following proposed telegram of instruction to British Chargé
d’Affaires, Peking, and expressed the hope that the Ambassadors present might
recommend to their Governments that similar instructions be telegraphed their
respective missions in Peking. Japanese Ambassador agreed with Chamberlain’s plan
and said he would recommend it to his Government. French Ambassador stated that
inasmuch as France had her own concessions and was therefore not directly interested
he would leave the matter for decision by his Government.
Upon leaving I informed Chamberlain I would make a personal recommendation to my
Government that any action taken should be in concert with powers represented.
Chamberlain will see Italian Ambassador today.
I request instructions.

“His Majesty’s Government have carefully considered your telegram number
230 but remain of opinion that apart from the controversy with the Municipal
Council a public and judicial inquiry is required to satisfy all concerned that
justice is being done. The preliminary inquiries instituted by the diplomatic
body and the conclusions formed by them on this report which they have
received from their delegation show that there is a clear case for further
investigation but the information in possession of His Majesty’s Government
is not sufficient to justify themselves in awarding or withholding blame still
less in refusing to the Municipal Council the public inquiry for which they
have asked. His Majesty’s Government appreciate the difficulties arising
from the fact that the diplomatic body have already rejected proposals made
from Shanghai for such an inquiry and that the diplomatic body considered
the report of their own commission sufficient basis for the conclusions which
they wished to publish. His Majesty’s Government are more than anxious to
maintain the authority of the diplomatic body but consider that this will be
better secured if the initiative in proposing and constituting a judicial inquiry
is taken by the diplomatic body and it is explained that the diplomatic
commission of inquiry is to be considered as a preliminary inquiry which has
made out a prima facie case for a further public judicial inquiry.
I therefore propose to endeavor to obtain the consent of the Governments
immediately concerned to the appointment of a judicial commission
consisting of American, French, Japanese and British judges having known
the Far East but if possible not directly connected with Shanghai. I do not
think that any Chinese representative should be included as the Chinese
Government are not responsible for the administration of the International
Settlement and have shown a persistent desire to use the Shanghai incident as
an argument in a different and larger issue instead of judging it strictly on its
merits.
The further communication which would be required to the Municipal
Council and which would be published should be on the following lines: It
should start by referring to the responsibility of the Chinese owing to the
organization of the demonstration on Chinese-administered territory and
should say that the inquiries made by the diplomatic body have led them to
the conclusion after consultation with their Governments that a public
judicial inquiry should be held to establish and make known the facts, fix the
responsibilities and satisfy public opinion in China and abroad, that justice
will be done and administrative reforms will be effected when required as
shown by the results of the inquiry. Pending the result of this inquiry they
consider that the police commissioner should be suspended but without loss
of pay or prejudice to his position.

In order to maintain solidarity among your colleagues I have discussed action
on the above lines with the American, French and Japanese Ambassadors in
London to whom I have handed a copy of this telegram in order to secure if
possible the issue of similar instructions to the representatives of those
Governments at Peking. As soon as I learn the result of this discussion I will
give you further instructions.”
HOUGHTON
10 Not printed.
11 J. Austen Chamberlain, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

[Document 533]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
July 17, noon, from the Ambassador in Great Britain, printed supra.]
This is the first intimation that this Government has had of any proposal by the
Municipal Council for a judicial inquiry into the question at Shanghai. The Department
does not perceive any objection to the plan proposed by the British Government but
before acquiescing desires to have your comments. The Department desires to know
what effect such a proposal would have upon the Chinese and the relations between
this Government and China. It would also like to be assured that such a judicial inquiry
would not interfere in the early calling of the conference on tariffs and the sending of
the commission on extraterritoriality.
KELLOGG

[Document 534]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 20, 1925—midnight.
1. Shanghai Municipal Council has never actually proposed to the interested
Legations to hold judicial inquiry. It has all along been dissatisfied, however,
with the sending of the commission of diplomatic secretaries which
investigated in behalf of the interested Legations; and in order to discredit the
conclusions based thereon, certain members and adherents of the Council
have instigated a vigorous agitation in the press to the effect that Council had
been unfairly treated in having criticism of its action, based upon
administrative rather than judicial inquiry. The suggestion most nearly
approximated concrete form in an identic telegram of July 16, 5 p.m., in
which American, British, and Japanese consuls advise their Legations (in
connection with one of these incidental phases of the situation which I have
not thought it worth while to take up with the Department by telegraph) that
members of the Council had said they anticipated that Shanghai rate payers
might pass resolution calling for judicial inquiry to be held on the
understanding that the Council would abide by its findings.
2. It would seem that decision of heads of mission to act on the basis of
report of the commission of secretaries was actuated by what at the time
appeared to be the prospect that such treatment would most quickly and
effectively tend to abate the antiforeign feeling aroused by the incident of
May 30th. This expectation was disappointed by opposition on the part of the
Council which was abetted by the British consul general and which has now
received the support of the British Government in opposition to the
recommendations of the British Chargé d’Affaires here. I make this comment
on the failure of the method adopted by the heads of mission, not in criticism
of their action (for my feeling is that had I been here I should probably have
joined in their decisions), but in recognition of the fact that a new state of
affairs has now been brought about which will necessitate something in the
nature of a judicial inquiry in order alike to satisfy Chinese feeling and to
avoid the perpetuation of such antagonism between the Shanghai community

and the diplomatic representatives as would seriously handicap any
negotiations for the settlement of the case.
3. Such an inquiry is likely to be opposed, however, by the Italian, French
and Belgian Governments whose Ministers consider their prestige and amour
propre compromised by any suggestion for reconsideration of the course
hitherto pursued and who are disposed to disavow any responsibility in
connection with the Shanghai situation if unable to get their way in forcing a
direct issue with the Municipal Council. Italian Minister in the meeting today
went so far as to say that proposed judicial commission would in fact be a
mere agency in behalf of the Governments whose nationals participate in the
Shanghai Municipal Council and that he had already advised his Government
to withdraw its small naval expedition if Shanghai should so be treated as not
in fact an international settlement.
4. In the present querulous temper of the diplomatic body, I am doubtful
whether any progress towards settlement can be made except by agreement
among the American, British and Japanese Governments in the hope that
other Governments, from a viewpoint more dispassionate than other [that?]
of their representatives here, will be persuaded to associate themselves with
the initiative thus taken by the powers actually most interested in the
Shanghai International Settlement.
5. For the reasons indicated, I recommend that our Government accede to the
British proposal with a qualification that the commission of inquiry should
include a Chinese jurist of high standing. The holding of an inquiry without a
Chinese member, or at any rate an offer to admit a Chinese to participate
would, I feel sure, have an adverse effect upon Chinese opinion but I believe
that to hold a judicial investigation in which Chinese had the opportunity to
be represented would be a conciliatory gesture which would favorably
influence Chinese sentiment and react advantageously upon our relations.
6. If such an inquiry were to be held without delay, I do not see how it would
interfere with plans for Special Conference or Commission on
Extraterritoriality. If the inquiry were to coincide with these, it might indeed
tend to create a situation tactically disadvantageous for the negotiation of
tariff and extraterritorial questions in that we would be compelled to deal
with these matters of principle while occupying a defensive position in regard
to concrete issues arising out of Shanghai incident. This, however, seems to
me preferable to having to negotiate in the atmosphere of distrust which
would persist if we were to have taken no adequate measures for the purpose
of reaching an adjustment of the Shanghai affair.

7. Should it be decided to have a judicial inquiry, it may be questioned
whether we ought not to be represented on it by a judicial officer not
connected with Shanghai. In common with what I believe is the general
opinion, I have the highest possible regard for Judge Purdy’s integrity and
personal suitability and would have absolute confidence in his fairness.12
Chinese opinion, however, is unaccustomed to the conception of judicial
impartiality and would almost inevitably assume that no foreign official
resident in Shanghai would be able to dissociate himself from the interests
and prejudices of the foreign community there. Although I have not consulted
Judge Purdy, I have reason to believe that he himself would prefer not to
serve on such an inquiry. I would therefore suggest that consideration be
given to the possibility of detailing a judge from the Philippines.
MACMURRAY
12 Milton Dwight Purdy, Judge of the United States Court in China.

[Document 535]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
Government is ready to acquiesce in its proposal for the holding of a public judicial
inquiry to establish and make known the facts, fix the responsibilities in regard to the
Shanghai incidents provided that the proposed commission include a Chinese jurist of
high standing. You may state that this Government is of the opinion that the holding of
an inquiry without a Chinese member, or at any rate an offer to admit a Chinese to
participate would have an adverse effect upon Chinese opinion while to hold a judicial
investigation in which the Chinese are given an opportunity to be represented would be
a conciliation gesture which would favorably influence Chinese sentiment and react
advantageously upon our relations.
[Paraphrase.] You may inform the Foreign Office confidentially that the American
Minister in China believes that probably the Belgian, French, and Italian Governments
will oppose such an inquiry, as their Ministers think that any suggestion to reconsider
the course followed hitherto will compromise their amour propre and prestige. [End
paraphrase.]
KELLOGG

[Document 536]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
Chamberlain stated to me in an interview yesterday that the British Government agreed
to the proposal approved by MacMurray that a Chinese judge be appointed.
Chamberlain continued that the substance of the contemplated British note to the
Chinese was practically the same as that of the proposed reply quoted in Department’s
Chamberlain thought might be made more nearly to conform; to that end, he will
telegraph the British Chargé d’Affaires in Peking to confer with MacMurray and agree
as nearly as possible upon an identic phraseology.
I expressed to Chamberlain the satisfaction with which this apparent correspondence of
views would be received.
HOUGHTON

[Document 537]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, August 3, 1925.
in regard to the proposal of the Corps Diplomatique at Peking to communicate to the
press and to the Chinese Government the findings which they had arrived at as a result
of their investigation into the circumstances attending the recent antiforeign riots at
Shanghai. Since your note was received the situation has been altered by the proposal
of the British Government, which was communicated to me through the American
Embassy at London, for the appointment of a commission, consisting of British,
French, Japanese and American judges, to hold a judicial inquiry in regard to the riots,
to establish and make known the facts, fix the responsibilities and satisfy public
opinion in China and abroad. On July 22, 1925, I instructed the American Ambassador
at London to inform His Majesty’s Government that this Government was prepared to
acquiesce in its proposal for the holding of a judicial inquiry for the purposes above
referred to provided the proposed commission should include a Chinese jurist of high
standing. I also authorized the Ambassador to express the view that the holding of an
inquiry without a Chinese member, or at least without an offer to admit a Chinese to
participate, might have an adverse effect upon Chinese opinion, while to hold a judicial
investigation in which the Chinese would be given an opportunity to be represented
would be a conciliatory gesture which would favorably influence Chinese sentiment
and react advantageously upon our relations.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 538]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
Japanese, and Italian Governments have agreed in principle to the establishment of
judicial inquiry and concludes:
“I should be grateful if United States representatives at Brussels,
Copenhagen, The Hague, Lisbon, Madrid, Stockholm and Oslo be instructed
to support their British colleagues in expressing the hope to the Foreign
Offices of these powers concerned that their respective representatives at
Peking be instructed to agree to the establishment of the inquiries.”
Similar Foreign Office note has been addressed to French, Japanese, and Italian
Ambassadors here.
Please reply.
HOUGHTON

[Document 539]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
representatives at Brussels, Copenhagen, The Hague, Lisbon, Madrid, Stockholm and
Oslo to consult with their British colleagues and if necessary to support them as
requested by informing the Foreign Offices of those countries that this country has
consented to the British proposal for the judicial inquiry, it being understood that the
judicial commission will include a Chinese jurist.
KELLOGG

[Document 540]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
192. The Chinese Minister called upon me on the 5th instant to state that he had
received instructions from his Government to say to me that his Government could not
see any need for the proposed judicial inquiry into the Shanghai matter in view of the
fact that the guilt of the Chinese students had been passed upon by the Mixed Court
and the responsibility of the police evidenced by the testimony of Everson at the same
trial, and that the question of the responsibility of the Municipality had been gone into
by the Commission sent to Shanghai by the Diplomatic Body and by the Chinese
Government. I explained to the Chinese Minister that this Government did not desire to
delay the settlement of the Shanghai matter in any way, that it had given full authority
to its Legation in Peking to deal with this matter, that the proposal for a judicial inquiry
had come from the British Government and that we had consented to it on the
understanding that a Chinese jurist should be appointed to the judicial commission or
that the Chinese Government be given an opportunity to appoint one. I stated that I
could not see any reason why such a judicial inquiry should not be held if the
Government desire it as it would be a public inquiry into the facts and would not
interest itself in any negotiations between the Powers and the Chinese Government
relating thereto.
KELLOGG

[Document 541]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Received 6:13 p.m.]
1. Minister for Foreign Affairs August 6th recounted to me an informal
conversation with British Chargé d’Affaires in which the former had
expressed objection to the proposed judicial inquiry into the Shanghai affair
on the ground that it would merely delay a settlement of the case.
2. He asked my views and I told him that while I had received no final
instructions from my Government on this point I was personally of the
opinion that such an inquiry would be of value and might in fact obviate
delays in the negotiations prescribed otherwise likely to occur through failure
to agree on the actual facts involved. He very persistently argued that the
reports made by the Chinese commission and by the commission of the
diplomatic body would furnish an adequate basis for negotiations, even
though they represented ex parte investigations by the two parties in interest.
He clearly implied that the Chinese would find it easier to deal with the
matter through mutual concessions rather than on the basis of an impartial
and precise ascertainment of facts.
3. From this and previous indications of Chinese feeling, I judge that the
acceptability of this proposal to the Chinese has been prejudiced by publicity
from London regarding the British Government’s intention to bring about a
judicial inquiry, these reports having first reached the Chinese in a form that
made no reference to Chinese participation.
4. At a meeting of interested ministers August 7th senior minister informed us
that the Minister for Foreign Affairs had told him the Chinese Government
had noted press reports concerning the proposed inquiry and stated that he
hoped no such proposal would be made as the Chinese Government would
categorically refuse to entertain it and would not only be unwilling to
participate but would take no cognizance of any of the findings of the
inquiry. Senior minister said he inferred, though it was not stated, that it was
the intention of the Chinese Government to decline all cooperation in such
matters as the summoning of witnesses under Chinese jurisdiction.

5. This attitude on the part of the Chinese disappoints the hope that they
would regard as a conciliatory gesture an offer to have them participate in the
inquiry: and I am afraid that if the powers were not committed to such a
course of action in consequence of publicity given the assurances, I should
now be disposed to recommend that we abandon a course which under
present circumstances seems likely to aggravate rather than diminish the
feeling among the Chinese. It is doubtless too late now to do that; and our
problem is to relieve the tense situation as best we can despite the further
difficulty that has arisen.
6. Japanese Minister has now stated that his Government assented on two
conditions to the British proposal for the inquiry: First, that it should not
stand in the way of early acceptance of the offered resignation of McEuen,
the Shanghai police chief whom the Chinese generally regard as responsible
for the shooting; and, second, that negotiations for the settlement of Shanghai
matters be undertaken as promptly as possible. It is the view of the Japanese
Government that pending the result of judicial inquiry into the facts of
shooting we might at once take up with the Chinese negotiations concerning
indirectly related questions of rendition of Mixed Court and of Chinese
representations on Municipal Council.
7. The British Government has telegraphed to its Legation here a draft of a
document by which it is proposed the diplomatic body should constitute the
commission of inquiry. This draft contemplates not merely that the
commission shall be a fact-finding body, but provides further that they shall
“make such recommendations as they may think proper as to action which is
called for in the circumstances as established by them and as to any steps
which should in their opinion be taken by authorities ultimately responsible
for administration at International Settlement at Shanghai with a view to
preventing similar occurrences in future.” This seems to me to go far beyond
the purposes of a judicial inquiry and to confuse the functions of the inquiry
with political considerations. Assuming that the Chinese will not participate,
the so-called judicial conference would in fact be scarcely more than new
foreign agency to reconsider the conclusions already reached by the
diplomatic body and now held in abeyance.
8. While the subject of a judicial inquiry is thus beclouded, no progress is
being made towards a settlement of Shanghai affairs, the agitations continue,
and the more responsible elements among Chinese find themselves
increasingly embarrassed in dealing with agitators by reason of what appears
to them the evasiveness and lack of candor of the foreign powers in dealing
with the present crisis. The situation is drifting dangerously, and it seems to
me important that we should try to bring about some solution of the present

muddle. It appears that the British hold the key to the situation, and since
their Chargé d’Affaires seems to have exhausted his influence with his own
Foreign Office in the course of his contest with the ultraconservative British
consulate at Shanghai, I venture to recommend that you urge upon the
government at London the necessity for action which will in some degree
meet a situation in China which is critical for all foreign interests and
particularly harmful to the British.
9. Concretely, I think we should urge upon the British Government the
following plan: (a) Resignation of McEuen to be accepted immediately; (b)
negotiations to be begun without delay by informing the Foreign Office of
our assent in principle to the rendition of Mixed Court and to Chinese
representation on Municipal Council; (c) judicial inquiry, if British
Government still insists upon it, to be limited to finding of facts. Points (a)
and (b) substantially correspond with Japanese conditions referred to in
paragraph 6.
10. The British Government seems to have adopted the views of Shanghai
interests that McEuen should be retained as chief of police unless and until he
may be judicially determined to have been culpable in the shooting affair.
This view ignores the fact that in the light of the present crisis in China
essential question is not as to his culpability but as to the expediency of
retaining him in his post despite the fact that traditional Chinese concepts of
official responsibilities point him out as one whose retention or departure
from office constitutes a test whether or not the foreigners are sincere in their
professions of regret and of desire to settle the Shanghai affair. The Council
might well let McEuen go with a pension because so long as he is retained it
will be difficult or impossible to negotiate in mutual confidence or good will
with the Chinese. His ostensibly voluntary resignation was already in the
hands of the Municipal Council when the British Government proposed that
action be suspended pending judicial inquiry. If that Government realized
what from this viewpoint is apparent as the obvious necessity of his
withdrawal from the situation, there should be no difficulty in its bringing
about that result.
11. As for commencing negotiations on the subjects indirectly related to the
incident of May 30, while withholding discussion of that incident pending the
result of the judicial inquiry, I feel that this somewhat illogical order of
procedure would be justified by the necessity of putting an end to the delays
in commencing negotiations.
12. The judicial inquiry should be very strictly confined to the determination
of the facts in connection with the shooting, and in view of the antagonism

aroused among the Chinese it would be prudent to minimize the emphasis
placed upon it.
13. If this proposal meets with your approval I suggest that you authorize me
to discuss the matter with the Japanese Minister with a view to his asking his
Government to make representations in a similar sense to the British Foreign
Office.
MACMURRAY

[Document 542]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Received August 10—1 p.m.]
322. Following from Shanghai:
been decided by the naval authorities that the landing forces, except to guard
public utilities, will be withdrawn on the 10th instant. After the withdrawal
there will remain ashore to guard public utilities 120 Italians, 220 British,
It is believed that conditions will justify this reduction though there are more
than 100,000 strikers who are potential criminals. There will be no
withdrawal of naval vessels in this vicinity.
There is an unconfirmed but persistent rumor that the seamen’s strike will be
extended on the 10th to vessels of all nationalities including Chinese. It is not
given serious credence and is mentioned only because of the serious
consequence if true.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 543]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
discuss the matter as you suggest with the Japanese Minister. American Embassy at
London is being instructed to take matter up with British Foreign Office along lines of
your telegram.
KELLOGG

[Document 544]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
Foreign Office to which the following reply has been received:
“As regards Colonel McEuen, as has already been pointed out by us to the
Japanese Government, we still feel that acceptance of his resignation before
the inquiry would be a mistake since if he is censured by the inquiry the
Chinese, who are likely to criticise us whatever we do, may complain that
justice has been defeated by allowing him to resign beforehand and thus
escape dismissal. This objection is increased if consular or diplomatic
representatives are concerned instead of its being a matter entirely between
the Municipal Council and their servant. Suspension without prejudice
therefore seems to us to be the proper course in fairness to all parties
concerned and we think it must surely be precisely the course which the
United States Government would themselves adopt if any similar inquiry
were held in America. It seems, moreover, to be in accordance with the idea
underlying the remarks of your Minister mentioned in (c) of your letter and to
meet the view with which we agree that Colonel McEuen should not remain
in active occupation of his office while the inquiry is being held.
You will also appreciate that His Majesty’s Government cannot insist on a
matter which lies between the Municipal Council and their own servant. We
now learn that Colonel McEuen’s offer to resign has lapsed and that he is not
now prepared to resign. We cannot insist that his offer be renewed, as though
he were an official in our own employ; and if the diplomatic body as a whole
were to try to do so this would probably mean a conflict with the Municipal
Council. Is the game worth the candle? And can the diplomatic body afford
to risk a fresh breach with Shanghai at the present moment and on an issue in
which they would be acting contrary to established ideas of justice? But we
have already declared our readiness to recommend that McEuen be
suspended by the Municipal Council. This will entail his disappearance from
office pending the inquiry upon the result of which his ultimate fate will
depend. This is fair and reasonable and we do not think the Municipal
Council can refuse.

Of course we have no intention or wish whatever to screen McEuen but we
do feel very strongly that the judicial inquiry which seems essential in order
to reach a settlement of the Shanghai riots ought not to be made dependent on
the minor question of McEuen’s fate which cannot affect the findings of the
inquiry in any way. We are prepared to go very far to meet the views of other
powers in order to expedite and facilitate this inquiry to which we attach
great importance whereas the McEuen question seems to us here to be
secondary matter. But if the United States and Japanese Governments insist
on making McEuen’s resignation a condition to the judicial inquiry, they will
be insisting on something which we (and they) cannot enforce; and they may
well therefore be wrecking the judicial inquiry.
As regards (b) in our Ministr[y’s] reply to the Chinese note we stated that we
agreed to negotiations commencing forthwith on those articles in the 13
demands which were extraneous to the immediate question of the Shanghai
riots. In this connection we agree with you in principle as to the rendition of
the Mixed Court and to Chinese representation on the Municipal Council;
and we have instructed Peking that negotiations may begin forthwith.
As regards (c), the scope of the judicial inquiry, we submitted draft terms of
reference to our representatives at Peking to serve as a basis for discussion
and not as an unalterable document. These were as follows “to inquire into
the origin and character of the disturbances which took place at Shanghai on
or about the 30th day of May 1925; the reasons if any that existed for
anticipating disorder; the precautions adopted or which might have been
adopted to prevent the same; the measures taken to suppress it and the
circumstances in which certain persons lost their lives and other persons
suffered injuries; to report thereon (to diplomatic body) and to make such
recommendations as they may think proper as to the action which is called
for in the circumstances established by them and as to any steps which in
their opinion should be taken by the authorities primarily or ultimately
responsible for the administration of the International Settlement at Shanghai
with a view to prevent a similar occurrence in future.”
These terms were duly intended to enlarge the scope of our original proposals
which were shown in the last paragraph of our aide-mémoire of July 17th16
should be held to establish the facts to fix responsibility and to satisfy public
opinion in China and abroad that justice will be done and administrative
reforms effected in any way that such an inquiry may show to be necessary.
It is the usual practice in order to get the full benefit from inquiries of this
character to ask the court of inquiry to make recommendations. It remains for

the Government[s] to act on those recommendations or not as they think fit.
In the present instance we thought such a condition the more desirable as the
police regulations are believed to be defective. We however only telegraphed
terms of reference to our Legation at Peking to serve as a basis of discussions
and in order to expedite action. Although for the reasons explained our first
impression was that the court of inquiry ought to be asked to make
recommendations on matters directly arising out of its ascertainment of the
facts, the point of main importance is that the inquiry should not be further
postponed and if your Minister and Government remain opposed to this
feature of the terms of reference we are ready to fall in with their views. In
any case I presume that your Government are ready to agree to rest of the
terms of reference. Your Government suggests that the inquiry should be
limited to “findings of fact as regards the resignation of McEuen” and on the
other hand “to the determination of the facts in connection with the
shooting.” I presume the latter is intended, but we do not see how the actual
shooting (or shootings) can be separated from the other interconnected
occurrences which in their entirety formed the sequence of events now
generally known as the Shanghai riots.
HOUGHTON
14 Telegram in two sections.
16 Not printed.
16 Not printed.

[Document 545]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
Legation at Peking. The American Minister replies that in his mind and in those of
several of his colleagues whose opinion he respects, there is no doubt that McEuen’s
resignation is necessary and that the proposal that he be “suspended without prejudice”
pending the inquiry would be regarded by the Chinese as a mere device to let him have
a holiday until the judicial inquiry has returned the finding that it is not competent to
review his exercise of the administrative discretion confided to him.
He points out that McEuen is an administrative officer whose continuance in the office
is the occasion for ill-will and distrust not only locally but throughout China. You are
authorized to communicate the above to the British Foreign Office and to state that we
hope that the British Government may find itself able to reconsider its position in this
connection in view of the desirability that early action of a conciliatory nature should
be taken in connection with the Shanghai matter. It is the considered view of this
Government that as much should be done as is possible to make some advance toward
a settlement of the Shanghai matter in order to get that out of the way before the
Special Conference on Tariffs meets in October.
KELLOGG

[Document 546]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. British Chargé d’Affaires has several times asked me whether our
Government has named a judge to serve on the Shanghai inquiry. I have
replied that I have no information as to your intentions beyond your original
acceptance in principle of the proposal for a judicial inquiry.
2. It now appears that at the instance of the British consul general at Shanghai
the British Government desires that even McEuen’s suspension should not be
put into effect or announced till immediately before the commission of
inquiry convenes. This would merely delay such slight concession to Chinese
feeling as might be involved in his suspension.
MACMURRAY
17 Not printed.

[Document 547]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
In conversation with me yesterday, Chamberlain referred to the matter and pointed out
the proven policy of the British Government to act in concert with America and Japan.
He said that British opinion was strongly against condemnation of British official
without fair hearing and added that this feeling would be strengthened by fact that
chairman, an American who was apparently equally guilty, was left undisturbed.
Chamberlain then made a personal appeal to me to do all in my power to urge upon my
Government the advisability of early action with Britain and Japan in conducting an
impartial investigation.
I am convinced that Chamberlain desires to act in unity with us. He fears, however,
embarrassment in Parliament as well as possible complication with public opinion of
British colonies in Far East if he permits McEuen’s resignation or dismissal before a
public inquiry has been made. I suggest that Department give appropriate weight to so
personal a request.
HOUGHTON

[Document 548]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
362. Following from Shanghai:
“August 29, 10 a.m. State of emergency canceled yesterday. All American
landing forces reembarking this morning. Probably, but not definitely known,
small British force will remain at power station.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 549]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. British Chargé d’Affaires now out of town, sent to me yesterday one of his
secretaries with a letter making “very urgent appeal” to me to urge you not to
insist on McEuen’s resignation and stating “my Government feel very
strongly that this procedure would be unfair and would lead to trouble:
indeed they are frankly unable to accept it.”
2. If, as is indicated both by this letter and by Chamberlain’s conversation
with our Ambassador, the British Government may be expected to persist to
the end in this shortsighted view, it seems necessary to accept that fact and
the consequences that McEuen cannot be got to resubmit his resignation
before the inquiry and that insistence upon it would indefinitely postpone all
action towards the settlement of the Shanghai incident.
3. Under these circumstances it seems to me wiser to yield to the extent of
contenting ourselves for the time being with his suspension which should
however be arranged to take effect as soon as possible without awaiting the
commencement of inquiry.
4. I remain however convinced that Shanghai affair can never be really
settled and the intense and widespread bitterness of the Chinese be allayed so
long as McEuen is retained in his post. If the inquiry should find him at fault
the matter will presumably be disposed of by his dismissal. But if as is quite
possible it should find that his conduct was not culpable but involved
question of the exercise of his administrative discretion’ which a judicial
inquiry is not competent to review, the Chinese would undoubtedly resent
what they would regard as a whitewash and there would be a fresh outburst
of agitation against the British and other nationalities which they considered
parties to repudiation of responsibility for shooting.
5. Unless therefore it can be arranged that McEuen if acquitted will
nevertheless retire from post in which his presence is a challenge and an
incitement to antiforeign feeling, we owe it to ourselves to dissociate

ourselves so far as possible from the policy of obstinately ignoring Chinese
sensibilities which has already proved the chief [omission] in the present
crisis in China. And unless the British Government is prepared to do its part
to prevent Shanghai negotiations proving abortive by exerting its influence
upon McEuen and the British members of Municipal Council to obtain in
advance the offer of his voluntary retirement in the event of his being
vindicated by the inquiry, I feel that we should hold aloof from those
negotiations and that I should be instructed not to accept membership on the
committee which it is planned should negotiate with the Chinese Government
in behalf of interested Legations for the settlement of matters immediately
connected with shooting.
6. Concretely I recommend that we should inform British Foreign Office that
for sake of avoiding indefinite delay in settlement of the Shanghai affair we
will not insist upon McEuen’s resignation before the inquiry; but that we feel
so strongly that his retention in his post would perpetuate the Chinese
rancour against the position of foreigners throughout China and render
abortive any negotiations for the settlement of the Shanghai incident, that we
would prefer to hold aloof from any such negotiations unless assured that he
will ask to be retired in the event of his vindication by the inquiry.
MACMURRAY
“Department desires your comments and suggestions as to way out of present
impasse.”

[Document 550]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
set forth in your telegram. It is willing to accept the British stand with regard to status
of McEuen on the understanding that McEuen’s suspension should be arranged to take
effect as soon as possible without awaiting the commencement of the judicial inquiry.
British Foreign Office does not appear fully to appreciate the importance which
attaches to McEuen’s status in the mind of the Chinese in the present situation. The
Department is convinced that the Shanghai affair can never be really settled and the
intense and widespread bitterness of the Chinese be allayed so long as McEuen is
retained in his post. Rightly or wrongly McEuen represents in the minds of the Chinese
that aspect of extraterritorial privileges which resulted on May 30 in the death of
certain Chinese students. If the inquiry should find him at fault the matter will
presumably be disposed of by his dismissal. But if, as is quite possible, the inquiry
should find that his conduct was not culpable but involved question of the exercise of
his administrative discretion which a judicial inquiry is not competent to review, the
Chinese would undoubtedly resent what they would regard as a whitewash and there
would be a fresh outburst of agitation against the British and other nationalities which
they considered parties to repudiation of responsibility for shooting. To prevent any
such unfortunate result it seems to the Department that it should be arranged that
McEuen, if acquitted, will nevertheless retire from post in which his presence is a
challenge and an incitement to anti-foreign feeling.
You may therefore inform the British Foreign Office that for sake of avoiding indefinite
delay in settlement of the Shanghai affair we will not insist upon McEuen’s resignation
before the inquiry; but that we feel so strongly that his retention in his post would
perpetuate the Chinese rancor against the position of foreigners throughout China and
render abortive any negotiations for the settlement of the Shanghai incident, that we
feel that assurances should be given that he will ask to be retired in the event of his
vindication by the inquiry.
KELLOGG

[Document 551]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
Embassy was informally advised that British Chargé d’Affaires at Peking would be
instructed to cooperate with his American colleague: First, in arranging McEuen’s
immediate suspension; second, in endeavoring to obtain as satisfactory assurances as
possible that McEuen will be retired in the event of his vindication; and third, in
expediting the holding of the judicial inquiry.
HOUGHTON

[Document 552]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. In consultation yesterday evening Japanese Minister, British Chargé
d’Affaires and myself worked out formula based upon the British Foreign
Office draft for the terms of reference to judicial inquiry of the matters
related to Shanghai incident of May 30. This we propose to present for the
approval of interested colleagues so soon as Japanese Minister and I may
have received authorization.
2. Substantial portion of the formula omitting preamble and lettering
subsequent paragraphs for convenience of reference, is as follows:
“(c) Now therefore, we, the diplomatic representatives at
Peking of (all interested Governments here named20 ), do
hereby authorize the American, British and Japanese
representatives each to designate a jurist to be a member
of a commission of inquiry (which shall also include a
Chinese jurist if such should be designated for that
purpose by the Chinese Government) to investigate the
origin and character of the disturbances which took place
at Shanghai on or about May 30th, 1925; the reasons if
any that existed for anticipating disorder; the precautions
that were or might have been adopted to prevent the
same; the measures taken to suppress it and the
circumstances in which certain persons lost their lives
and other persons suffered injuries; and to report their
findings.
(d) The commission shall have power to determine the
procedure to be adopted for the purposes of the inquiry.
(e) The sittings of the commission other than those held
for the purposes of determining its procedure and of

preparing its report shall be held in public.
(f) The commission is authorized so far as the different
legal systems applicable may permit to require the
attendance of witnesses and the production of documents
and to take evidence on oath.
(g) The commission may at its discretion permit any
person or public body concerned with the subject matter
of the inquiry to appear before it either in person or by
legal representative and to call and cross-examine
witnesses.
(h) The findings of the commission should if possible be
unanimous.
(i) In pursuance of the authorization set forth above we
the representatives of the American, British and Japanese
Governments do hereby respectively designate . . . . . . . .
. ., Sir Henry Gollan21 and . . . . . . . . . . to be members of
the said commission.”
3. Please advise me whether this formula is satisfactory, if so definitely
empowering me to sign it or any modification of it importing no substantial
alteration.
4. I should be glad if you could as soon as possible advise me of the name of
the jurist whom I may be authorized to designate for the purpose in behalf of
our Government and of the approximate date when he may be available to
take part in inquiry. In view of the long delay that has taken place in
constituting the commission, even though the fault is not primarily ours, I
would urge the utmost expedition in making the necessary arrangements.
MACMURRAY
20 The American, Belgian, British, Danish, French, Italian, Japanese, Netherlands,
Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish, and Swedish Governments.
21 Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Hongkong.

[Document 553]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
replies that the British Chargé d’Affaires has asked him whether, in order to avoid
possible difficulties, we would be satisfied with a definite pledge from the British
Government that at the close of the judicial inquiry it would, if necessary, exert its
utmost influence to bring about retirement of McEuen. MacMurray recommends that
matter be taken up with British Government. You may inform Foreign Office that a
definite pledge from it to that effect will be acceptable to us as sufficient assurance of
McEuen’s elimination.
GREW

[Document 554]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
authorized to sign it or any modification thereof importing no substantial alteration.
Department is considering question of judge.
GREW

[Document 555]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
proposed terms of reference with following modifications: (1) in paragraph (c) “do
hereby authorize” changed to “do hereby request”; (2) in paragraph (i) “authorization”
changed to “request”; (3) all interested representatives to sign at the end of paragraph
(h), and American, British and Japanese representatives to sign again at the end of
paragraph [(i)]
Action awaits selection of American and Japanese judges.
MACMURRAY

[Document 556]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Court of the Philippine Islands will be named as the American judge to serve on
Commission of Inquiry at Shanghai as soon as Department receives word from you as
to when the Commission will sit.
KELLOGG

[Document 557]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. I have received from the British Chargé d’Affaires letter stating he has been
authorized by the British Foreign Office to inform me that—
“At the close of the judicial inquiry my Government will if necessary exert
their influence on the Shanghai Municipal Council with a view to obtaining
Mr. McEuen’s resignation, believing as they do that his continued
employment would in any case be prejudicial to harmonious relations
between foreigners and Chinese.
I hope you will be able to tell me that this promise is satisfactory to your
Government and that they will accept it as a sufficient assurance of Mr.
McEuen’s elimination.”
2. May I inform him that this assurance is satisfactory and that I am for my part ready
to proceed with the negotiations with the Chinese Government regarding Shanghai
incident?
MACMURRAY
22 Not printed.

[Document 558]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
satisfactory, and that you are ready to proceed with negotiations with Chinese
Government regarding Shanghai incident.
KELLOGG

[Document 559]
The Netherlands Minister in China (Oudendijk), Senior Minister, to the
American Minister (MacMurray)23
PEKING, September 15, 1925.
Circular No. 259
Subject:—Commission of enquiry concerning incidents of May 30th, in Shanghai The
Senior Minister has the honour to inform his Honourable Colleagues that he received
from the Senior Consul in Shanghai the following telegram:24
“In reply to Your Excellency’s telegram of the 11th instant, the Municipal
Council confirms its agreement to conform to the conclusions of the judicial
commission and to suspend the Commissioner of Police before the first
meeting of the commission.”
Consequently the Senior Minister has today forwarded the letter to the Wai Chiao Pu
by which he hands the Minister for Foreign Affairs a certified copy of the terms of
reference for the Commission of Enquiry.25
A copy of this letter is attached to this Circular.
Certified copies (one for each Legation) and the usual number spare copies of the terms
of reference together with copies of the Senior Minister’s letter will be sent today to the
various Legations directly.
[Enclosure]
The Netherlands Minister in China (Oudendijk), Senior Minister, to the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs
(Shen)
PEKING, September 15, 1925.
Decanat No. 49
MONSIEUR LE MINISTRE: As Your Excellency is aware the Foreign Governments interested have
come to the decision that the circumstances of the unfortunate incidents in Shanghai of
May 30th. should be definitely cleared up by a public judicial enquiry.

They have therefore authorized their Representatives in Peking to request their
American, British, and Japanese Colleagues each to designate a Jurist to be a member
of a Commission of Enquiry.
I am now desired by my Colleagues to inform Your Excellency that the Heads of
Mission concerned have taken this step, and seize this opportunity to hand Your
Excellency herewith a certified copy of the terms of reference for the above mentioned
Commission at the foot of which the designations of its members are inscribed. The
Commission will meet as soon as its members can reach Shanghai.
As it is in the interest of all concerned that the findings of this Commission be as full
and complete as possible, our respective Governments think it highly desirable that a
Chinese Jurist should also be one of its members, and for that purpose I have the
honour in the name of the Heads of Mission concerned to express the hope that Your
Excellency’s Government may see fit to appoint a Chinese Jurist to sit on the
Commission.
In conclusion I have to add that the Municipal Council of the International Settlement
of Shanghai have bound themselves to abide by the findings of the Commission and
that the Chief of Police of the said Settlement Mr. McEuen will be suspended, without
prejudice, until the completion of the enquiry.
Whilst expressing the hope that Your Excellency’s Government see their way to
appoint a member of the Commission of Enquiry and in any case in the interest of
justice and to facilitate the work of this Commission as far as possible to expedite the
fulfilment of its task, I avail myself [etc.]
W. J. OUDENDIJK
23 Copy received by the Department on December 4.
24 Telegram in French; translation supplied by the editor.

[Document 560]
The Netherlands Minister in China (Oudendijk), Senior Minister, to the
American Minister (MacMurray)26
PEKING, October 3, 1925.
Circular No. 273
Subject:—Shanghai incident of May 30th (judicial inquiry).
Referring to Circular No. 25927 the Senior Minister has the honour to circulate
herewith among his Honourable Colleagues the official English translation of a Note
received by him on October 2nd., from the Minister for Foreign Affairs on the subject
of the Judicial Enquiry.
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Shen) to the Netherlands Minister (Oudendijk), Senior Minister
[PEKING,] October 2, 1925.
MONSIEUR LE MINISTRE: I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s
Note of September 15th. last informing me that the Foreign Governments interested
have authorised their Representatives at Peking to request their American, British and
Japanese Colleagues each to designate a Jurist to be a member of a Commission of
Enquiry into the circumstances of the incidents in Shanghai of May 30th., and, in
sending me a certified copy of the terms of reference for the Commission, Your
Excellency also expressed the desire that a Chinese Jurist should also be one of its
members.
I beg to seize this opportunity to state that the British Chargé d’Affaires at Peking, had
in a Note of September 1st., last, transmitted to this Ministry telegraphic instructions
from his Government respecting their proposal for a Judicial Enquiry. In view of the
lapse of time and changed circumstances whereby most of the requisite evidence had
become unobtainable or had disappeared and moreover as the facts of the case had
been carefully investigated into at the beginning by Delegates on both sides, my
Government had informed Monsieur Palairet in reply that the application at the present
junction [sic] of such a procedure would only serve the purpose of further complicating
the issue.

Your Excellency is no doubt aware that after the occurrence of the Shanghai incidents
my Government lodged a formal protest through the Italian and then Senior Minister
with the result that the Diplomatic Representatives of the interested Powers decided to
send Delegates to Shanghai to investigate into the incidents and empower them to
discuss and settle the case with the Chinese Delegates on the spot. Though the
negotiations were brought to a suspense [sic] through the lack of authority on the part
of the Diplomatic Delegates to settle the case as stated by them but no question,
however, arose in respect to the facts which had been investigated into. When the case
was transferred to Peking for settlement the then Senior Minister brought out five
points as being suitable for discussion while consultations also took place on the
various articles embodied in this Ministry’s despatch of June 24th. last as they are
within the scope of the case and admissible for discussion.
Afterwards it was given out that the British Government proposed to re-investigate the
case by judicial procedure, a proposal [of] which the British Chargé d’Affaires at
Peking also subsequently made mention. Consequently my Government instructed by
telegraph their Chargé d’Affaires at London to inform the British Government that as
the facts of the Shanghai case had already been investigated into con-jointly by the
Diplomatic Delegates who also had several discussions with the Chinese Delegates, the
re-investigation suggested was unnecessary and would only involve a waste of time: a
view I also made known on several occasions to the Representatives at Peking of the
interested Powers.
To be informed three months after the occurrence of the incidents that the Foreign
Governments interested still come to the decision of appointing delegates to investigate
into the case by judicial procedure, I beg leave to say that my Government have not
wavered from their attitude originally maintained.
I avail myself of Your Excellency’s valued channels to transmit the contents of this
Note to Your Colleagues, the Heads of Mission concerned, and to express to you,
Monsieur le Ministre, the renewed assurances of my very high consideration.
[File copy not signed]
26 Copy received by the Department December 4.
27 Supra.

[Document 561]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
appear and give evidence regarding May 30th incident and announced first meeting for
October 7th.
“Commission announced an adjournment at this morning’s sessions until
October 12th to enable all parties to prepare their evidence. It appears to be
settled that the Chinese witnesses will not appear before the commission. The
inquiry therefore will probably be ex parte with very doubtful beneficial
results. Shall the inquiry proceed?”
3. I have replied that the inquiry should proceed, adding that the refusal of the Chinese
to cooperate was anticipated before the commission was constituted; and, while the
failure to obtain Chinese witnesses may of course impair the abstract value of the
findings, I believe that available testimony (including records of Chinese testimony
taken by Mixed Court in proceeding had in connection with the incident) will suffice as
a basis for just conclusions as to the actual facts of the incident and that conclusions
likely to be arrived at will in fact carry the greater weight with Chinese public opinion
by reason of their having been reached by a foreign judicial agency independently of
Chinese cooperation and indeed against Chinese obstruction.
4. I am further confidentially advising him that British Chargé d’Affaires informs me
that officials of the Foreign Office, while declaring themselves unable to cooperate
openly with the commission, have nevertheless intimated that they have sent word
privately to local authorities urging them to give such assistance as they may find
possible.
MACMURRAY
28 Not printed.

29 The commission consisted of: E. Finley Johnson, Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court of the Philippine Islands; Sir Henry C. Gollan, Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court of Hongkong; and Kitaro Suga, Chief Justice of the Hiroshima Appeal Court of
Japan.

[Document 562]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
2. In reply to request that he advise me confidentially of any reasons he might have to
apprehend obstacles to the carrying out of the work he had undertaken, Johnson has
now telegraphed me in strict confidence:
“Up to the present time, there is no reason to believe that any proof will be
presented to an audience except by Municipal Council, McEuen, Everson and
Martin.30 An ex parte inquiry with biased witnesses cannot be satisfactory.
Opposition to inquiry very general, by best people of all nationalities, based
upon prior investigations, and I have another solution of the difficulty more
equitable and just to all concerned of which I shall be glad to give suggestion,
if desired. The result of the present inquiry will not change public opinion
and the inquiry will be of no avail. The long delay of the present inquiry has
been unfortunate. Shall insist upon having presented certified copy of the
proof taken in the Mixed Court and anticipate serious objections thereto.
Shall endeavor to conduct an impartial inquiry into subjects submitted for
investigation.”
3. I am replying that I should be glad to consider any suggestions he may care to offer
though I do not think it would prove feasible to substitute for the inquiry any other
arrangement for dealing with the matter; and that I have the utmost confidence in his
determination to make inquiry as full and impartial as possible and to bring out
whatever he may convince himself is the truth of the matter even though this may
compel him to submit a minority report.
MACMURRAY
30 Commissioner of police, police inspector, and assistant commissioner of police,
respectively, in the Shanghai International Settlement.

[Document 563]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Government acquiesced in the holding of the judicial inquiry on the understanding that
it was to be a public and impartial investigation to “establish and make known the
facts” and “fix the responsibilities in regard to the Shanghai incident”. You may state
that this Government desires that the Commission should pursue its investigation
unhampered and freely, invite any evidence that will assist in making clear the facts
and that the fullest opportunity be given to anyone having knowledge of the facts to
come before it and give without fear any pertinent information that they may have. To
that end he is free to take any necessary action to bring out the facts and the truth even
though, regrettable as such action might be, this should compel him to make a minority
report.
KELLOGG

[Document 564]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Following from Justice Johnson:
“October 16, noon. I am gratified at your expressions of confidence. Am
submitting each biased witness to severe cross-examination following the
line of questioning which the Chinese would probably give. I hope to get at
real facts and perhaps to develop important questions. Minority report
imminent.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 565]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
inquiry and I will make report in 6 to 10 days.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 566]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Received 6:30 p.m.]
1. I have received for confidential information a copy of Justice Johnson’s
individual report,31 the original of which was delivered yesterday to senior
minister. Report by British judge received by British Legation although I am
not yet informed of its contents. A brief summary of Justice Johnson’s report
follows.
2. The report confirms the impression gained by diplomatic commission
during its investigation at Shanghai as acted upon by Heads of Legation last
June to the effect that adequate precautions were not taken by police
authorities to prevent disorder. Report rather severely censures McEuen for
leaving his post and remaining out of the city at such a time in the following
language, “I can see no basis for his, McEuen[’s], absence from duty on that
day, without giving notice to his deputy, which can be harmonized with his
responsibility. His presence and his personal direction of his police force at
lives of some innocent persons.”
3. The report ably reviews under the headings of the terms of reference the
facts brought out by the inquiry.
4. It is regrettable however that it does not end at this point with a few briefly
summarized conclusions. Instead Justice Johnson exceeds the terms of
reference, giving his conclusions in 17 paragraphs and his recommendations
in 3 which in the majority of cases embrace topics and offer proofs obviously
beyond the scope of the inquiry. For example, under “conclusions”: Ninth
paragraph, “That those in authority with power to act in order to lessen the
complaint of the Chinese people should as speedily as possible bring to a
close the negotiations which have been pending for some years relating to the
status of and character of the Mixed Court.” Tenth paragraph, “That the
question of participation on the part of the Chinese people in the actual
government of the city of Shanghai, so far as treaty relations will permit,

should be taken up, mutually discussed, and settled. The present situation,
from the standpoint of many, is intolerable and until settled will continue to
be a source of serious grievances.” Eleventh paragraph, “That the question of
extraterritoriality which compels the Chinese people in his [sic] relation with
the foreigners and in all of his [sic] disputes with them in which, he [sic] is
the aggrieved party to submit to foreign law more or less, should speedily
and without delay be mutually discussed and settled. There exists a basis of
settlement which would be fair and reasonable to all parties.” Twelfth
paragraph, “That the alleged grievance on the part of the Chinese people
relating to the loss of sovereignty and territory in the region of the city of
Shanghai is also a question which those in authority should not overlook. It is
a serious one and its speedy settlement would greatly allay much of the
trouble now existing.” Thirteenth paragraph, “That the grievance of the
Chinese people concerning unjust treaties negotiated with selfish and perhaps
dishonest officials is another question which should be carefully considered,
mutually discussed and justly settled by all of the friendly nations of the
Chinese people [sic].” Fourteenth paragraph, “That the foreigners in China
have failed to take into account the principles of liberty and independence
which they themselves have by precept and example spread abroad
throughout China, concerning which the young and rising generation have
been apt students.”
5. The following three recommendations conclude the report.
“First. That after some of the suggestions made in my
conclusions above enumerated have been put into effect
that the powers and duties and responsibilities of the
governing body of Shanghai be more definitely and
precisely defined.
Second. That considering the knowledge which the
commissioner of police, Mr. Kenneth John McEuen, had
concerning the excited condition of a large portion of the
Chinese population within and immediately without the
International Settlement, as evidenced by his daily
reports signed by himself as commissioner of police from
the 11th day of January last up to and including his report
for the 30th day of May last, the daily report furnished by
Chief Inspector Givens in his ‘summary of labor, student
and Bolshevik activities and diary of events leading to
the shooting incident on the Nanking Road near the
Louza station on May 30 last’, considering his own
admissions in his evidence adduced during the hearing in

relation with the fact that he took no precautionary
measures whatever to prevent the disturbances of May 30
last and his absence from his station during the afternoon
of that date, I am fully persuaded that he does not have a
proper appreciation of his responsibility in the
maintenance of peace and good order within his
jurisdiction. I would therefore respectfully recommend
that he be succeeded by one whose performance of duty
shall be more nearly commensurate with his very high
responsibilities.
Third. Considering the many nationalities living and
residing in the International Settlement of Shanghai, it
occurs to me that it would be wise and advisable to have
the commissioner of police and the deputy commissioner
of police selected from among the citizens of two nations
so that the blame for disorder and disturbances in the
future if they occur cannot be wholly charged to one
nation alone.”
6. It is very unfortunate that dicta of a controversial political nature should be
contained in a judicial finding intended to be published at this time. I have
informally talked the matter over with the senior minister. He and I are in
agreement that there is no other course to follow than to have the three
reports published. The matter cannot be decided, however, until opportunity
is given for the Heads of Legation to discuss the reports. I presume such a
discussion will take place soon. In this discussion I shall maintain the attitude
indicated above unless I receive instructions to the contrary from the
Department.
and pertinent correspondence with respect to resignation of McEuen. I
believe now is the appropriate time for the Department to call to the attention
of the British Government their commitment in this matter and to urge the
British Government to exert its full influence to secure the immediate
submission of McEuen’s resignation and its acceptance by the Shanghai
Municipal Court. I cannot emphasize too strongly my belief that there should
be no further delay in having this resignation submitted and accepted.
MACMURRAY
31 Not printed.

[Document 567]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
should make a report including matters not submitted to the jurists in view of the
instructions which the commission received to confine their investigation to the origin
and nature of the disturbances, etc. It will probably embarrass us greatly in view of the
statement we made to the British Foreign Office that it was our wish to have the
investigation limited as it was in these instructions. The evidence may, however, justify
Johnson’s conclusions and were we to suppress them now or request Johnson to modify
his report, it seems to the Department that we would incur severe criticism in this
country and in China as having interfered with the action of an impartial justice and as
having suppressed his conclusions. Perhaps matters of the same general nature are also
dealt with in the other reports. Please inform me as soon as possible. In discussing the
matter with the diplomatic representatives of other powers, you can, of course, make it
clear to them that the directions to the commission were the only instructions Justice
Johnson had and that we in no way interfered with him and were not informed in
advance that he was considering making such a report. In view of the above we are
unable to avoid agreeing with your conclusions that when it becomes necessary to
publish the report it will have to be published as it stands. We doubt that it is advisable
to request our Embassy in London to ask for McEuen’s removal before the British
Government has had time to take action on its own motion.
KELLOGG

[Document 568]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
the British and Japanese judges in their reports confine themselves to closely narrowed
findings of facts based upon the evidence as they understand it and keep within the
limits of the terms of reference and that the general purport of both reports is that the
Shanghai authorities are free from blame. The report of the Japanese judge was
received by the senior minister last night.
MACMURRAY

[Document 569]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Shanghai repeated for your information.
“November 27, 7 p.m. In conference with senior minister today, the British
and Japanese Ministers and myself agreed to send the following to our
respective consuls in Shanghai:
1. Reports of the three judges have now reached senior minister.
Very briefly stated conclusions of the British and Japanese judges
agree in exonerating police and municipal authorities. American
judge while holding that police had no alternative but to fire in the
circumstances which arose, considers that they were at fault in
having allowed such a necessity to arise.
2. In order to prevent spreading of mischievous and imaginary
statements in the newspapers and among the Chinese, senior
minister considers that it will be necessary in the near future to
make a communication in the above sense to the press, prior to
circulation and consideration of the reports, which are very lengthy,
by the diplomatic body, and prior to their eventual publication
which will be unavoidable.
3. You should in consultation with your British and Japanese
colleagues suggest privately and confidentially to your respective
nationals on the Municipal Council the urgent desirability of their
spontaneously announcing to the senior consul that now that
inquiry has been held they do not wish to take advantage of any
difference of opinion but prefer to proceed forthwith to take steps
in direction of settlement by offering generous compensation to the
victims, both killed and injured, and by devising ways of
dispensing with the services of the police commissioner and of the
officers actually involved in the incident.

4. Action along the line indicated would seem to be all the more
desirable in view of the fact that Chinese Government have just
addressed to senior minister a note containing preposterous
demands for a settlement of the incident.
Both British and Japanese however send instruction contained in paragraph 3
subject to ratification by their respective Governments. You may consult with
your British and Japanese colleagues with a view to the taking of
simultaneous action when they advise you they are in a position to do so.
I understand from British Minister that Barton favors and considers entirely
feasible such action by the Council as is suggested. Let me ask your fullest
and most earnest cooperation in bringing about the desired result as
expeditiously as possible, the more particularly as there seems to be a danger
that agitation regarding the Shanghai incident may be received [revived?] for
political purposes.
Please keep me fully and promptly advised of action taken and progress of
discussions in this connection.”
[Paraphrase.] My own preference would have been to have the reports in full published
immediately. However my British and Japanese colleagues were not free to take such
action. It may be hoped that the plan now adopted in harmony with their instructions
will provide a settlement of the Shanghai incident which will be satisfactory and will
give as little emphasis as possible to the embarrassing and unnecessary dicta contained
in Johnson’s report. This may be accomplished, especially if the Council takes prompt
and generous action. [End paraphrase.]
MACMURRAY

[Document 570]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
appointment of Judicial Commission to inquire into Shanghai incident.
It now appears that the Judicial Commission has completed its labors and that the three
Judges have submitted separate reports to the Diplomatic Body at Peking. The
Department is informed that while the reports of the British and Japanese Judges agree
in exonerating police and municipal authorities, the American Judge, while holding that
police had no alternative but to fire in the circumstances which arose, considers that
they were at fault in having allowed such a necessity to arise, and that he recommends
that McEuen, whom he finds not to have had a proper appreciation of his responsibility
in the maintenance of peace and good order within his jurisdiction, be succeeded by
one whose performance of duty shall be more nearly commensurate with his very high
responsibilities.
The Department is informed by the Legation at Peking32 that on November 27 the
British, Japanese, and American Ministers telegraphed their respective Consuls in
Shanghai outlining the differences in the findings of the Judicial Commission and
stating among other things that in order to prevent spreading of mischievous and
imaginary statements in the newspapers and among the Chinese, the Senior Minister
considered that it would be necessary in the near future to make a statement to the press
regarding the findings of the Judicial Commission prior to circulation and consideration
by the Diplomatic Body of the reports, which are very lengthy, and prior to their
eventual publication which will be unavoidable. The American Consul was instructed
that he should, in consultation with his British and Japanese colleagues suggest
privately and confidentially to their respective nationals on the Municipal Council the
urgent desirability of their spontaneously announcing to the Senior Consul that now
that inquiry has been held they do not wish to take advantage of any difference of
opinion but prefer to take steps in the direction of settlement by offering generous
compensations to the victims, both killed and injured and by devising ways of
dispensing with the services of the police commissioner and of the officers actively
involved in the incident.

The Department is informed33 that the British Minister at Peking has informed the
American Minister that his Government is withholding authorization for its Consul
General at Shanghai to proceed in above manner pending fuller information as to the
points on which the reports of the three Judges agree and disagree. The American
Minister also reports that the Japanese Minister, at an informal meeting with the British
and Dutch Ministers and himself, informed them that, “On November 27 Japanese
Minister for Foreign Affairs had told British Ambassador that since the reports were not
unanimous there was in effect no decision resulting from Judicial inquiry and that he
was therefore strongly of the opinion that it would be inadvisable to publish the reports
and thus give occasion for the Chinese to play on differences among the interested
Powers and that the British Ambassador had concurred.” The American Minister
reports that the Japanese Minister promised to urge upon his Government the view of
this Government that the terms of reference themselves contemplated the possibility of
a divided Court and that it was our profound conviction that it would prove utterly
impossible to prevent leakage of the substance of the reports and that the attempt to
suppress or edit them would only act infinitely more unfavorably upon foreign interests
in China.
The above is communicated to you for your information and such use as you care to
make of it in discussing matter with British Foreign Office. You will state to the
Foreign Office that while it is regrettable that the Commission should have disagreed in
its findings this Government feels that it would be most disastrous at the present time,
in the face of conditions now existing in China, for the Powers to repeat the procedure
which followed the investigation made into the Shanghai incident by the Committee
representing the Diplomatic Body in July and to suppress, edit or delay the publication
of the findings of the Judicial Commission. Already there has appeared in the press,
both in China and in the United States, intimation to the effect that the Powers will
refuse to give these reports to the press. You will state to the British Foreign Office that
this Government does not feel that it should permit itself to share in the odium of a
virtual repudiation of the results of the inquiry which has been publicly conducted by
three Judges appointed at the request of the Diplomatic Body. You may add that,
howsoever much we may regret the necessity of so doing, this Government will for its
part feel obliged, even though there may be no agreement about the publishing of the
three reports, to publish the report of the American Judge in the near future.34
KELLOGG
32 Telegram printed supra.
attention of the Japanese Foreign Office the views expressed by the Minister in China
in the fourth paragraph of his telegram No. 509, Dec. 2, to the Department, which are

substantially the same as the views embodied in this paragraph. (File No.
[Document 571]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, December 12, 1925—noon.
525. 1. It was not necessary to take the independent action indicated in the fourth
announced at an informal conference with the British Minister, the senior minister, and
myself that the Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs had decided to consent to having
the reports published subject to certain conditions regarding arrangements as to action
p.m.
2. The diplomatic body at a meeting yesterday morning authorized me and my British
and Japanese colleagues to approach the Shanghai Municipal Council through the
members on the Council of our own nationalities with a view to having the Council
adopt the following measures in order to settle the affair of May 30: (1) The
responsible police officers should offer their resignations to the Council and that body
should accept the resignations with expressions of appreciation for previous
meritorious services; (2) reasonable amounts should be offered to the Chinese victims,
such payments to be given not as compensation but as a compassionate grant. There is
reason for hoping that these suggestions will be promptly accepted by the Council. It is
proposed that when the senior minister is informed that these proposals have been
accepted he will announce the arrangement and release for publication the report of
June 24 by the diplomatic commission without annexes, the note by which the senior
minister on September 15 informed the Chinese Government of the terms of reference
and extended to the Chinese an invitation to take part in the judicial inquiry, and a
summary of the findings of fact given in the reports of the three judges on the
commission. At the same time the senior minister will announce that as soon as
necessary copies can be made the reports themselves will be released in full.
3. This telegram is repeated to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

35 In this telegram the Minister proposed to publish Mr. Johnson’s report independently
on December 15, unless arrangements could meanwhile be made for prompt
simultaneous publication of the three reports.

[Document 572]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. Japanese Minister has just informed me of the receipt of instructions that
his Government withdraws its objections to publication of reports.
2. Shanghai Municipal Council has adopted suggestions outlined in second
paragraph of my telegram number 525, December 12, noon.
3. Procedure to be followed regarding announcement of action taken and the
publication of reports will be considered at a meeting of interested ministers
tomorrow. Repeated to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY
36 Not printed.

[Document 573]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. Interested ministers today authorized senior minister to give out to the
press tomorrow afternoon, together with announcement of the action taken by
the Shanghai Municipal Council, documents referred to in the second
paragraph of my telegram 525, December 12, noon. Publication of full texts
of reports will follow in due course.37
2. I have expressed to Cunningham my appreciation of his part in bringing
about action by Shanghai Municipal Council in accepting resignations of
McEuen and Everson and offering $75,000 solatium to victims or their
families. I trust this action brings Shanghai incident to a conclusion as
satisfactory as could have been hoped for.
MACMURRAY
the reports were to be released to the press by the Senior Minister on January 23 (file

Spread
of
antiforeign
disturbances
in
China38
38 See also sections entitled “Participation by the United States in efforts to solve
problems arising from the disturbances at Shanghai, May 30, 1925,” and
“Intensification of antiforeign feeling in Canton after the firing at Shameen,” pp. 647
620, and Doc. 621] ff.
[574] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[575] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[576] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[577] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[578] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[579] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[580] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[581] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[582] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[583] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[584] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[585] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[586] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[587] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[588] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[589] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[590] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[591] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[592] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[593] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[594] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[595] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[596] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[597] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[Document 574]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
1. According to telegraphic abstracts published January 8th in Peking
newspapers the North China Daily News Shanghai conservative, richest and
most influential foreign newspaper in China and best served with
correspondence from missionaries and others throughout the provinces,
published prominently January 7th an article declaring that a serious wave of
antiforeign and anti-Christian feeling is sweeping across China. The writer
attributes the causes to the failure of the present rulers who are attempting to
deflect the popular wrath from themselves to the foreigners, also to the large
growth of Christianity recently and the Bolshevist poison. In an editorial on
the subject the editor says that many men not given to asserting express the
opinion that an explosion is inevitable shortly and that the present
propaganda is part of a widespread movement working for general
repudiation of the treaties.
2. I telegraphed consul general, Shanghai, January 8th to convene group of
representative missionaries and educators and get their opinion on these
alarmist articles and also to consult heads of American concerns doing
extensive business throughout China and telegraph me the result.
3. In reply received January 11th consul general states that none of our
businessmen “have received any intimations from interior representatives of
anti-Christian move” but that—
“Missionaries and educators have received reports of anti-Christian
move from interior correspondents but the consensus of opinion at
present is that the move is but slightly more extensive than in 1922,
that it is as well organized but not so intelligently directed, that the
move is a natural sequence of the Chinese educators’ challenge of
mission education and that thus rivalry will likely continue over a
long period. It has elements that may cause’ antiforeign propaganda

but as yet it is not apparent. The agitation is purely anti-Christian
education or antimission school to date.”
4. For explanation of the challenge of Chinese educators to mission schools
see the report of the resolutions, especially resolution number 7, passed by
the Tenth National Conference of Chinese Educational Association[s] held at
Hankow.40
5. It may be questioned whether the association’s proposal to restrict and
eventually to terminate the educational work conducted under the auspices of
foreigners in China and to prevent the use of foreign schools or other
educational agencies for the propagation of religion, is, as our Shanghai
missionaries and educators declare, an agitation “purely anti-Christian.”
Besides the religious mistakes, in [sic] which among a people so essentially
nonreligious and tolerant as the Chinese may indeed be the weakest, I suspect
the presence and operation of the following influences: (1) the ever-present
Chinese aversion to foreigners and a new sense of the danger of foreign
control of education, (2) the rising consciousness of nationality and the
aspiration for a system of national education, (3) Bolshevik propaganda
against other nations in China which has been especially successful in
winning over and utilizing educators and students, and (4) a Bolshevik and
Chinese drive against the so-called “Anglo-Saxon nations” who support most
of the foreign missions and schools in China. France and Italy are scarcely
mentioned in this connection and of course Japan not at all.
6. Japan is not averse to this agitation against foreign, that is, Christian
nations in which she is naturally regarded as on the side of China. Foreign
diplomats often speak of national value to America of her thousand
missionaries and hundreds of schools and hospitals in China. In this respect
America comes first, Great Britain poor second. In the present agitation
Japan sees us attacked at our most vulnerable point as the friend and helper
of China while she is entirely immune.
7. I do not associate Christian General Feng Yu-hsiang41 or even Sun Yat-
sen42 with this anti-Christian agitation. Both, it is true, demand the revision
of “unequal treaties” between the foreign nations and China and in this
respect Chinese public opinion is unanimously behind them. They are
exponents not of Bolshevism but radical nationalism though they may be
willing to utilize the Bolshevists in their political maneuvres as, in Hunan,
Feng’s lieutenant, Hu, is today using bandits in his army. Both Sun and Feng
have taken pains to disassociate their political movement from Bolshevism;

As to Sun whom a half dozen German, American and Chinese physicians in a
public bulletin pronounce very sick man and for whom they prescribe
complete rest, Eugene Chen came to me January 3rd and endeavored to
explain away from his chief’s record in Canton all appearances of
Bolshevism. Professed program of Sun and Feng in relation to foreign
nations would seem to be not very different from that indicated in my
Shanghai speech43 as the policy of the United States. Undoubtedly these
leaders have found that the Chinese people have been scared by the danger of
Bolshevization and that foreign nations would not tamely submit to the
repudiation of the treaties. I do not believe they would encourage or tolerate
attacks on foreigners even if they succeeded in driving out Tuan44 who has
already given formal assurance of protection to foreigners.
8. If an attack were made on foreign nations over any issue arising out of the
Christian activities of foreigners in China I do not share the opinion of the
editor of the Peking & Tientsin Times of January 9th that Japan in the interest
of civilization would rally to the support of the foreign nations. On the
contrary I should expect to see her emerge, without perhaps taking any active
part, as the friend, helper and protector of China against the western nations.
SCHURMAN
40 Not printed.
41 Commander in chief of the People’s Army and director general of the Northwest
Frontier Defence.
42 Leader of the Kuomintang Party.
44 Tuan Chi-jui, Chief Executive of the Provisional Government of China.

[Document 575]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
1. Consul general, Shanghai, January 15th telegraphed as follows:
[“] After the meeting of the American church mission board, Dr. Hawks Pott
confidentially stated that the anti-Christian move looks worse than he thought
at first and he regards it to be political. He stated the situation in connection
with anti-Christian propaganda is becoming more and more serious and is
looked upon by clear-thinking good educators and leaders as a dangerous
thing not only to the Christian institutions but to the nation at large.”
2. Dr. Pott, a graduate of Columbia who is president of Saint John’s University, is one
of the wisest and best informed missionary educators in China and understands Chinese
psychology. …
3. The Chinese Recorder, a monthly journal of the Christian movement in China, in
editorial in January number received today says:
“The situation facing Christian educational work in China today is a critical
one. For years past missionaries have been free to conduct such schools as
they saw fit. Their right to do so is not [now?] being questioned by
influenced [sic] groups of Chinese educators on the ground both of their
foreign nationality and of the religious character of the education given. The
resolutions passed by national federation of educational associations at its
recent meeting in Kaifeng if approved by the board of education in Peking
would force all Christian schools either to take religious courses out of their
requirements or to close their doors. Either of these courses would be fraught
with serious consequences for the growing Christian communities in China.
“We question whether the Government will press the issue at this time since
Christian schools are recognized by many responsible people outside
Christian circles as performing a useful function and since moreover the
Government is able to provide educational opportunities for only a fraction of

the children of school age. At the same time Christian educators will
recognize that we are facing new conditions.”
SCHURMAN

[Document 576]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
“February 4, 3 p.m. Antiforeign campaign continues including mass meetings
and parades. Powers are accused of intrigue with military government in
opposition to Sun Yat-sen regime; the United States accused of landing
marines at Nanking for alleged purpose of aiding the military.
Local situation becoming very tense because of Sun’s illness and Chen
Chiung-ming’s45 threatened attack on Canton.”
SCHURMAN
45 Commander of Kwangtung forces opposed to Kuomintang Party.

[Document 577]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 4, 1925—noon.
201. Following from consul, Changsha:
“June 3, 1 p.m. Students of all the schools in Changsha striking today
because of the May 30th affray in Shanghai. Many private rikishas
demolished last evening on the main streets. Boycott against British and
Japanese declared. The situation is serious but is under control.”
MAYER

[Document 578]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
207. Following from consul, Amoy:
“June 6, 10 a.m. Student demonstration carried out this morning; about two
thousand in procession; one-day strike also declared. Agitators are arriving
from Shanghai this afternoon. Antiforeign boycott appears probable. Feeling
against Japanese and British is running high and trouble may be expected.
Understand that Japanese consul is in communication with Japanese warships
which evidently are in close proximity. British consul has informed his naval
authorities at Hongkong of local situation.”
Repeated to commander in chief.
MAYER

[Document 579]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:25 a.m.]
208. Following from consul, Nanking:
“June 6, 8 p.m. There was serious rioting in Chinkiang British Concession
yesterday afternoon. Municipal building was wrecked, fires started but
extinguished, Concession now defended by volunteers and Chinese troops.
In Nanking, situation as regards British and the Japanese is becoming
gradually worse but no hostile demonstration against Americans.”
MAYER

[Document 580]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
214. The following telegram has been received from the consul at Antung:
“June 9, 6 p.m. At noon today Japanese police opened fire on Salt Gabelle
patrol attempting to arrest Korean smugglers off shore of Japan[ese]
Concession, killing five Chinese, then marched en masse into Chinatown and
surrounded Gabelle office. They have returned to Japanese Concession.
Feeling running high among Chinese.”
MAYER

[Document 581]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Foochow, Tsinan and Tsingtau during past few days report student strikes and parades
with banners and distribution leaflets making demands in general similar to Peking
boycott of British and Japanese goods demanded by students. No acts of violence.
Consul at Swatow reports small strike of workmen in four American firms threatens
[to] become serious, and tense situation has been created by Shanghai incident. Consul
general at Canton estimates that 30,000 men are now engaged in fighting in and around
Canton. United States ship Pampanga was fired on by mistake, for which Yunnan
general has expressed regret.
MAYER

[Document 582]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received June 13—9 a.m.]
219. The following telegram has been received from the consul general at Hankow:
“June 12, noon. Detachments of British sailors defending sailors [British?]
four Chinese killed, six wounded. At 7:30 p.m. mob rushed southern end of
the British bund throwing stones. At 8 o’clock British sailors were landed
[as] the general alarm sounded. The mob was driven back and the roads
around the Concession picketed and wire entanglements laid. Mob then
proceeded to rear Concession and pressed into it forcing back one street the
British naval forces unit and volunteers when the firing occurred. All foreign
naval and volunteers forces including American guarding Concession, sailors
defending boundaries and there is a cordon of Chinese troops beyond the
boundaries to ward off rioters. Chinese authorities now control mob and
further serious disorders not expected. Coolies had been instigated by student
agitators. Commissioner of foreign affairs when first approached by British
consul general was apathetic; and the detachment of troops sent tardily by
garrison commander looked passively on and [sic] mob otherwise and [sic]
shooting could have been avoided. One Japanese killed and five wounded by
mob before the shooting occurred. All Japanese property on the back spaces
of British Concession totally destroyed.
One American gunboat now Hankow and two destroyers due today. These
vessels desirable to furnish American quota of the forces required to carry out
the defence scheme which as amended recently by the senior naval officer
and volunteer commanders with the sanction of the consular body now
includes special administrative district. British consul general has requested
cruiser to be sent here. Consular body today decided to make strongest
representations to the Tupan fixing responsibility for the incident on
provincial authorities”.
MAYER

[Document 583]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
“Today’s newspapers accuse United States and France of perfidy in joining
with Great Britain in diplomatic corps’ defence of police authorities. Also
cite four needless killings of Chinese by American troops in 1912. There is
every reason to believe every effort is being made by Bolshevik agitators to
involve the United States but up to the present time students and other
organizations have shown no definite anti-American feeling.”
MAYER

[Document 584]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
226. Radio, Admiral McVay to Commander, state[s] that according to report from
Japanese destroyer Japanese and British consulates at Kiukiang completely destroyed
by mob on June 13th. Japanese destroyer sent landing force. No casualties reported.
Order restored in Concessions while 500 Chinese soldiers protecting foreigners living
outside. If necessary American destroyer will be sent from Hankow.
British Legation’s reports are to effect that Chinese officials assumed full responsibility
for protection prior to event but failed to send troops for 3 hours.
MAYER

[Document 585]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Continued demonstrations in Peking and other agitation regarding
Shanghai incident especially distribution of pamphlets and pictures
calculated to incite extreme antiforeign feeling. Heads of Legation through
senior minister have sought ineffectually past few days to cause Chinese
Government either to put a stop to the above or make necessary arrangement
to prevent demonstrations from coming into direct contact with Legation
Quarter as has twice occurred when effort made by bodies of students to rush
gates of Quarter. Chinese Government acknowledges unable to prevent
contact between Legation guards and demonstrators.
2. Senior minister at meeting of Heads of Legation yesterday afternoon stated
he was informed on most reliable authority that group of extremists would
attack Foreign Office on 15th, establish people’s commissar for foreign
affairs, and incite mob to assault Legation Quarter. Japanese Minister had
same information and chief of police also. General sense of meeting that
Soviet and Communist activities in Peking greatly increased to the end that
some incident involving foreigners should take place and that Feng Yu-
hsiang’s troops now in Peking not to be relied on in the circumstances.
3. [Paraphrase.] Chang Tso-lin caused a message to be sent to the senior
minister confidentially and privately that if desired he would send 10,000
soldiers to Peking to obtain order. This message the senior minister placed for
action before the Heads of Legation. Most diplomatic representatives
believed that a grave and menacing situation confronted foreigners in the
capital because of Communistic activities, the paralysis of the government of
Tuan Chi-jui, the reaction to the riots at Hankow and Kiukiang and the
general condition of disturbance throughout China. With this situation in
view they believed it imperative that the Heads of Legation, in reply to
Chang Tso-lin, welcome any aid in maintaining law and order here.

4. I was most emphatic in stating that under no circumstances did the
American Government wish to take sides in conflicts between Chinese
factions; that I thought our neutrality might be seriously compromised by the
step which the Heads of Legation proposed; that it was my opinion that
Chang would of necessity be forced to assume control in Peking with or
without an expressed welcome from the Heads of Legation concerned if the
Communistic menace was as great as my colleagues believed; and that I
would not be surprised, in view of my previous experience with him, if
Chang were trying again to use the Communistic menace to secure some
form of support from the powers for himself. The British Chargé expressed
himself categorically in a similar sense. The Italian Minister assured me that
he had information entirely independent of that from Chang Tso-lin as to the
Communistic menace to foreign lives and property. It was stated by all Heads
of Legation that they had no wish to take sides in disputes between factions.
They felt, however, that foreign lives and property were in great danger not
only in Peking but throughout China and that we must take advantage of all
possible assistance both to protect ourselves and to prevent any untoward
incident between Chinese and foreigners which would precipitate an
antiforeign outburst.
5. My British colleague and I decided after long argument and discussion that
we could not assume the responsibility of preventing action desired by the
other Heads of Legation. We caused a formula to be adopted, however, for
such action by which I believe our neutrality will not be compromised. The
Italian Minister was authorized to make confidentially and orally a statement
to the representative of Chang Tso-lin, a translation of which follows. [End
paraphrase.]
“The interested Heads of Legation have taken cognizance of the
considerations which Marshal Chang Tso-lin has conveyed to them
concerning the necessity for the reestablishment of order in Peking
in order to prevent further difficulties and the development of a
situation which threatens to become dangerous. They have the
honor to make known to him that, preoccupied above all with the
question of assuring the safety of their nationals, [they?] shall
welcome with satisfaction any support which would be given to the
Government for the maintenance of order and for taking
appropriate measures to the end that the present agitation may
cease.”
6. While the British Chargé d’Affaires and myself do not completely share
the apprehension of our colleagues as expressed above I view the situation
with a certain alarm because of the undoubted intense Soviet activities for the

purpose of stirring up trouble in all quarter[s], and by reason of the entire
paralysis of the present Government in Peking. I am in constant
communication with commandant of Legation guard concerning the
protection of our nationals in Peking in any eventuality and shall take
requisite steps to that end.
7. Respectfully request Department’s views in the premises.
MAYER

[Document 586]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
consulates and British municipal building at Kiukiang looted and bank of Taiwan
burned. State of affairs in Chungking is serious and situation at Hankow is becoming
more tense.
MAYER

[Document 587]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 16, 1925—noon.
[Received 12:25 p.m.]
1. Yesterday passed without disorder. Some 15,000 students and workmen
paraded in orderly fashion, precautions being taken by moderate faction of
students to prevent extremists from causing trouble. Demonstrators insisted
in call upon Chief Executive that Government carry out following demands:
troops for the purpose of protecting the Chinese merchants in foreign
concessions at Hankow; (3) to circularize all provinces by telegram to
organize a national relief army. Chief aide to Tuan stated that the
Government would discuss demands at Cabinet meeting on the 16th when the
demonstrators were requested to send representatives to attend meeting.
2. At my suggestion senior minister authorized to call upon Chief Executive
yesterday morning in order categorically to request from him guarantee of
protection of life and property of foreign residents in Peking. Tuan Chi-jui
gave such assurance in emphatic terms stating that he had ordered one
division of Minister of War’s troops to come to Peking to assist in
maintenance of law and order. These troops belonging to Feng Yu-hsiang’s
forces were stationed about the city yesterday morning especially at the
approaches to the Legation Quarter in support of the police.
3. General strike scheduled to take place yesterday postponed to 25th at
meeting of representatives from many educational, commercial and labor
organizations, the plan apparently being that on above date governmental,
commercial, industrial and educational activities throughout the country will
be stopped from 6 in the morning until noon; amusements of all kinds
suspended, flags flown at half mast and demonstrations to take place
throughout China.
4. The tension at Peking seems somewhat relieved today and I feel more at
ease regarding local situation owing to steps taken by Tuan Chi-jui as

described above as result of our continuous efforts to arouse Chinese
Government from its apathy.
5. No reaction from démarche of Heads of Legation note in paragraph 4, my
6. Recent interview with representative of Shanghai students who also called
on my Italian, French and Belgian colleagues very satisfactory. Burden of
representative’s remarks were [was] that students realized the difficulties of
present situation, importance of absence of antiforeign incidents and
necessity for calm atmosphere in which Foreign Office and Heads of
Legation concerned could solve present situation. The assistance of United
States requested to see that justice be done. I expressed my profound
gratification on learning the point of view of Shanghai students. I assured
them through representative of the desire which my Government as well as
all the Governments concerned had to see justice done, the great regret over
the Shanghai incident no matter who was to blame, and my personal feeling
that the hope of China lay in the new generation of students upon whom
therefore grave responsibility rested for producing a state of affairs in China
which would permit the powers concerned at the earliest moment practicable
to carry the aims of the Washington Conference to their logical conclusion.
MAYER
49 Tuchun of Hupeh Province.

[Document 588]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[Paraphrase]
in fourth paragraph of your telegram, i. e., that the American Government wishes to
avoid any action that would apparently place it in the position of taking sides in
conflicts between Chinese factions.
The Department believes that considering sentiment which you report to have existed
in the diplomatic corps you were wise in not taking the responsibility of preventing
action set forth in your fifth paragraph which was desired by the Heads of Legation.
Your attitude is commended.
KELLOGG

[Document 589]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. A further note will be presented Wai Chiao Pu, being sent this afternoon, drafted at
this morning’s meeting of Heads of Legation. In substance note calls to serious
attention of Chinese Government the agitation now existing in China which, increasing
as it is, has placed the lives and property of foreign nationals in peril. A brief review
follows of Hankow, Kiukiang and Chinkiang incidents and recent murder of foreigners
in outskirts of Shanghai Settlement. Note closes with the following paragraph,
translation:
“The incidents referred to above are the most serious which have been
brought to our attention but from all sides we are informed that there is
developing an antiforeign sentiment and subversive tendencies which cause
us the gravest apprehension. Wishing above all to dispel every cause which
might result in impairing the cordial relations which exist between China and
the foreign governments, my colleagues and I once more draw the most
particular attention of the Chinese Government to the gravity of the present
situation and the imperative necessity which is incumbent upon it to meet
that situation.”
Note is being published.
2. While technically the Kiukiang, Hankow and Chinkiang incidents pertained
principally to the British and Japanese Governments, actually safety of all foreigners in
China is involved in increasing agitation. In addition to above consideration, use of
international naval forces, whose necessary activity on behalf of said foreigners may at
any moment produce an incident wherein any of the foreign powers having naval
forces in Chinese waters may be directly concerned, and the necessity of showing
united front at this time, lead me to concur in this note.
MAYER

[Document 590]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
information. On the 15th instant I saw the Chinese Minister and made the following
informal statement to him:
“The United States has, as it always has had, the most friendly feeling toward
China and is desirous of being helpful. The Department views with
apprehension the continued anti-foreign demonstrations and disturbances in
several parts of China. While the situation at Shanghai, according to late
reports, has somewhat improved, the disturbance has spread to other places. I
am apprehensive lest the continuance of these demonstrations should bring
some harm to American life and property. If such an untoward incident
occurs the effect on the American public will surely be changed from the
present friendly attitude. In view of the readiness of the Diplomatic Body at
Peking to cooperate with the Chinese Government in investigating and
settling the matter, something should be done by the Chinese Government to
prevent the spread of these disturbances.” In a general discussion with
Minister Sze I also said “the Government of the United States is pleased that
the Tariff Conference will be held soon and hopes that an atmosphere will not
be created to hinder it from convening at an early date or from achieving the
desired end. There are also other conferences called for by the Washington
Agreements to be held in the future and such conferences are unlikely to
bring about good results unless held under favorable circumstances and in a
friendly atmosphere, An unfavorable atmosphere may make it impossible to
achieve any suitable results.”
The Department understands that the Minister telegraphed his Government in the sense
of the above.
KELLOGG

[Document 591]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
235. Following from American consul at Chungking:
“No reports yet received justifying advice to Americans to be in readiness to
leave. Student and labor agitation against British and Japanese growing.
Three foreigners, British, Swedish, Polish, severely beaten by mobs. Chief
danger is that General Yuan Tsuming’s troops may assist agitators. British
consul is moving from the consulate in the city to British gunboats across the
river because of the forced desertion of staff and servants. It is believed that
he is adopting only feasible course. Small crowds yesterday threw stones into
the Japanese premises but there is no disturbance today. Japanese consul is
remaining in Japanese consulate for the present. Consuls exerting every effort
to avoid circumstance that might give rise to attack upon any foreigner. There
is no agitation at present against Americans.”
MAYER

[Document 592]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
246. Following from American consul, Amoy.
“June 23, 10 p.m. Situation has assumed a graver aspect resultant insistence
of unruly elements to demonstrate on Kulangsu. Municipal Council acting in
the interest of International Settlement have requested consular corps naval
protection. Requests have been addressed to their respective naval authorities
by the British and Japanese consuls. They have requested that their vessels
rendezvous at Chapel Island, Amoy, in view of the gravity of the situation
and the statement by the Chinese today that they could not guarantee
protection of life and property in the Settlement, together with request of
Municipal Council and the announcement of the latter that the Settlement
police were insufficient to protect foreigners and property in the Settlement,
as well as the fact that a Japanese or a British naval vessel and landing party
would only precipitate or aggravate local situation. I recommend naval
assistance capable of putting ashore at Settlement landing party of about 100
be sent immediately and anchor outer harbor off Standard Oil Company
installation Sung Sua, Amoy. Such action would not be misconstrued by the
Chinese authorities here who would cooperate. Boycott with the possibility
of a general strike against the British and Japanese appears inevitable and
will probably take place here 25th or before. Student and other agitators
active. Boycott against the two abovementioned powers already commenced
at interior points. Regarding oil situation I have seen and persuaded General
Chang at Changchow today to cancel tax, and supplies are again moving.
General Chang has advised me all Americans which amount to
approximately 100 at Changchow are perfectly safe and well there and there
is every reason to believe he will afford the necessary protection if required. I
have exceeded my telegram allowance by approximately $25 gold. Urgent.”
Pertinent parts repeated to commander in chief.
MAYER

[Document 593]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received June 28—10 a.m.]
1. At meeting of Heads of Legation this morning apparently called at the
request of Japanese Minister, latter stated agent of Chang Hsueh-liang52 had
informed him through his military attachés that in view of Communist
activities and the like Chang Hsueh-liang considered situation in Shanghai
would grow worse unless it was soon settled and that he desired to place his
services at disposal of Heads of Legation to assist in bringing about a speedy
and happy conclusion of the Shanghai incidents.
2. While Italian, French and Belgian Ministers in general way seemed to
favor a polite but vague reply to Chang Hsueh-liang in no manner accepting
his proffered assistance, yet they appeared quite favorable to requesting from
him a more precise statement of whatever he might have in mind. I observed
that I was opposed to our flirting with Chang Hsueh-liang or any factional
leader in China; that I had reported to the Department my statements at
meeting of Heads of Legation on June 14th last regarding the position of the
United States in the above regard and that my Government had informed me
that my statements had exactly expressed its attitude; that therefore I
suggested the reply to Chang Hsueh-liang while of course polite should not
be of a tenor to encourage a further démarche of this description on his part.
The British Chargé d’Affaires expressed himself as entirely concurring in my
view as being that likewise of his Government, adding a further caution
against statement on our part which might give any factional leaders reason
to believe we desired further communications from them of the nature of
Chang Hsueh-liang’s or that we were prepared to accord any measure of
support thereto. The Heads of Legation then authorized the Japanese Minister
to reply to Chang Hsuehliang’s agent in the tenor of the suggestion made by
Mr. Palairet and myself.
3. Repeated to Tokyo.
MAYER

[Document 594]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
275. Following from American consul at Swatow:
“July 11, 3 p.m. Cantonese troops attacked and looted British mission at
Wukingfu on July 9. One man, two women stripped and beaten by the troops
but escaped to Swatow. American missionaries at mountain resort very near
Wukingfu have been heard from but they are safe. I am taking all possible
measures to secure protection of life and property. Local situation
comparatively quiet with complete boycott and strike against British and
Japanese. Local merchants aroused by the extortions of students and strikers
and threaten open resistance.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 595]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
303. Following from Amoy:
“Madras [sic] situation, while comparatively quiet, is very uncertain and
looks portentous. Boycott against the British and the Japanese is being rigidly
enforced, practically all Americans have come from the interior to Amoy.
Conditions in the interior reported to be fairly quiet although an intense anti-
British propaganda and boycott is being carried on with the acquiescence and
assistance of the Chinese military authorities.
It is believed acts of intimidation and terrorism are being carried out in Amoy
by the agitators for the strike. Monday last, an attempt was made in the
International Settlement to assassinate Mr. Wong, Chinese Secretary,
Kulangsu Municipal Council. Wong is now in local hospital, condition
uncertain. Tuesday evening 6 o’clock Lim, prominent educationalist and the
leader of the antistrike movement, shot and killed in the street Amoy,
assailants of both escaped, no arrests. According to the voting of local bodies
yesterday radical elements which are led and governed by the Kuomintang
Party have prevailed; and strike against the British and the Japanese will be
carried out here August 1st. I am of the opinion that in view of the acts of
violence which have taken place, the conservative elements will be
frightened [afraid?] to take measures against the radicals and extremist
Chinese laborers hereabouts, claiming have the situation in hand; but
nevertheless they are adopting a vacillating policy and appear to hesitate
taking action against radicals. British consul informed me that he has
requested naval protection and that the British warship Foxglove arrives here
Saturday morning. I am of the opinion that the presence of naval vessel here
will have a restraining influence on the extremist elements. While apparently
Americans and American interests are for the present in no danger yet in
view of this being an international settlement and also the possibilities of the
situation I recommend cooperation with the British in the matter of naval
protection of life and property. Further developments will be telegraphed
immediately.”

ief informed.

Commander in ch
MacMorray

[Document 596]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
363. Consul at Amoy reports today situation quiet, boycott weakening. Presence of
United States ship Hart no longer necessary.
MACMURRAY

[Document 597]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Received 2:10 p.m.]
1. It appear that by a process so gradual that the phases of its development
have scarcely been discernible there has come about in general an abatement
of the tensity of Chinese feeling such as to warrant the hope that the crisis has
passed. The Chinese no longer “see red”; the aggressive movement against
foreign rights and interests has slackened; strikes and boycotts continue
apparently out of sheer momentum but with no new impulse behind them.
2. These generalizations are subject to local exceptions particularly in the
case of Canton which is now more than ever under Soviet domination and to
that extent abnormal to Chinese conditions. They are moreover subject to the
qualification that they are less strictly applicable to conditions in proportion
to the distance south from Yangtze.
3. To a large degree also a distinction must be made between British and
other interests. The Japanese originally grouped with the British have from
the beginning perceived psychological crux of the problem and by an
assiduously conciliatory attitude towards Chinese sensibilities have
succeeded almost completely in “getting out from under” and putting
themselves on virtually the same basis as those who like ourselves have been
merely incidentally affected by the present outburst of ethnical self-
consciousness on the part of the Chinese. The British Chamber of Commerce
and China Association of Shanghai have recently adopted and communicated
to the Chinese Chamber of Commerce resolutions so ludicrously ingratiating
in contrast with the previous attitude of community which they represent that
the fact of their being received without adverse comment is in itself an
evidence of subsidence of Chinese feeling even towards the British.
4. Although the aggressiveness of feeling may have passed its crisis it would
be a mistake to assume that the volcano has burnt itself out, that the danger is
over and that things in China have reverted to what they were before. The
passionate intensity of feeling has been succeeded by a new sentiment that

involves at once sullenly suspicious attitude towards foreign nations and a
rather complacently self-conscious conviction that Chinese have scored once
and can do it again when they want to. Representative Chinese talk in more
or less detached fashion about the defects and possibilities of mass action,
half apologizing for the abatement in the movement of self-assertion and
half-threatening recrudescence of it if occasion should arise. I believe there is
still the possibility of a new movement which might be set in train by affront
to their pride even by some casual accident as the situation is still explosive.
5. The recent after-developments of the situation seem to add confirmation to
the belief that the whole crisis through which the Chinese Government have
been passing is emotional rather than logical and that it is less concerned with
substraction [abstract?] rights and obligations (which are only vaguely
understood by any but the exceptionally keen minds among them who for the
most part understand also the reasons for abnormal state of things in China)
than with appearances and amenities of intercourse.
6. There is of course a development here which, whatever the crudities of its
manifestations, is real and must be met. But it is accompanied by much
plausible assumption which has no basis whatever in fact. Idealistic though
term of about the [apparently garbled groups] possibilities of the Chinese
people and sympathetic towards their somewhat elementary yearnings
towards nationality, it is a case [sic] nevertheless incumbent upon those who
deal with China today to keep in mind that in relation to the present problem
China consists of two elements: first, the faction recognized as the
government which is in control in Peking and which only wants money to go
on with, and second, the articulate element of China’s population which,
most of it, holds the so-called government in contempt but is momentarily
willing to array itself behind that effigy or [of] sovereignty for the sake of
gaining “face” for the ethnic group which calls itself the Chinese nation as
opposed to the foreigner. It behoves us therefore to be on our guard against
the assumption that a concession to be [the?] government is ipso facto
concession to that growing national sentiment with whose healthy
development we would be disposed to sympathize. It is in fact quite possible
that any concrete concession enabling the present governing faction to
consolidate its power over the country would incur the active resentment of
the very elements which are urging in the abstract the necessity for such
concessions. I venture this observation in view of the considerable amount of
American comment reprinted here which advances upon the facile
assumption that the problem is to decide whether or not we are prepared to
satisfy the legitimate aspirations of the Chinese people.
7. Repeated by mail to Tokyo.

MacMurray
2 Post, p. 799 [Pg

Victory
of
the
radical
wing
of
the
Kuomintang in Canton
[598] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[599] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[600] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[601] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[602] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[603] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[604] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[605] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[606] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[607] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[608] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[609] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[610] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[611] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[612] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[613] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[614] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[615] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[616] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[617] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[618] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[619] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)

[Document 598]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
substance as follows:
The Central Executive Committee of the Kuomintang at special meeting at
Canton on May 23rd adopted resolution severing all connection with the
Peking Government and that henceforth party should devote efforts towards
cooperation with Soviet Government. Wide breach of conservative members
Kuomintang allied with Yunnan and Kwangsi military groups on one hand
and radicals including present civil administration and Cantonese troops
together with Russian trained and officered volunteers. Unless civil
administration resigns and peaceful means found to check Soviet influence,
clash seems inevitable. Ma Soo54 has been expelled from the party and has
been in conference with representatives of militarist factions including
Peking to fight Soviet influence in Canton. Ma Soo asserts Canton
administration subservient to Russian Communist influences and receives
regular financial support from Moscow. Civil Governor has promulgated
order restricting religious instruction in foreign missionary and other schools.
Situation in Canton more delicate than any time since death of Sun Yat-sen.55
MAYER
54 Former personal representative of Sun Yat-sen at Washington.

[Document 599]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received June 2—3 a.m.]
“June 1, 4 p.m. Local conditions very critical. Officials continually going and
coming between Canton, Hongkong and Swatow. Yunnanese entrenching
near White Clouds Mountain with intention resisting General Hsu’s army
now reported returning from Swatow. Government has issued denial it is
Communist but shows every indication determination to fight.”
MAYER

[Document 600]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
205. Referring to my telegram [apparent omission] consul general, Canton:
telegrams. General Hsu’s Cantonese army now understood to be within 40
miles of Canton. Yunnanese entrenched in eastern suburbs and contact with
opposing forces is expected within 36 hours. Entire civil administration
established in cement works on Honan Island protected by sand bags and
other barricades. Yunnan troops said to be short of ammunition and artillery.
Opinion is that they will be defeated. Administration issuing series of
proclamations denying it is Communist but at the same time promises
numerous Socialistic reforms to laborers and peasants.
Have advised Americans to leave suburbs where fighting likely to occur and
many women and children have already removed to safer points.
Asheville is here and Pampanga is expected tonight. Critical local situation
has prevented any serious anti-British manifestations so far but we are
apprehensive. Telegraph line to Hongkong is interrupted. I have warned
leaders of the opposing forces that we expect American lives and property to
be protected. Department is not informed.”
MAYER

[Document 601]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
been received from the consul general at Canton:
about 4:30 p.m. on Saturday and still continues. All Americans safe so far.”
MAYER

[Document 602]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
with growing intensity, opposing troops firing at each other across the
waterway dividing city proper from Honan Island, Gunboats loyal to the
Government frequently run through this outside [sic] firing point-blank into
the native city. Yunnanese continue to hold their ground but Government’s
forces are being strengthened by the arrival of contingents from outside
though not so rapidly as was to be expected. Governor and all important
officers loyal to him have gone to Whampoa. Yunnanese announce that they
support Kuomintang but are against Communists.
All Americans safe so far. Canton American hospital has been struck by one
small shell and several rifle bullets. On Saturday afternoon after the first
outburst of shooting had ceased two American launches returning to the
Christian College frequently hit by rifle shots but the occupants escaped
injuries. Have protested. Also warned Americans to avoid dangerous area.
Upon consulate’s advice most women and children have moved from
Tungshan suburb and other strategic points. Pampanga now at Christian
College and Asheville off Shameen.”
MAYER

[Document 603]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
received from the consul general, Canton:
completely routed and all in city surrendered to the Cantonese about 3 p.m.,
June 12th. All Americans and property reported safe but I have not yet had
direct communications with the outlying missions. When the Cantonese
generals entered the city they were accompanied by Russian military advisers
who directed fight and to whom Cantonese victory undoubtedly due.
There was some looting and beating and killing of stray Yunnanese last night
but no serious disorders.
According to the semiofficial Canton Gazette seamen’s strike will begin in
Canton and Hongkong June 15th in sympathy with the Shanghai students.
This will undoubtedly become serious general strike if the Shanghai affair is
not settled soon.”
MAYER
56 Not printed.

[Document 604]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
been received from the consul general at Canton:
of Yunnanese and other Chinese not speaking Cantonese dialect have been
hunted out and beaten to death by the civilian populace while the victorious
Cantonese army did little or nothing to prevent it. However, police
department is beginning to function and it now seems likely that order will be
restored shortly.
Antiforeign agitation continues and there is considerable uneasiness in
Canton and other cities. During student demonstration in Wuchow on the 8th
mob yelled ‘kill foreigners’ and threw stones at American Baptist Hospital.
Local situation seems to be dominated by Whampoa military school cadets to
whom complete destruction of Yunnan army is due. However, it appears Ng
Bong Ping and other conservatively inclined Cantonese leaders will have a
share in the new government.
I am continuing my policy of urging Americans especially women and
children to leave for Hongkong and other safe places.”
MAYER

[Document 605]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 22, 1925—noon.
284. Following from Canton:
Central executive committee of Kuomintang has issued call for preliminary
people’s conference to be held in Peking after August 1st to cancel unequal
treaties. It has also addressed to the Acting President, Tuan, open letter
pardoning his past unfriendly actions and urging him to accept Kuomintang’s
advice instead of that of Chang Tso-lin.
MACMURRAY

[Document 606]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
347. Following is substance of two telegrams received from Canton:
“Liao Chung-hoi, head of the local radical movement and former civil
divisions, was assassinated August 20th. Three Chinese took part, one being
killed and two escaping. Their names are not yet known nor is it clear to what
faction they belong. Members of administration are accusing British of
having instigated the plot but many Chinese say that dissatisfied strikers or
agents of opposition military leaders were responsible. Impossible to foresee
effect of Liao’s death on the situation in Canton but he was the foremost
leader of the radicals who are undoubtedly badly shaken.[”]
MACMURRAY

[Document 607]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
“August 25, 6 p.m. Whampoa Cadets occupied Canton today and have
already arrested over one hundred government officials supposed to have
been implicated in the assassination of Liao Chung-hoi, including brother of
Hu Han-min, the Commissioner of Foreign Affairs, and formerly acting
generalissimo. Whampoa, Cadets are carrying out house-to-house search and
hold strategic points. They have also brought in artillery, and fighting is
predicted tonight. They may attack General Li Fok-lam on Honan Island.
“This is evidently the beginning of the long-expected clash between Pinks
and Reds and the Reds have moved first under their Russian advisers. They
will have probably the advantage at least in the initial stages of the conflict,
but many of the Cantonese leaders are opposed to Russian Communists.
Department is not informed.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 608]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
365. Following are extracts from telegram received from Canton:
“August 27, 6 p.m. City in complete control Whampoa Cadets and civil
administration badly disorganized. There was occasional firing Tuesday night
and yesterday but conditions now fairly quiet. Hsu Chung-chi, leading
Cantonese general, is supporting Reds but his allegiance is doubtful.
Bolshevik Russians seem to be very nervous but there is no indication of
further fighting unless Cantonese troops in the outlying districts attack.
The Government now consists of provisional commission of three including
General Hsu Chung-chi, Wang Shao-ning and General Chiang, commander
of the Whampoa Cadets.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 609]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
American consul general at Canton:
“August 28, 4 p.m. According to fairly reliable reports, strike committee has
decided to cancel strike and boycott with respect to all foreigners excepting
British and Shameen residents. Needless to say I shall not consent to many
Americans returning unless the attitude of the new Red regime is fairly
satisfactory.
I am reliably informed Hu Han-min surrendered to Whampoa cadet
headquarters and is at Whampoa fort under surveillance. He is no longer a
member of the Government. The city seems quiet and no more fighting is
expected unless Cantonese troops in the Province combine to attack.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 610]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
American consul general at Canton:
strike committee unable as yet to agree to confine strike and boycott to the
British only. On the contrary, indications in some quarters show strike
actually tightening against Americans including our gunboats.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 611]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
416. Following from American consul general at Canton:
“September 21, 4 p.m. General Hsu Chung-chi has been relieved of his
command and left hurriedly during the night on a vessel bound for Shanghai.
His bodyguard was disarmed by order of the commander of the Whampoa
Cadets. It is reported that General Hsu’s principal military assistant with the
Cantonese army near Sheklung has revolted and will join Chen Chiung-
ming’s forces in eastern Kwangtung.
The so-called diplomatic committee has left for Shanghai.
Line between the Reds and Moderates now becoming clearly defined. There
are indications that the opposition in outlying districts is crystallizing against
the Reds.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 612]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
428. Following telegram repeated from Canton:
“October 2, 3 p.m. Commissioner of Foreign Affairs states that Canton army
is mobilizing. Heavy detachments of troops are being sent to east front to
check Chen Chiung-ming advance. Fighting reported southeast of Waichow
and East River points. Wounded arriving Canton daily.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 613]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
447. Following from Canton:
government has notified consular body that state of emergency has been
declared in the Boca-Tigris fort area, that adjacent waters have been mined
and that all vessels including men-of-war must notify commander of the fort
and receive pilots to conduct them through the danger zone. Authorities also
desire to be informed in advance through the consul general of expected
arrival or departure of vessels.
Although the note does not say so, British authorities tell me Chinese are
insisting on boarding merchant ships and asking questions as to the nature of
the cargo, number of Chinese passengers, ownership of vessel, etc.
Above action said to be due to the presence of two northern cruisers in South
China waters.
In my reply to note I suggest calling attention to correspondence referred to
our men-of-war. Also suggest pointing out that in view of the well-known
attitude of our Government I shall expect American vessels to be supplied
with pilots and conducted safely through the mine field with the least
possible delay or annoyance. If necessary I will also protest against boarding
except by customs officers. War has not been declared but as it actually exists
I am uncertain whether I should protest against placing of mines which may
break loose and ultimately become grave danger to our ships. I shall
definitely decline to give any advance notice of movement of our ships which
is generally impracticable.”
Legation’s circular instruction number 215 embodied substance of the Department’s
Jenkins’ recommendations including protest against mines.
MACMURRAY

[Document 614]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 24, 1925—noon.
463. Following received from Canton:
“Oct. 20, 4 p.m. Local government announces capture of Waichow by the
Whampoa Cadets, but rumors persist city has been retaken by Chen Chiung-
ming forces. Fighting in eastern Kwangtung unusually severe, local
authorities admitting heavy losses in killed and wounded. Several hundred
wounded have arrived in Canton.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 615]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Canton in manner suggested in your telegram.
KELLOGG

[Document 616]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
477. Following is excerpt from telegram dated November 4, noon, received from
Swatow:
“Chen Chiung-ming forces retired from Swatow, October [November?] 2. An
officials left yesterday. Cantonese troops expected to arrive at any time;
Cantonese flags have been raised and the city may be regarded as in
possession of Cantonese. No disorder, American destroyer here.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 617]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
“November 7, 12 noon. Chiang Kai-shek arrived yesterday with several
thousand troops, quiet.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 618]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
493. American consul, Swatow, states that it is reported Canton Government
contemplates taking over Maritime Customs, Swatow. He asks whether action similar
to that of the consul general, Canton, on the same question in 1923 should be taken.58
Please instruct.
MACMURRAY

[Document 619]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
their efforts to prevent disintegration of Customs Administration to making formal
representations to Chinese authorities. I do not object to your cooperation with your
colleagues in making representations to Chinese Government, or to your instructing
consul, Swatow, to protest if such action as he fears is taken. I question whether it is
advisable or practicable at this time to conduct such an international naval
demonstration as was carried out at Canton in 1923.
KELLOGG

Intensification of antiforeign feeling in
Canton after the firing at Shameen
[620] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[621] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[622] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[623] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State
[624] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State
[625] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State

[626] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State
[627] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State
[628] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Canton (Jenkins)
[629] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[630] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State
[631] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[632] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[633] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[634] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Canton, October 16, 1925.

[Document 620]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
236. Following from consul general at Canton:
“June 18, 1 p.m. General strike against foreigners imminent. I am warning
American women and children to leave and the men who remain to be
prepared for immediate departure in event of danger.”
MAYER

[Document 621]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
“June 21, 11 a.m. General strike and boycott against the British, Japanese and
Americans has been announced and house and office employees are leaving
this morning. About two-thirds American women and children have gone to
Hongkong and other safer places. American senior naval officer and myself
deemed it advisable to urge their departure because of extreme difficulty
protecting large missionary communities in the suburbs in the event of
disorders. One Japanese shot and robbed in the native city. This may have no
political influence but many Japanese have entered Shameen for safety.
Violent propaganda continues directed especially against the British.”
MAYER

[Document 622]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received June 23—11 a.m.]
informed Governor issuing order today to troops and police to protect foreign
lives and property, and C. C. Wu59 has told senior consul foreigners will be
protected. These belated assurances seem to indicate local authorities are
beginning to realize their responsibility and will exercise some measure of
control over parades and demonstrations announced for tomorrow. If there
are no acts of violence tomorrow indications are that general situation will
begin to improve.
Confidentially I am informed that Kuomintang has decided to except
Americans from the boycott which will be directed against the British and
Japanese.
Strike applies to all firms and residents in Shameen including consulate
general and also Canton-Hongkong river steamers which will be completely
tied up tomorrow.
British Navy tug will bring the mails and food supplies daily. Servants and
employees of Americans in the city and suburbs continue to work.”
MAYER
59 Secretary for Foreign Affairs in the Canton Government.

[Document 623]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State
SHAMEEN, June 24, 1925—noon.
While the demonstration of students, laborers and soldiers was passing by Shameen
about 3 o’clock yesterday afternoon heavy rifle and machine-gun firing started between
Chinese soldiers and British and French sailors lasting 20 minutes with sniping for an
hour afterwards. One French civilian was killed and several other Europeans wounded.
No Americans hurt, Chinese dead unknown but estimated at nearly a hundred.
There was no shooting last night but the situation is exceedingly tense and fight may be
resumed at any moment. As no request for assistance has come from the British and
French Concessions, American Navy force merely standing by.
It is estimated that 200 European and American refugees left for Hongkong this
morning by special steamer. Japanese women and children have taken refuge on the
Japanese destroyer. The few Americans remaining in missions near Canton believed to
be safe.
Overwhelming foreign evidence that the Chinese soldiers fired first.
U. S. S. Helena expected to arrive this afternoon from Hongkong. Consular code and
seals transferred to U. S. S. Asheville for safekeeping. Legation is informed.
JENKINS

[Document 624]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State
CANTON, June 26, 1925.
[Received August 1.]
No. 336
SIR: I have the honor to refer to my telegram of June 24, 12 o’clock noon, to the
Department and to the Legation concerning the brief but sharp firing that occurred on
the afternoon of June 23rd between Chinese troops on one side and British and French
bluejackets on the other.
Revised figures show that forty-three Chinese were killed and about seventy wounded,
including soldiers, students, and several women. On the British-French side the
casualties were one killed (a French merchant) and five wounded including the
Commissioner of the Chinese Maritime Customs, Mr. Edwards, as well as a Japanese
merchant and several British bluejackets.
As the Department will recall from my telegrams to the Legation the Chinese
announced a demonstration against “unequal treaties”, foreign concessions, et cetera,
for June 23. It was known that this demonstration would pass partly around Shameen,
and that it would probably consist of soldiers as well as students and laborers. For these
reasons the British and French authorities, as well as other foreigners residing in the
Shameen concessions, naturally became apprehensive for their safety. It was realized
that the Chinese were greatly excited because of anti-foreign propaganda and that the
procession might easily develop into a mob and attack Shameen. Warnings were
addressed to the local authorities by the British and French consuls urging that the
procession not be permitted to pass near Shameen and that the Chinese Government
take every possible precaution to prevent an outbreak.
This Consulate General also addressed a communication to the authorities calling
attention to anti-foreign propaganda and asking for an assurance that American lives
and property would be protected. No reply was received by this office from the Civil
Governor, but on the afternoon of June 22 a personal letter came from the Chief of
Police to the effect that he was doing everything he could to prevent an outbreak and
did not think there would be any disorders.
Mr. C. C. Wu, I am informed, gave verbal assurances to the British Consul General that
order would be maintained, but as the British and French consuls did not feel that the

local authorities could be relied upon to protect the foreign concessions steps were
taken for defence in the event of trouble. Barricades were constructed on the back bund
facing the native city and machine guns were placed at strategic points. The volunteer
corps was also called upon to stand by.
The procession appeared about 2:30 p.m. It was orderly and at first consisted only of
students, Boy Scouts, laborers, et cetera. For about half an hour it continued to pass
Shameen and as there was no sign of trouble onlookers began to breathe with more
ease, feeling that the danger of an outbreak was over.
It was then observed, however, that soldiers were bringing up the rear of the procession
and that they were armed. These troops consisted of Whampoa Cadets and ordinary
Cantonese contingents. No actual count could be made but it is estimated there were
more than a thousand men in line.
Just as the first of the troops reached a point in front of the Victoria Hotel near the
British bridge the procession stopped, probably because of some congestion ahead. The
troops began to show signs of nervousness and the students and civilians nearby
seemed to increase their yelling and waving. Suddenly the soldiers were seen to break
their formation and a shot rang out. This was followed by several more in rapid
succession, and then a perfect din of rifles and machine guns began.
It is impossible to say from which side the first shot was fired. The British and other
foreigners are practically unanimous in declaring that a Chinese fired first, but the
Chinese assert that the shot came from Shameen. At any rate the firing spread rapidly
along the bund and the French were hotly engaged almost immediately after the
British. Heavy firing lasted about fifteen minutes, bullets smashing into houses facing
the canal and striking the trees and roofs of buildings all over the two concessions. The
mystery is that more Europeans were not killed or wounded.
A large motorboat from the U. S. S. Asheville happened to be lying off the front bund
when the shooting commenced and it was soon filled with refugees who were taken out
to the ship. A wounded Japanese civilian was also picked up and carried over to a
Japanese destroyer lying off the concessions. Other refugees kept crowding on the front
bund and soon the boats from the warships were busy transferring people to the river
steamer Honam which had been anchored nearby with this very purpose in view.

The Honam sailed early the next morning with several hundred refugees for Hongkong.
In the afternoon another steamer left with many women and children so that all who
wanted to leave were able to get away. The Chinese section of the Honam’s crew had
struck and a detail of twelve men from the U. S. S. Asheville assisted the European
officers on the run down to Hongkong. All American and British women have left

Shameen and so have most of those of other nationalities although a few French and
Japanese women and children still remain. A few American women and children
continue to live in the missions in the suburbs but these are being urged to go.
As can well be imagined the shooting has produced much bitterness and excitement
amongst the Chinese who suffered such unexpectedly great losses. There does not seem
to be so much feeling against the French although a large proportion of the casualties
were evidently inflicted by French machine guns. The British are blamed for starting
the shooting. The Japanese had no part in the Canton affair but they are blamed for
their part in the Shanghai troubles. The boycott is directed against the British, French,
and Japanese but not against the Americans.
From their side the English insist that the first shots came from the Chinese and that the
British officers did everything in their power to stop the firing as soon as possible.
They regret the large number of casualties and especially the killing of students, but
point out that the concessions were being attacked by fully armed Chinese soldiers who
far outnumbered the European defenders. The students were near the soldiers and
probably came under an indirect fire.
It is estimated by the French that fully a thousand armed Chinese troops were facing
Shameen at the moment the shooting commenced. In addition more troops were seen
extended down the native bund.
The people on Shameen were afraid that there would be trouble while the parade was
passing and the Consuls and naval authorities concerned took every possible precaution
to prevent an outbreak, and at the same time safeguard the concessions. Everyone
deplores the affair which can only serve to increase the difficulties of an already
complicated and dangerous situation.
No foreigners have gone into the native city since the shooting and it will probably be a
long time before they will find it safe to move about freely, except Germans and
Russians who will probably wear arm bands indicating their nationality. In the suburbs
conditions are easier for the Chinese are more or less personally acquainted with the
foreigners they see there. Business is at a standstill.
No steps have been taken as yet to open negotiations for a settlement and it will
probably be some days before anything can be done. Every effort is now being directed
toward the prevention of another outbreak which could easily develop into something
far more serious than the affair of June 23.
As this is being written the French and British are busily engaged in strengthening the
defenses of the two concessions. More barricades are being erected and the system of
communication improved. There are rumors that troops are massed in the city behind
Shameen and that another demonstration may be expected shortly. The more

responsible leaders are doing their best to calm the people but the students, who are
evidently under Russian Soviet influence, are insisting that the Chinese dead must be
avenged.
No one knows what is going to happen. Each day brings a new crop of rumors, some of
which seem reasonable while others are mere nonsense. Shameen is an armed fort to all
intents and purposes and it is no exaggeration to say that a state of war exists although
there is no active warfare at the moment. The strike is complete on the island and
shipping is almost paralyzed, only a few Chinese owned steamers being in operation.
The question is, how long is it going to last? Things may go on as they are for weeks
and even months. The Chinese are almost if not quite as much inconvenienced as are
the foreigners for there is practically no communication with the outside world and
food supplies will soon be running low.
The Canton affair may and will be adjusted after a fashion, but it is evident there can be
no real stability and friendliness in China’s relations with foreigners until some plan is
found and put into effect for the readjustment of China’s status with the Powers.
I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS

[Document 625]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State
Referring to my telegram of June 24, noon. There has been no more firing but the
British report that Chinese forces massed in the city behind Shameen. Situation
continues extremely tense and renewed outbreak may occur at any time, as the Chinese
forces directed by Russians have some artillery and an aeroplane situation could
become grave. On the other hand Governor and civil authorities assure me Chinese
have no intention resorting to force. They declare also Chinese had no intention
provoking incident and bitterly resent what they claim to be an unprovoked attack by
the British. Each side accuses the other side of firing the first shot and no overtures for
a peaceable settlement yet possible. Chinese asked me to sit on an international
commission of inquiry and I signified my willingness to accept but so far no
organization perfected.
About fifty Americans mostly men still remain in and near Canton whom I advise to
leave if they can.
Demonstrations in outlying districts reported but so far no serious assaults on
foreigners.
If the commission of inquiry is duly organized am I authorized to participate?
Legation is informed.
JENKINS

[Document 626]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State
Referring to my telegram June 26, 11 a.m. Local Government has addressed notes to
the British consul general and French consul demanding retrocession of Shameen,
apology, remuneration to the families of killed, punishment of officials responsible for
shooting and withdrawal of warships.
No change in the situation generally. Members of the Government urging students and
other organizations not to renew demonstration and to protect foreigners but the
radicals insisting upon action of some sort. No demonstration today but one is expected
June 29th.
General friendliness to America which is officially [excepted] from the boycott but no
foreigners safe in the city. Conditions better in the suburbs. Soviet Russians very active
in efforts to turn affairs to their advantage. Absolutely no export and import business.
Pampanga still at Wuchow. Helena and Asheville at Canton.
Legation is informed.
JENKINS

[Document 627]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State
Referring to my telegram of June 28, 9 a.m. From what I can gather Chinese as well as
British and French would be willing to refer Canton affair to an international
commission for settlement provided commission is composed of representatives from
disinterested powers. It is becoming increasingly evident that this deplorable affair may
drag on indefinitely or become even more acute if our Government or some other so-
called neutral does not make an effort to start peace negotiations. I would respectfully
urge therefore that the Department approach the British Government and the French
Government with the suggestion that an international commission be created and that
the Canton affair be dealt with separately from Peking because I am convinced
Cantonese will never accept any terms made in Peking.
General situation unchanged. Party of American missionaries arriving from the interior
threatened by railway workmen but the police intervened. All Americans safe so far.
Legation is informed.
JENKINS

[Document 628]
The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Canton (Jenkins)
Your June 26, 11 a.m. You should tactfully decline to sit on proposed commission of
inquiry unless officially requested to do so by the British and French Consuls General
and unless common foreign interests would be furthered by your participation in which
case you should telegraph your views stating also the composition and defined objects
of the commission and await further instructions.
KELLOGG

[Document 629]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
telegrams from Canton. Following from consul general at Canton:
“July 1, 3 p.m. Demonstration announced for yesterday postponed.
Commission form of Government inaugurated today with a committee as the
executive instead of civil governor. Probably this will not affect the local
situation because the personnel is the same practically as before.
Nothing is being said at present in regard to international commission of
investigation. At any rate I do not believe I could properly serve.
Representatives should not be local people.”
MAYER

[Document 630]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State
CANTON, July 8, 1925.
[Received August 14.]
No. 340
SIR: I have the honor to call the Department’s attention to the fact that when the
possibility of an attack on Shameen seemed imminent, the Municipal Counsel [sic]
called for volunteers to serve in the Militia or Police Forces on the Island. This has
frequently been done in the past, as the Department is doubtless aware, and when the
Americans showed a disposition to offer their services in this instance I saw no reason
to interpose any objections.
When the shooting occurred on June 23 a number of Americans were actually posted
along with British, Danish, and other nationals at strategic points. The Americans
continued to serve for two days but when they found that the British and French
authorities did not intend to ask for the assistance of the American Naval forces in the
Harbor, the American volunteers declined to bear arms any further and withdrew.
This action on the part of the Americans caused some criticism at first, but the British
Consul General explained the matter to his nationals and the incident may now be
considered closed. However, I am encouraging Americans to lend their assistance in
keeping up the essential public services of a nonmilitary character, for it seems only
proper that we should bear our share of the burden so long as the strike continues. A
detail of American marines is assisting in the operation of the cold storage plant, but no
American armed forces have been landed on the concession up to this time.
The Department understands, I presume, that the British and French authorities on
Shameen have consistently opposed the landing of American or other armed forces
unless their assistance was deemed absolutely necessary, and so far as I know
American Naval commanders have respected the British and French attitude.
I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS

[Document 631]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
a.m. Steamers now stopped by strike and foreign community here entirely
dependent for transportation and mails on a merchant vessel taken over by
the British Navy. General situation seems to be less strained but there are no
indications whatever of a settlement locally. On the contrary British still
continue strengthening Shameen defenses so that island has become fortified
camp as I have reported previously. According to a statement in Hongkong
newspapers the British recently seized Norwegian vessel laden with a large
cargo of rice for Canton from a foreign port. British consul general says,
more or less seriously, present situation may continue until Christmas with
Shameen entirely closed against Chinese and suspicious foreigners. Strike of
postal employees still continues.”
“July 28, 4 p.m. It is rumored radicals will attempt to seize local government
August 1st. Five deaths from enteric fever have occurred in French
Concession during July. Because of unreliable communication at present I
suggest Legation’s telegrams to me be sent to consul general at Hongkong to
be forwarded by post or if urgent by radio.[”]
MACMURRAY

[Document 632]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
329. 1. The consul general at Canton, believing that an attack on the French and British
Concessions at Shameen by the Canton military forces is possible, asks whether it
would be advisable for the United States naval forces to unite with the French and
British forces in the defense of the island if so requested by the authorities of either
Government, or whether it would be preferable to limit their activities to aid in
removing noncombatants from danger zone and to safeguarding the property and the
lives of Americans.
2. While I do not believe in the likelihood of an attack of this sort, it seems to me that it
is none the less so obviously possible that the duty lies upon us of deciding beforehand
and authoritatively on the policy to be followed in such an event, in order that the
consul general and the senior naval officer of the American cruiser should not have to
make a decision without warning and in grave danger of extensive loss of life and of
property, on their own responsibility. This sort of a decision as to the policy to be
pursued seems the more advisable at present because of the large number of other
places in all parts of China where a situation of like nature might well occur at any
moment as a consequence of local unrest.

3. A distinction should be noted between the situation under consideration and that at
Shanghai where we take part in and share the responsibility for the administration and
protection of the foreign International Settlement. Insofar, however, as concerns
Shameen the French and British authorities have insisted on their own sole
responsibility.
4. It seems evident that our participation should not be warranted merely for the
protection of a French or a British concession. If we could in fact isolate this question
from other considerations, no doubt it might be possible that it would be preferable for
us to avoid involving ourselves in any sort of dispute to support anything like a
territorial claim for any other nation.

5. It appears, however, practically impossible to separate this problem from larger
considerations which would be brought into action in any case of this sort if the
American forces were either to remain inactive or to retire in the course of an attack
possibly directed ostensibly and at first against the British or any other nationality, but,
when thoroughly analyzed found to spring from motives in which we and other nations
would be implicated to only a lesser degree. Such action would be particularly lacking
in courtesy in cases where the lives and property of Americans were in danger of
attack. In a case of that sort it would in fact be practically impossible to give adequate
protection to American nationals without taking our part in a united plan for defense.
6. Further than the obvious precaution of withholding our naval forces from foreign
concessions in which the interests of Americans are not implicated, I acknowledge that
no way presents itself by which we can differentiate our own interests from those of
other nations, so as to avoid our possible implication as participants in defending any
foreign concession where American nationals may have become established. We have
considered the possibility of a withdrawal of Americans at any time when an attack
threatened, but aside from the regrettable effect that this would have on the feeling of
the foreigners and on the possibility of cooperation with other foreign nations whose
interests in China are in substance of the same nature as our own, I cannot help
thinking that such a withdrawal at a moment of crisis would in itself have a tendency
toward encouraging and bringing about separating hostile action on the part of the
Chinese, which would finally involve us, beyond doubt, no less than it would the nation
first attacked. Though, for the time being, the agitation against the position of
foreigners in China is concentrated principally against Japanese and British, it should
be remembered that such a distinction is, in great measure, a matter of tactics on the
part of the leaders in the agitation; and we should also not forget that to those inspiring
the attack its purpose would be perhaps not directly but none the less actually in
opposition to American interests and will be a benefit to China. It is especially the case
in Canton, which is in great measure under Soviet influence at present, that the
motivating force is antagonistic to the “imperialistic and capitalistic” powers and
opposed to the entire political and economic system of which the United States forms
as large a part as does Great Britain.
7. Hence I am unable to avoid the conclusion that in Canton and other treaty ports
where a crisis of like nature might occur, it would be preferable for the United States
naval forces to remain in order to protect American citizens and their interests and, with
that in view, it would be advisable for them to be authorized to unite in such defense
measures as the commander in his discretion may deem necessary to accomplish that
end after mediation appears no longer possible.
8. The commander of the South China Patrol has presented this same question of policy
to the commander in chief and I am sending him a copy of this telegram.

y as to the Government s por

uld appreciate an early repl

9. I sho
MacMurray

[Document 633]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
of your telegram. It should be understood, however, that there should be no
unnecessary risk of life in the protection of property and American forces should not
participate in defence of Shameen at Canton unless specifically requested so to do by
the naval authorities of countries concerned. Ordinarily this government’s policy would
be to evacuate its citizens to a place of safety and look to Chinese Government for
protection of their property, and this policy should guide American naval authorities
should British or French request contemplate a different policy in regard to the property
Above communicated to Navy.
KELLOGG

[Document 634]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)62
[Extract]
CANTON, October 16, 1925.
No. 304
SIR: I have the honor to inform the Legation that a large number of Americans have
returned to the Canton consular district during the past two weeks, including many
women and children. Most of the American missionary institutions at Canton have
reopened and the attendance averages between seventy-five and ninety percent, of
normal.
The general attitude toward Americans has shown considerable improvement during
the past month but conditions are still so unsettled that I have not deemed it proper for
me actually to advise American women and children to return. I have let it be
understood however that I did not consider the situation unduly dangerous and that if
Americans wished to come back to their homes they could do so but at their own risk.
I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS
62 Copy received by the Department on December 4.

Adherence of certain powers to treaties
concerning China signed at Washington,
February 6, 1922
[635] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Moore)
[636] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Moore)
Washington, October 1, 1925.

[Document 635]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Moore)63
Please hand following to Minister for Foreign Affairs:
“EXCELLENCY. By a note dated May 18, 1922, addressed to His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain,64 my predecessor in the office of
Secretary of State of the United States of America, in pursuance of Article 8
of the Treaty relating to the revision of the Chinese Customs Tariff and
cognate matters, signed at Washington on February 6, 1922,65 extended to the
Government of Spain on behalf of the Government of the United States,
acting for all the Government’s, a cordial invitation to adhere to the said
Treaty upon its ratification by all the signatory Governments.
The Treaty has now been ratified on all parts and has gone into effect by the
deposit with the Government of the United States on August 5, 1925, of the
ratifications of all the signatory Governments. I have the honor, therefore, on
behalf of the Government of the United States, acting for all signatory
Governments, to renew through Your Excellency to the Government of Spain
the cordial invitation of my predecessor to adhere to the Treaty, and to
express the very great pleasure with which the Government of the United
States would learn that such adherence had become effective by the receipt of
notice thereof as provided in Article 8 of the Treaty. Accept, Excellency, the
assurances of my highest and most distinguished consideration. Frank B.
Kellogg, Secretary of State of the United States of America.”
KELLOGG
[The following powers notified the American Government of their adherence to the
treaty relating to the revision of the Chinese customs tariff, signed at Washington
63 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the American diplomatic representatives in Denmark,
Norway, and Sweden.
64 Not printed.

[Document 636]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Moore)66
WASHINGTON, October 1, 1925.
SIR: I transmit herewith a communication addressed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Spain67 inviting the adherence of the Government of Spain to the Convention
between the United States, Belgium, the British Empire, China, France, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands and Portugal, relating to principles and policies to be followed in matters
You will please hand the communication with its accompanying certified copy of the
treaty to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW
[The following powers notified the American Government of their adherence to the
treaty regarding principles and policies to be followed in matters concerning China,
Mexico, January 14, 1927. Later correspondence with the Government of Mexico
disclosed that the adherence of Mexico as of the above date was premature and that the
date of effective adherence was September 29, 1927.]
representatives in Austria, Bolivia, Chile, Denmark, Germany, Norway, Persia, Peru,
Sweden, and Switzerland; on Nov. 21, 1925, to the Ambassador in Brazil; and on Apr.
23, 1926, to the Ambassador in Mexico.
67 Not printed.

Request from the Chinese Government to
the Washington Conference powers for a
readjustment of treaty relations
[637] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[638] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[639] The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
[640] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, July 1, 1925—noon.
[641] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs (Johnson)

undated
[642] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[643] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[644] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[645] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[646] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Acting Secretary of State
[647] The Secretary to the President (Sanders) to the Acting Secretary of State

[648] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[649] The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
[650] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, July 13, 1925.
[651] The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State

undated
[652] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[653] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, July 18, 1925—noon.
[654] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[655] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[656] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[657] The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State

undated
[658] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, July 23, 1925.
[659] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[660] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[661] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[662] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[663] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[664] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[665] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[666] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[667] The Secretary of State to the Minister of China (MacMurray)
[668] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[669] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[670] The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State

[671] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[672] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, August 5, 1925.
[673] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington , August 6, 1925.
[674] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[675] The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
[676] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[677] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State

[678] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, August 22, 1925.
[679] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[680] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
August 31, 1925
[682] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[683] The American Minister (MacMurray) to the Chinese Minister for Foreign
Affairs (Shen)
Peking, September 4, 1925.

[Document 637]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10 p.m.]
247. 1. Representative of Foreign Office has just handed me copy of the following
identic note addressed to the representatives of Washington Conference powers.
“With the object of further consolidating the friendly relations between China
and the foreign powers, I have the honor to address you on a subject which is
essential to the promotion of that happy mutual understanding and good will
upon which international friendship result [rests]. During recent years there
has been a steadily growing feeling shared even by many foreign statesmen
that, in justice to China as well as in the interest of all the parties concerned,
there should be a readjustment of China’s treaty relations with foreign powers
to bring them more in line [with] the generally accepted conceptions [of]
international justice and equity and more in conformity with existing
conditions in China.
It may be recalled that many of these treaties were not only concluded [a]
long time ago but were negotiated under circumstances which hardly
permitted the formulation, by full and free discussion, of the principles which
should permanently regulate the normal intercourse between China and the
foreign powers. But while designed in the first instance largely to meet the
exigencies of a particular time these treaties have been allowed to remain in
force to the present time when, the situation having been greatly changed, the
further indefinite continuance of the extraordinary political and economic
privileges and immunities therein conferred upon the foreigners seems to be
hardly warranted by circumstances. Moreover on account of restrictions
imposed by these treaties there are mutual inconveniences and disadvantages
which affect matters concerning China and the foreign powers. So long as
these inequalities and extraordinary privileges continue to exist there would
always remain causes of disaffection which are apt to produce friction and
disturb the cordial relations and good understanding between China and the
foreign powers, such as for instance can be seen in the recent deplorable
incident which took place in Shanghai.69

At the time when China joined the Allied and Associated Powers in a war
waged for upholding the sanctity of international law and the vindication of
justice, the Chinese Government was encouraged to hope for a definite
improvement of her international status and was happily assured by these
powers that they would do all that rests with them to ensure that China would
enjoy in her international relations the position and regard due to a great
country. Great therefore must be [the] disappointment to her people when
after the Great War had been won and the common cause achieved, her own
international status should remain unimproved and is in some respects even
inferior to that of the defeated nations for in [none] of them do we find the
existence of extraterritorial courts, foreign concessions, leased territories and
an externally imposed conventional tariff.
The Chinese Government has therefore on repeated occasions approached the
foreign powers concerned for a readjustment of her treaty relations.
Questions of importance for readjustment were submitted by China to the
Paris Peace Conference which, while fully recognizing the importance of the
questions raised, did not consider that they fall within the province of the
Peace Conference. A similar effort was made by the Chinese Minister at the
time of the Washington Conference which, though more disposed to consider
China’s requests, could not agree to effect any fundamental readjustment; so
that as far as substantial results are concerned very little has yet been
accomplished. More recently in a note brought both [addressed?] jointly to
the representatives in Peking of the signatory powers to the Washington
treaties and agreement, shortly after the assumption of office by the
Provisional Chief Executive, the Chinese Government again expressed the
hope that the friendly powers would give sympathetic consideration to the
well-known aspirations of the Chinese people submitted in recent years to
different international conferences by the Chinese Government, so that their
relations may be further improved to their mutual advantage. The Chinese
Government is firmly convinced that with all nations not only can their
relations with China be made more cordial but their rights and interests can
be better protected and more effectively advanced without rather than with
the enjoyment of extraterritorial privileges and immunities. I have the honor
to request you to be good enough to transmit the above to your Government
in the confident hope that the Government which you have the honor to
represent will be as much convinced as the Chinese Government is that the
readjustment of China’s treaty relations on an equitable basis in satisfaction
of the legitimate national aspirations of the Chinese people would do much to
further consolidate her friendly relations with foreign powers and that your
Government will also as fully appreciate the mutual advantages that would
result from such a course of action and will therefore give an encouraging
response to this proposal of the Chinese Government.[”]

2. Representative from Foreign Office assured me that note’s purpose twofold, first, to
take action along line of legitimate national aspiration of Chinese, second,
confidentially the note was designed to neutralize radical propaganda directed toward
immediate cancelation of so-called unequal treaties by evidencing to Chinese people
purpose of Chinese Government to initiate action at once toward readjustment of treaty
relations with foreign powers in friendly manner consonant with principles of
international law.
3. Meeting of Heads of Legation tomorrow at which Chinese note will be discussed. I
shall telegraph further thereafter.
MAYER

[Document 638]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Representatives of Washington Conference powers are today sending following
identic telegram to respective Governments in reference to identic note addressed to
them by Chinese Government under date of June 24th. Translation:
“The representatives concerned limited themselves to acknowledging the
receipt of the note in question stating that they were transmitting this
document to their respective Governments.
They are unanimous in thinking that this note responds especially to the
immediate needs of the internal situation.
In the reply to be made they consider that it would be opportune to recall that
the Conference for the Revision of the Tariff should assemble in the near
future. Likewise the Governments should propose the hastening of the arrival
of the Extraterritoriality Commission which alone is capable of studying the
question. They should state moreover that the abolition of extraterritoriality
must be dependent on equality of rights between Chinese and foreigners. It is
understood that the reestablishment of order is an indispensable preliminary.
The representatives concerned request identic instructions.”
2. As I expressed myself generally at meeting of representatives of Washington
Conference powers I consider that we should take advantage of opportunity afforded
by reply to Chinese Government’s note aforementioned to record and give publicity to
the other side of the shield; that, while reaffirming principles and policies of
Washington Conference and reassuring Chinese of our desire to go forward along that
line as soon as [may be], we should clearly indicate the practical difficulties involved
and the necessity for facing facts rather than fancies in the request which the note
presents for a readjustment of the treaty relations between China and the friendly
powers. In my opinion our reply should frankly express the hope that the Chinese
Government while demanding additional sovereign rights will commence seriously to
realize the sovereign responsibilities which the possession of those rights entails.

Furthermore, I believe we should affirm in our reply the duty of the respective
Governments concerned toward their citizens and subjects who by mutual assent of the
Chinese and the respective Governments have acquired in China commercial,
educational, and missionary rights of great value and importance both to the citizens
and subjects aforementioned and to the Chinese, the successful pursuit of which, if not
their very existence, would in all probability be seriously jeopardized should the
Governments concerned accede to the complete implication of the Chinese
Government’s note of June 24th in this period of chaos and the absence in China of a
permanent government able to enforce its mandate throughout the country or even in a
considerable portion thereof. We might further with advantage in our reply state that
the Governments concerned would be false to their public trust [should they] surrender
the privileges and immunities of their citizens and subjects in China at the present time
without first assuring themselves of the ability of the Chinese to carry out the burden of
normal nationality to which they appear to aspire.
Repeated to Tokyo.
MAYER

[Document 639]
The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
agree with the views set forth by Mayer in the latter telegram. We feel that the Chinese
proposal should be neither rebuffed nor received in such a manner as to convey an
impression that the powers are yielding under pressure, but that it should be made the
occasion of evidencing to the Chinese our willingness to consider sympathetically and
helpfully the modification of existing treaty [treaties?] for the upholding [of] Chinese
sovereignty in measure as the Chinese authorities demonstrate their willingness and
ability to fulfill their obligations and to assume the protection of the foreign rights and
interests now safeguarded by the exceptional provisions of existing treaties.
It occurs to us only to suggest that reference to the Commission on Extraterritoriality
should be so phrased as not to imply that this Commission should meet until the
Special Conference72 shall have concluded its work. It may be suggested that it would
be advisable for our Government, immediately upon ratification of the China treaties
by the French Government, to circularize to the signatory and adhering powers the
recommendation that the Extraterritoriality Commission should meet within a
[specified] period after the conclusion of the work of the Special Conference.
BANCROFT
70 Not printed.
71 John V. A. MacMurray, newly appointed Minister to China, who was en route to his
post.
72 For revision of the Chinese Customs Tariff.

[Document 640]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, July 1, 1925—noon.
made the occasion of evidencing to the Chinese our willingness to consider
sympathetically and helpfully the modification of existing treaties in measure as the
Chinese authorities demonstrate their willingness and ability to fulfill their obligations
and to assume the protection of the foreign rights and interests now safeguarded by the
exceptional provisions of existing treaties.
In discussing with your colleagues the text of the reply which each will make to the
identic notes of the Chinese foreign office of June 24 you will take occasion to impress
upon them this Government’s desire that the powers concerned expedite preparations
for the holding of the special conference regarding Chinese customs tariff stating that
this Government believes that that Conference should be requested, after
accomplishing the work required by the treaty, to make concrete recommendations
upon which a program for granting complete tariff autonomy to China may be worked
out. You will also make clear to your colleagues this Government’s desire that the
preparations for the despatch of the commission to investigate the question of
extraterritoriality be proceeded with without delay and state that this Government feels
that this commission should be requested to include in its report recommendations
upon which a program for the gradual relinquishment of extraterritorial rights may be
based which may be carried out pari passu with steps to be taken by the Chinese
Government looking to the adoption of laws and the establishment of legal institutions
capable of giving legitimate foreign interests the protection now given under the
treaties.
Before finally accepting the text of any identic note to be delivered to the Chinese
Government you will communicate text to the Department for its approval. Keep
Department informed by telegraph of developments as discussion proceeds. Repeat to
Shanghai for MacMurray.
KELLOGG

[Document 641]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)

undated
On June 30 the Chinese Minister called upon the Secretary by appointment to discuss
with him the contents of his note of June 25.73 The Chinese Minister stated, among
other things, that he had been advised informally by his Foreign Office, although he
had not been authorized to make official representations to this effect, that while that
Government had desired greatly that a conference be called to consider the question of
treaty revision it was realized that such a conference could not take place at any early
date. He stated to the Secretary that this had come to him as a result of a telegraphic
inquiry which he had made asking for some explanation of the desires of his
Government as set forth in that note. He stated that his Government felt, therefore, that
they should not, in striving for the greater end, lose what had already been gained by
the treaties signed as the result of the Washington Conference and the resolution calling
for the sending of a commission to go into the matter of extraterritoriality.
The Secretary stated that the greater question of general treaty revision involved many
difficulties. He said that this Government had from the beginning desired to expedite
the holding of the Customs Conference provided for by the Washington Conference
treaty and the sending of the commission on extraterritoriality, but that the whole
matter of the Customs Conference had been delayed pending action by France on the
China treaties, while, as regards the commission on extraterritoriality, after the first
postponement at China’s request, this Government had been unable to obtain any
unanimity on the part of the Powers concerned as regards the fixing of the date for the
sending of that commission.

The Chinese Minister asked whether this Government would be willing to urge upon
the other interested Powers the hastening of the calling of the conference on tariff
matters. The Secretary stated that we would be glad to do this. He said that he was also
willing to urge the hastening of the sending of the commission on extraterritoriality.
The Chinese Minister stated that he was sure that his Government would receive this
information with pleasure. He pointed out, however, that the conference on tariffs, as
provided for under the Nine-Power Treaty, did not in fact give to China the fiscal relief
that she desired, that what was wanted was complete tariff autonomy. Mr. Johnson
suggested that something might be accomplished if the instructions to the conference
on tariffs could be amplified to include a request or recommendations upon which a
plan for giving complete tariff autonomy might be worked out after the special tasks of
the conference had been completed. The Secretary stated that this of course was a
matter which would have to be taken under advisement.

The Chinese Minister also stated that the commission on extraterritoriality would be
merely asked to make a report, that it did not promise to accomplish anything nor did it
bind the Governments to do anything of a concrete nature. Mr. Johnson here suggested
that something might be accomplished in this regard also toward meeting the desires of
the Chinese, if there could be included in the instructions to the several commissioners
a request that they submit with their report recommendations upon which a plan for the
gradual relinquishment of extraterritoriality rights might be based. The Secretary stated
that this would have to be given consideration.
On July 1 the Chinese Minister again saw the Secretary who at this time stated to him
that the Chinese Government’s notes would have to be answered by the representatives
of the Powers party to the Washington Conference at Peking and he stated that he was
instructing the American Legation to urge upon its colleagues at Peking the hastening
of the holding of the tariff conference and the early sending of the commission on
extraterritoriality. He stated that we had already urged France to hasten action with
regard to the treaties. The Secretary did not tell the Chinese Minister that our
instructions to Peking recommended the broadening of the powers of the tariff
conference or the commission on extraterritoriality to include a request for concrete
recommendations leading to an eventual restoration to China of tariff autonomy and the
gradual relinquishment of extraterritoriality provisions.
N[ELSON] T. J[OHNSON]
73 Not printed; it is substantially the same as the Foreign Office note quoted in telegram

[Document 642]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., July 3, 1925.
[Received July 6.]
No. 677
SIR: On instructions from His Majesty’s Government, I have the honour to draw your
attention to the note recently addressed by the Chinese Government to the Corps
Diplomatique at Peking—the text of which you will no doubt have received from the
United States representative at that capital, as also the suggested reply thereto
submitted in the form of an identic telegram to their respective Governments by the
heads of the Legations concerned.
2. His Majesty’s Government are impressed by the magnitude of the issues
raised by this note, which include the question of extraterritoriality in all its
aspects and the future attitude of the Powers towards the demands of China in
such matters as the revision of treaties, the suppression of mixed courts, the
retrocession of leased territories and fiscal autonomy. They have
consequently devoted the most careful study to the suggestions contained in
the identic telegram and I now have the honour to lay before you their
comments thereon to which His Majesty’s Representative at Peking has been
instructed to conform his action.
3. In the first place, His Majesty’s Government are of opinion that the reply
to the note of the Chinese Government should make it clear that the Powers
are not prepared to discuss particular reforms, much less to review their
Treaty relations with China until order has been fully restored and the
Chinese Government have given proof of their determination to repress anti-
foreign agitations and to enforce respect for the safety of foreign lives and
property. Provided that these conditions are emphasized and placed in the
fore-front of the reply, His Majesty’s Government approve the reference to
the meeting of the Tariff Conference as worded in the identic telegram.
4. As regards the question of extra-territoriality, His Majesty’s Government
are apprehensive lest the Chinese Government interpret a promise to expedite
the meeting of the Commission as a sign of weakness on the part of the
Powers. In these circumstances, they are disposed to think that the Powers

should do no more in their reply than point out that the Commission will be
the competent body to examine this question and leave it at that.
5. The above comments, which have also been communicated to the
Japanese, French and Belgian Governments, represent the considered views
of His Majesty’s Government in the matter, and in bringing them to your
notice, I have the honour to enquire whether the United States Government
concur therein, and if so, whether they are prepared to send instructions to the
United States representative at Peking similar to those which have been
already addressed to His Majesty’s Representative.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 643]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 2:45 p.m.]
263. 1. Mr. Yoshizawa, the Japanese Minister, called upon me and stated that his
Government had instructed him to discuss informally with the British Chargé and
myself the question of more complete cooperation between the representatives of Great
Britain, Japan, and the United States in order to expedite settlement of the Shanghai
affair. He said that his Government thought that it would be of great benefit if the three
of us could be the force to lead the Heads of Legation to an early settlement of this
matter. Yoshizawa added that he had delayed complying with his instructions so that he
could consider his own opinion that from a practical standpoint it might be better to
include our French and Italian colleagues in any such cooperation. He said that the
French Minister had shown himself always willing to cooperate, that the Italian
Minister as senior minister was in a practical sense the leader of the Heads of Legation,
and that there had been and continued to be excellent cooperation and understanding
between the representatives of France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, and the United
States.
2. Yoshizawa had called upon Mr. Palairet, the British Chargé, before calling upon me
and had discussed the matter with him. Mr. Palairet had suggested that it might be
advisable to include all the Washington Conference powers in any such proposed
cooperation as the Japanese Government had suggested.
3. The Japanese Minister asked me to tell him informally what I thought on the subject.
I replied that I could only speak for myself since on a matter of this kind I would have
to ask my Government for instructions before I could give any answer that he could
make to his Government. I added that as the new American Minister was soon to arrive
I had some hesitancy even to discuss this matter, implying future action by our
Legation. I did, however, informally discuss the subject with Yoshizawa, my special
purpose being to sound him out. I told him that from a practical standpoint we believed
that the fewer persons who cooperated in a situation the better it was. I said, however,
that I fully appreciated Yoshizawa’s idea of the practical utility of having the French
and Italian Ministers join in such cooperation as the Japanese Government seemed to
contemplate. I expressed the opinion that for the purpose in view the eight Washington

Conference powers seemed a rather unwieldy combination. I raised the objection of the
national susceptibilities of treaty powers which were not represented in the Washington
Conference, experience with regard to which we had had in connection with the joint
note of December 9, 1924 from the Washington Conference powers to the Chinese
Government.74 I questioned whether it would be beneficial to create a block of
Washington Conference powers just in order to expedite results in the present situation
as such a block would be either too large or not large enough.
4. Yoshizawa and I agreed fully regarding the attitudes of the French and Italian
Governments. The former had completely changed since the settlement of the gold
franc issue and now seemed anxious to aid China in every proper way. For this reason
the French Minister doubtless would generally be in accord with what I consider to be
the American, British, and Japanese policy with respect to China, i. e., a sympathetic
attitude toward China’s aspirations, assistance in that direction by proper revision of
treaties as fast as the Chinese show ability to fulfill their responsibilities, and the
achievement by China of a stable government without foreign interference. Yoshizawa
and I agreed that the Italian attitude toward China differed rather sharply from that
stated above. We both feel that the Italian Government seems disposed to make the
satisfactory settlement by China of the Italian gold franc case and the payment to Italy
of certain former Austrian bonds a condition to a sympathetic attitude toward China
generally and specifically to wholehearted support to the early convening of the Tariff
Conference. Yoshizawa also pointed out that although two months ago France had
promised to ratify the Washington Conference treaties she had not yet done so.
5. The Japanese Minister then came to the point which I think was the reason for his
appeal to me. He said that he believed his Government contemplated a larger
cooperation between the American, British, and Japanese Governments with respect to
China than merely cooperation in the affair at Shanghai. He repeated in several
different ways this extended idea of cooperation, which gave me every reason to
believe that Japan is making a bid on a definite basis for cooperation in China of these
three powers. I told Yoshizawa that I could not express an opinion on this very
important conception and its many implications but said that I would be glad to comply
with his request to report the same for consideration by my Government. At this point I
questioned Yoshizawa as to Japan’s attitude toward China. After discussion I
summarized its attitude as I saw it as follows: With respect to Manchuria, Japan had
taken a position which it believed was vital to Japan’s existence as a nation; but as for
the rest of China, Japan wishes it to work out its own destiny free from foreign
interference so that an authoritative, stable government may be established, and Japan
believes that as concerns treaty readjustment and the like the national aspirations of
China should receive sympathetic consideration. Yoshizawa was evidently pleased to
confirm this summary as being exactly the attitude of the Japanese Government.

6. I call the Department’s attention to the statement by Waterlow in the third sentence
this telegram after my conversation with the Japanese Minister.
7. For a long time I have believed, as previously reported, that considering the situation
with respect to Japan and the Soviet Union in Manchuria, the menace in Mongolia from
the Soviet Union, and the connections which Feng Yu-hsiang76 undoubtedly has with
the Soviets and in general with the radical elements in China, the Japanese must sooner
or later decide whether to join an Asiatic block with China and the Soviet Union or to
remain, so to speak, a Western power. The proposal reported herein may well be
evidence of a decision by Japan to remain in the concert of Western powers if she can
be assured of a well-defined understanding with America and Great Britain for
cooperation in China. Japan must also realize the advantage of such cooperation in
view of the agitation against the Japanese which is now rather widespread in China.
The Japanese may have concluded that the American Government is about to assume a
more decided leadership or a certain independence of action in China showing more
willingness than the other interested powers to respond sympathetically to China’s
aspirations for readjustments in her foreign relations. Japan may therefore wish to align
herself with America both to keep us from winning undue prestige from such an
independent position and to benefit by being in some way associated with America in
the pursuance of a policy of this kind which would be popular with the Chinese.
8. Aside from the angles mentioned above with respect to such an understanding
between the American, British, and Japanese Governments as is contemplated, I will
only suggest a fact which may be worthy of serious consideration, which is that by
aligning ourselves in such an association we would be taking an important step toward
the adjustment of our relations with Japan as regards the recent immigration-law
difficulties and, of even more importance, that it would be a move toward detaching
Japan, at least for a time, from a pan-Asiatic alliance with the Soviet Union.
9. I am mailing a copy of this telegram to Tokyo.
MAYER
76 Commander in chief of the People’s Army and director general of the Northwest
Frontier Defence.

[Document 644]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington Conference Powers and to Denmark, Peru, Spain and Sweden for
American Embassy, London, from Perkins78
“From informal conversation with Waterlow79 it appears that the British
Government fully shares the view of the American Government that it is
essential to placate China by making such concessions as may be just and
practicable. Without any desire however to be dogmatic on the subject
Waterlow believes it preferable at the present moment to concentrate our
efforts on the early convening of the special conference in which real and
substantial advantages may be accorded to China rather than upon the
meeting of the extraterritoriality commission since in the present state of
China no very fundamental changes can be made in the immediate future as
the result of the investigations of the commission. He feels that the
simultaneous meeting of the conference and the commission might tend to
confuse the Chinese public mind and to result in the exploiting of the more
sentimental questions dealt with by the commission to the possible detriment
of a proper appreciation of the real advantages to be obtained from the
special conference. Waterlow regards it as inevitable that the scope of the
conference itself must eventually be broadened encompassing the whole
range of outstanding questions between China and the Powers.”
GREW
77 It was communicated also to Norway.
78 Mahlon F. Perkins of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, who
had been sent to London to confer with the British Foreign Office regarding the Special
Conference for the Revision of the Chinese Customs Tariff.
79 S. P. P. Waterlow, head of the Far Eastern Department of the British Foreign Office.

[Document 645]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., July 6, 1925.
[Received July 7.]
No. 682
SIR: In my note No. 677 of the 3rd instant, I had the honour to submit to you the views
of His Majesty’s Government regarding the reply to be returned to the note recently
addressed by the Chinese Government to the Corps Diplomatique at Peking, and I
enquired whether the United States Government would be disposed to send instructions
in the matter to the United States Representative at that capital similar to those which
had already been addressed to His Majesty’s Representative.
His Majesty’s Government now learn that the United States Representative has already
been informed of the attitude which he should adopt towards the note in question,80 and
it is understood that the tenour of his instructions is as follows:—
(1) The United States Government consider that the Chinese proposals
should be met with an expression of willingness to accord help and full and
sympathetic consideration to the modification of existing treaties in the same
measure as the Chinese Government give proof of their power and ability to
fulfil their obligations to protect foreign rights.
(2) The United States Government desire to expedite the preparations for a
tariff conference, and have instructed the United States Representative to
impress upon his colleagues the view that, when its work under the treaty has
been accomplished, the conference should make recommendations upon
which a programme for granting complete tariff autonomy may be
elaborated.
(3) The United States Representative is also to make clear that the United
States Government favour speedy preparations for sending out an
extraterritorial Commission. Furthermore, this Commission should be
requested to make recommendations upon which may be based a programme
for the gradual relinquishment of extraterritorial rights pari passu with steps
taken by the Chinese Government to establish a legal system capable of
securing the legitimate interests of foreigners.

His Majesty’s Government are in complete sympathy with the aims which these
instructions are intended to secure. At the same time, however, I am instructed to
inform you that His Majesty’s Government entertain doubts as to the wisdom of laying
down now that the Commission should be given such definite terms of reference as
those suggested above. It is the opinion of His Majesty’s Government that the
Commission should be left free to make its own recommendations, and they consider
that any attempt to indicate at this stage of the negotiations that the Powers are
prepared to go such lengths in meeting the Chinese demand for the abolition of
extraterritoriality would be fraught with danger and liable to be regarded as a
capitulation.
In these circumstances, His Majesty’s Government are generally disposed to think that
the ends common to the United States Government and to themselves can best be
secured by concentrating upon the tariff conference, and by keeping the extraterritorial
issue in the background, at any rate for the time being.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 646]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Acting Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., July 7, 1925.
[Received July 8.]
No. 683
SIR: With reference to the correspondence on the subject of the situation in China ending
with my note No. 682 of July 6th, I have the honour to inform you, by instructions of
His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, that His Majesty’s
Government are disposed to think that the dangers of the Chinese situation would be
diminished if a joint declaration could forthwith be made publicly by the nine Powers
signatory to the Washington China Treaties indicating their readiness to expedite the
tariff conference and warning Chinese factions of the consequences if the present
agitations should make a meeting of the Conference impossible. His Majesty’s
Government have accordingly drafted a declaration, the terms of which are as follows:
“The Washington Customs Treaty81 provided for the early convocation of a
conference at which by the agreement between China and the nine Powers,
certain economic measures should be adopted for the benefit of China as a
whole. The spirit animating the Powers remains today what it was then.
Various subsequent changes in the situation which have delayed the meeting
of a conference have not affected the original intentions of the Powers; on the
contrary, they have confirmed these intentions whilst the Powers themselves
consider that the objects of the Washington Conference are to fulfill an
agreement to be reached at the Tariff Conference which will require to be of a
more far-reaching and comprehensive nature than was originally
contemplated. The Powers further hope that the Tariff Conference will be but
the first step in a comprehensive revision of the treaties which they express
their willingness to undertake at the earliest opportunity. The Powers are
accordingly anxious to expedite the meeting of the Tariff Conference and to
enter upon it with the desire to devise, in co-operation with the Chinese
people, such modifications of the present tariff system as will correspond to
present needs and will supply China with the necessary resources to stabilize
her administrative system and will create those conditions of internal stability
and international accord which are necessary conditions for the assumption
by China of her proper place in the comity of Nations. The Powers are

anxious to lose no time in taking steps towards this end. But it is obvious that
no effective progress can be made so long as the present anti-foreign
agitation persists and especially so long as it expresses itself in the forms
which imply absence of any responsible authority for the purpose of
international consultation and co-operation.
The agitation now proceeding, unless the Powers have misjudged it, is
pregnant with graver possibilities than the mere disintegration of responsible
authority. It seems to be taking the form of an organized movement designed
to extort forcibly from the Powers the unconditional abandonment of their
rights and obligations conferred upon them by the present treaties. The
Powers hope that they are mistaken in this estimation, but they feel it their
duty solemnly to warn the Chinese Government that should these
apprehensions be justified, an entirely new situation will be created in which
not only will the hope of the Powers for constructive co-operation with China
be frustrated but they will be obliged to consult together as to the immediate
measures necessary to protect their interests until the realisation of these
hopes shall again become possible.”
I am directed to ascertain whether the United States Government concur in the terms of
the above declaration. Any suggestions as to its wording will be gladly received by His
Majesty’s Government.
Furthermore, I am to explain that if the nine Powers have not agreed within a week on
issuing the joint declaration, His Majesty’s Government suggest that it should be made
by themselves and the United States and Japanese Governments.
In view of this, I am directed to impress upon you the very great urgency of the matter.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 647]
The Secretary to the President (Sanders) to the Acting Secretary of State
LYNN, MASS., July 10, 1925.
[Received July 14.]
MY DEAR MR. GREW: This will acknowledge your favor of the 7th addressed to the
President,82 in which you enclosed a copy of a note received by the Department from
the British Chargé d’Affaires83 setting forth the comments of the British Government
on the issues raised by the Chinese Government’s identic notes to the Legations in
additional notes received from the British Chargé d’Affaires on the same subject, dated,
thinks in the circumstances the Secretary of State should use his judgment but
cooperate as far as possible with the other interested powers, using great care not to
have China think there is a division of counsel.
Sincerely yours,
EVERETT SANDERS
82 Not printed.
84 Not printed.
646].

[Document 648]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. My own conviction is that the present ebullition of national self-
consciousness on the part of the Chinese Government can be diverted from
actions and uncontrolled hostility to foreign rights and interests only by
consistent and scrupulous observation by the powers of the obligations
already undertaken by them at the Washington Conference for the alleviation
of what the Chinese regard as anomalous inequalities imposed upon them by
the treaty. I, therefore, feel that we should resist any temptation to deviate
from the course laid down by the Washington treaty and resolutions, and that
we would be in a stronger position if the contemplated purposes of those
agreements were to fail through the fault of the Chinese than if we were to
deny the Chinese the opportunity for a reconsideration by the treaty powers
of the several problems which the Washington Conference offered them the
opportunity to discuss. In the face of the present agitation against foreign
treaty rights, a strict adherence to the Washington Conference program seems
to me the only safe road.
powers strongly urged upon the consideration of the Chinese, but that to
make these considerations a condition precedent to a fulfillment of our
international obligation would merely inflame a popular psychology already
abnormal and prone to seek occasions for the further embitterment of feeling
against all foreigners.
3. My recommendation is, therefore, that the Department should insist upon
literal fulfillment of obligations undertaken by the powers in respect to
Special Conference and the Commission on Extraterritoriality.
MAYER
84 Not printed.

[Document 649]
The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
Office.86 Commenting on the document the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs said he
thought that the point of primary importance was complete accord between the United
States, Great Britain and Japan; that Baron Shidehara87 felt very strongly that all other
considerations were of minor importance. Japan has received the British aide-mémoire,
copy of which he gave to the Embassy, which showed, he thought, a point of view
widely different from that of the United States. He felt that the British attitude was too
stiff and that it would be unwise to offend the Chinese by practically refusing to
consider their statement. Yet Japan could not ignore the disturbances in China and
something ought to be said to make the Chinese feel that they had some responsibility
in the matter. Japanese and British had been killed without anything being done by
China to show that it felt any responsibility whatever.
So far as our instructions to Peking were concerned he felt that the Japanese were
sympathetic with paragraph 1 and with the second part of paragraph 2 dealing with
extraterritoriality. In his opinion they did not much differ from the views of MacMurray
and Shidehara as expressed in their interview in Tokyo.
With reference to the Customs Conference, he felt that it would be unwise to go beyond
the terms of the Washington Conference agreements or of existing treaties. He felt that
it would be inopportune to discuss such matters as tariff autonomy under existing
conditions.
He said that the Japanese position would be defined early this week and the Foreign
Office would then be able to discuss the matter more fully. Peking informed.
BANCROFT
86 The Legation in China had been instructed to repeat Department’s telegram No. 125,
July 1, noon, to Tokyo as telegram No. 80, with instructions to communicate it to the
Japanese Foreign Office for its information.
87 Japanese Minister of Foreign Affairs.

[Document 650]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)88
WASHINGTON, July 13, 1925.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your notes Nos. 677 and 682 of July
the Chinese Government to the Corps Diplomatique at Peking, and to the suggested
reply thereto submitted in the form of an identic telegram to their respective
governments by the heads of the Legations concerned. In considering the points raised
in the Chinese Government’s note of June 24, I have not failed to be impressed with the
magnitude of the issues raised therein which include, as you state, the question of
extraterritoriality in all of its aspects and the future attitude of the Powers towards the
demands of China in such matters as the revision of treaties, the suppression of mixed
courts, the retrocession of leased territories and fiscal autonomy.
This Government finds itself in complete accord with the British Government in its
opinion that the Chinese Government must be impressed with the necessity of giving
some concrete evidence of its ability and willingness to suppress disorders and enforce
respect for the safety of foreign lives and property, and I feel that these conditions to
any ordered and fruitful discussion regarding treaty revision should be emphasized and
placed in the forefront of any reply which may be made to the Chinese Government’s
identic note.
This Government feels very definitely, however, that the growing spirit of national
unrest in China, which, in this present situation, is being encouraged by radical
statements and ideas emanating from those holding revolutionary theories regarding
Government and the relations of states must be met by something more concrete than
mere promises of action such as were written into the new commercial treaties which
followed the settlement of the Boxer uprisings of 1900. It feels furthermore very
strongly that this condition in China can best be met by consistent and scrupulous
observance by the Powers of the obligations already undertaken by them at the
Washington Conference for the alleviation of what the Chinese regard as anomalous
inequalities imposed upon them by former treaties. While it might with truth be urged
that government in China today is ineffective, it may also be said that little opportunity
is given to any section of the Chinese people to make their government effective
because of a continued scarcity of funds necessary to the maintenance of good and
effective government. In so far as an import tariff can serve to furnish funds for
government purposes the treaty Powers cannot escape a certain direct responsibility

due to the positive control that they exercise over Chinese customs receipts through the
conventional tariffs annexed to the several treaties, and the least that these Powers can
do is to agree to an early calling of the Conference on Chinese tariff provided for in the
Treaty of February 6, 1922. Public opinion in the United States definitely favors some
such course.
As regards the question of extraterritoriality, this Government feels that definite steps
should be taken by the Powers in line with the promises made in the commercial
treaties which followed the settlement of the Boxer uprising of 1900. At that time the
promise was formally made to China by the Government of the United States that,
when it was satisfied that the state of the laws of China, the arrangements for their
administration and other considerations warranted, extraterritorial rights would be
relinquished.89 The most feasible way in which the question can be approached and
considered is to send to China the Commission provided for in Resolution V of the
Washington Conference,90 in the expectation that the investigations made by that
Commission will help to guide the treaty Powers as to what, if any, steps should be
taken as regards the possible relinquishment of extraterritorial rights at this time.
You state in your Note of July 3, 1925, that the British Government is somewhat
apprehensive lest the Chinese Government interpret a promise to expedite the meeting
of the Commission on extraterritoriality as a sign of weakness on the part of the
Powers. This Government does not share in that apprehension. It, as well as other
Governments which participated in the Washington Conference in the Autumn of 1921,
affixed its signature in good faith to the Resolution regarding extraterritoriality in
China. It is true that some responsibility for the delay in carrying out the terms of this
Resolution must be put to the account of China, which had requested a postponement
of one year in calling a conference. However, that year has long since lapsed and
nothing has been done to make effective the solemn obligations then assumed. The
conditions which now prevail in China differ only in degree from those which
prevailed while the Resolution was being adopted and since its adoption. This
Government cannot recognize that any such condition prevails which would invalidate
its undertakings embodied in the Resolution. This Government cannot believe that a
policy which consists in carrying out agreements undertaken in good faith and already
overdue can be interpreted as a sign of weakness.

It was in consideration of the above facts that this Government instructed its Legation
these considerations and because the terms of Resolution No. V do not call specifically
for anything in the way of recommendations, it was deemed advisable that the Powers
concerned should agree to instruct their Commissioners to go beyond the mere letter of
the Resolution itself and include in their report recommendations upon which a definite

program for the consideration by the Governments concerned of the question of
extraterritoriality might be based. This Government for its part desires that this be done
in order that it can have before it for consideration some feasible plan of action for the
future.
I venture to hope that the British Government will find itself so far in agreement with
the attitude outlined above as to see its way to join this Government in urging the early
calling of the Conference on Chinese Tariff and the sending of the Commission referred
to above in order that the Powers may at an early date have before them data upon
which they can determine their future course in dealing with these two of the many
questions raised by the Chinese note.
the situation in China in which you set down the text of a declaration which the British
Government proposes should be made public jointly by the nine Powers signatory to
the Washington Conference Treaties in regard to China. I note that the British
Government is disposed to believe that the making of such a declaration at this time
would assist materially in diminishing the dangers of the Chinese situation.
I have given very careful consideration to this proposal of the British Government and
feel with it that the situation now existing demands some action on the part of the
Powers which participated in the Washington Conference, which will evidence to the
Chinese their desire to see the agreements made at Washington carried out. I feel that
some such action is necessary to meet the arguments that the contrary is the case which
are now being used by agitators among the Chinese. My views as to the best way to
meet this agitation have been fully set forth above. I repeat that it is the opinion of this
Government that a strict adherence to the Washington Conference programs seems the
only safe road. I have been unable to convince myself, however, that the present is an
opportune moment for the making of any public statement with regard to conditions in
China. I am the more disposed to feel that the Powers should wait in this matter in view
of the fact that the representatives at Peking are even now considering the nature of the
replies which they will make to the Chinese Government’s identic notes of June 24. I
feel that the consideration of those replies should be expedited and that they should
form the basis of a statement which the Powers concerned can then make publicly.
As regards the text of the proposed statement quoted in your note under
acknowledgment this Government would find itself in hearty agreement as regards the
early convocation of the tariff conference. It joins the British Government in
considering that such a conference will require to be of a more far reaching and
comprehensive nature than was originally contemplated by the Treaty of February 6,
1922. This Government feels, however, that in any reply which is made to the Chinese
Government’s note of June 24 and consequently in any statement that may be made to
the public the Governments concerned should also indicate their willingness to

expedite the sending to China of the Commission provided for in Resolution No. V
passed at the Washington Conference.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
88 The views set forth in this note were repeated in substance, July 14, to the American
diplomatic representatives in Japan, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, and
Portugal to be communicated to the respective Foreign Offices of those countries for
their information.

[Document 651]

The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State24

undated
MEMORANDUM
1. The Government of Japan have observed with great satisfaction that since
the installation of Marshal Tuan Chi-jui as Provisional Chief Executive of
China, various questions of national and international importance, and
particularly those concerning the recent “Reconstruction Conference and the
Gold Franc, have been finally settled. Should China further succeed in the
work of the National Assembly and the Customs Conference, which are
expected to be held in due course of time, her position in the family of
nations will no doubt be greatly enhanced and strengthened.
2. It is a cause of regret that certain elements of the Chinese people have
recently been active in inciting strikes in Japanese cotton mills at Tsingtao,
Shanghai and elsewhere. Demands for better terms of employment soon
developed into threats and violence against employers and police, and
following the unfortunate incident at Shanghai, they have been succeeded by
anti-foreign movements directed towards the cancellation of international
arrangements. These agitations have spread rapidly to a great many localities
and foreigners have everywhere been subjected to constant danger and
molestation.
3. It is realized that the Chinese authorities in different places have been
making efforts, although with varying degrees of success, to suppress
disorder. At the same time, they have freely given their moral, if not material,
support to the movements for the revision of treaty relations, regardless of the
means employed or of the consequences involved in the support of such
movements. The note addressed by the Chinese Foreign Minister to the
Japanese Representative at Peking shows the disposition of the Chinese
Government to take advantage of the Shanghai incident for urging
consideration by the Powers concerned of many sweeping demands which
are not directly connected with the incident itself.
4. The Government and people of Japan always look with sympathy on the
legitimate national aspirations of the Chinese. The Japanese still retain bitter
memories of the regime of extraterritoriality that existed in their own country
years ago, and so their minds are naturally receptive to the Chinese appeal for
the termination of that system. They are also mindful of the manifold
difficulties with which China is now confronted in her domestic and foreign
relations, and they trust that Marshal Tuan Chi-jui will appreciate the

patience and self-restraint which they have consistently exercised at this time
when such heavy damage has been inflicted upon their countrymen.
5. It will, however, be well understood that the attainment of legitimate
national aspirations must be sought through means equally just and
honourable. Japan, during a period of twenty years, had devoted all her
energy and attention to the completion of judicial reforms before she
proceeded to the abolition of extraterritoriality within her own borders. When
the results of her labour were made evident, the Powers gladly abandoned the
immunity which they had previously enjoyed by treaty. The same immunity
is still enjoyed by foreigners in China. It is, however, by no means due to any
intention on the part of the Powers to stigmatize the Chinese people. It is
based on the actual necessity inherent in and consequent upon the present
inefficiency in the administration of justice. No attempt is likely to succeed
which is designed to remove any effect without removing its cause. On the
other hand, if the Chinese Government should decide to introduce
immediately necessary reforms in the administration of justice, and thereby
to prepare the way for the termination of extraterritoriality, they may reckon
upon the wholehearted co-operation of the Japanese Government in common
with the other countries.
6. It further seems extremely unfortunate that the present agitations of the
Chinese for the revision of treaty relations should be closely associated with
activities looking to the destruction of industrial organization. So long as
strikes in factories are no more than a means to secure better conditions of
employment, they shall give no occasion for official interference. But when
they represent organization to undermine the whole structure of industry, they
will prove a cause of serious danger as much to China herself as to other
countries.
7. The Japanese Government are of the opinion—
(a) that the questions directly connected with the Shanghai incident
shall first of all be brought to a final adjustment as quickly as
possible;
(b) that thereupon, the questions concerning the jurisdiction of the
Mixed Court, the organization of the Municipal Council and other
kindred matters in Shanghai shall next be taken up and settled in
the light of local requirements;
(c) that finally the questions of extraterritoriality and of customs
tariff shall be disposed of, in conformity with the terms and spirit

of the arrangement reached at the Washington Conference;
(d) that all bona fide labour disputes concerning the terms of
employment may be left for direct discussion between the
representatives of capital and labour, and no agitation from sources
outside the immediately interested parties should be permitted to
interfere;
(e) and that at the same time, it rests with the Chinese Government
to carry out fully and firmly their obligations affording protection
to the lives and property of foreigners, and to see the realization of
China’s just aspirations, with the sympathy and understanding of
the Powers.
8. If, as [is] confidently hoped, Marshal Tuan Chi-jui should face the
situation with determination on the line of thought and action above
suggested, the Government of Japan will be happy to do whatever lies in
their power in supporting such a policy conjointly with other Powers.
Ambassador informed him that it contained statements which were communicated by
the Japanese Minister in China to the American Minister in China and, on July 10,
informally to the Chief Executive of the Chinese Government.

[Document 652]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 10:50 p.m.]
regarding the situation at Shanghai, the Japanese Minister inquired whether I was
informed of the tenor of his conversation with Mayer. Yoshizawa urged that the
American, British, and Japanese Governments cooperate in seeking a solution of the
present crisis. It seemed to me that he somewhat conspicuously avoided referring to
more general cooperation.

2. Yoshizawa inquired regarding the willingness of the United States to cooperate in the
particular matter under consideration. I told him that personally I believed that my
Government would welcome heartily cooperation on the basis contemplated as I
understood it, i. e., not an agreement restricting the freedom of action which might be
considered by some power to be necessary, not a set of obligations, but rather a state of
mind based upon the realization that the powers concerned have common interests and
purposes, confidence in each other, and a spirit of accommodation. Yoshizawa said that
he was pleased with this tentative expression of my opinion. He suggested that after I
had had an opportunity to consider it we should discuss the matter further.
3. As there have been exacting and incessant discussions among the Ministers with
respect to the situation at Shanghai, I have not been able to find an opportunity to
resume my discussion with my Japanese colleague without giving an impression of
emphasis which I am afraid would be misunderstood. I am waiting for a chance for a
more apparently spontaneous resumption of my conversation with Yoshizawa. In the
meantime I submit to you my own suggestion on behalf of the Japanese Government.
with Baron Shidehara on June 30. From our discussion it seems to me that we may
assume that there is such a substantial agreement in points of view between the
Japanese and us that we can work in harmony with respect to the general situation in
China with special reference to the necessity for envisaging the growth of Chinese
national feeling and adapting ourselves to it. I believe the Japanese desire to work

along the same lines with us and are even ready to make further concessions to our
views so as to maintain solidarity with us. The British Government likewise has for the
same reason shown a willingness in the past to work in harmony with us. The United
States, Great Britain, and Japan, apart from Russia, have the largest interest in China
and as a result are more disposed to take long views instead of seeking small temporary
advantages, as the Italians, for example, do. It seems to me, therefore, that there is an
opportunity for these three powers to coordinate their general policies toward China
and whenever possible harmonize their individual actions with the purposes which they
hold in common.
5. I somewhat fear, however, that the Japanese may have in mind some more definite
object involving some sort of tripartite agreement which would deprive us of a freedom
of action we would not be willing to relinquish and which would also produce a
psychological result that might outgrow the scope of the original agreement, as did the
Anglo-Japanese Alliance. My doubt on this score is increased because Yoshizawa
seems to have given some emphasis to the differentiation which Japan made between
her interests in Manchuria and in the rest of China. There would seem to be no
occasion at present for Japan to seek assurances as to the validity of her vested interests
in Manchuria, whatever may be the fact as to the greater amount of concern which she
may have reason to feel respecting her interests in that area. As the experience of the
Anglo-Japanese Alliance, the Lansing-Ishii Agreement, and Consortium negotiations
indicated, it is not possible to give public recognition to any special concessions or
claims regarding a particular region in China without laying the basis for
misunderstandings. I consider the chief value of the four-power Pacific pact to be that it
replaced the Anglo-Japanese Alliance with an understanding clearly disconnected with
the continent of Asia. Furthermore, the Washington Conference prepared the way for
the cancelation of the Lansing-Ishii Agreement. I would consider it unfortunate for us
to become involved in any new understanding which would in any degree revive the
effects of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance and the Lansing-Ishii Agreement.
6. I fear that any agreement definitely identifying ourselves with Great Britain and
Japan would be a positive disadvantage to our interests, apart from any question of
reviving the understandings mentioned above. This is particularly true at a time when
Chinese feeling against both the British and Japanese is aroused to an unexplainable
and unnatural degree. I do not think we should seek to disassociate our responsibilities
and interests from those of the British and Japanese and, in fact, I have taken the liberty
of assuring the British Chargé that we do not intend to try to exploit the agitation
against the British to their disadvantage. Nevertheless, I am becoming daily more
impressed that it would be unwise to place ourselves in the position of espousing the
cause either of the British or of the Japanese. In the present undeveloped stage of
Chinese political thinking, hatred first of the British and secondly of the Japanese is the
consuming passion. The United States is being eagerly watched to see whether it is pro-
Chinese or whether it is pro-British or pro- Japanese. I think we can work honorably

with the British and Japanese and yet not quixotically identify ourselves with them in
such a way as to bring upon ourselves a share of the odium in which the Chinese hold
them.
7. It is my feeling, therefore, that, while carefully avoiding accepting any commitments
or obligations which might hinder us from maintaining our own policies and views
regarding China, we should cordially welcome any offer from the British and Japanese
to work as far as possible in a spirit of harmony with them.
MACMURRAY

[Document 653]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, July 18, 1925—noon.
to the attitude that should be taken by us. According to statements appearing in
newspapers here, a working agreement between the United States, Great Britain, and
Japan was in effect. This statement has been denied by me, but I have stated that of
course Great Britain, Japan, and all the powers interested in China are being consulted
by us. In my opinion we should not have any agreement with the powers whereby our
general policy, as set forth in my instruction No. 125 of July 1 and in my note to the
the memorandum handed by the Japanese Minister in Peking to the Chief Executive of
China,94 the substance of which was cabled to you in the Department’s No. 151 of July
16,95 that the views of Japan, except for the insistence on the Shanghai settlement
before taking up any of the other matters, are practically along the same line as the
views of the United States Government. The Shanghai settlement seems to me to be a
special matter, very desirable of course, but the general situation should not depend
upon that settlement. Considering that Japan has communicated its views to the
Chinese Government, and in the absence of an agreement by the other Governments to
an identic note of the sort proposed by us, a statement of your views is desired as to
whether it would not be wise for our views, substantially as given in the notes referred
to above, to be outlined in a separate note to China in reply to its note of June 24.
KELLOGG
portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651].
95 Not printed.

[Document 654]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., July 20, 1925.
[Received July 21.]
No. 701
SIR: I have the honour to inform you that His Majesty’s Government have given the
most careful consideration to the views of the United States Government as set out in
your note of the 13th instant regarding the suggested reply to the representations
recently addressed by the Chinese Government to the Corps Diplomatique at Peking.
The conclusions which His Majesty’s Government have now arrived at are as follows:
— After the fullest possible review of the facts of the situation His Majesty’s
Government are still of the opinion that it would be inadvisable to make any delay in
acquainting the Chinese Government with the attitude of the Powers. In this opinion
they are supported by the replies received from the other governments whom they have
consulted. Nevertheless, in deference to the views of the United States Government,
His Majesty’s Government are prepared to endorse the proposal submitted by the
Italian Government96 which appears to be in substantial accord with the procedure
contemplated by the United States Government. His Majesty’s Government are also
prepared to adopt a series of amendments which the Japanese Government have
proposed to the draft joint declaration conveyed to the Acting Secretary of State in my
note No. 683 of July 7th. I am forwarding the text of these suggested amendments
under cover of a separate note and a perusal of them will show that they go far to meet
the views of the United States Government regarding the Commission to consider the
question of extraterritoriality. At the same time, however, His Majesty’s Government
would deprecate giving the investigations of this Commission so distinct a lead as is
implied in the relevant passages of your note under reference.
Taking into account the above considerations, which call for an amplification of the
proposals conveyed to you in my note No. 677 of July 3rd last, His Majesty’s
Government are of opinion that the reply of the Corps Diplomatique at Peking to the
representations of the Chinese Government should consist:
(1) of an emphatic statement that there can be no discussion of particular
reforms much less a review by the Powers of their treaty relations with China
until the Chinese Government have given evidence of their ability and
willingness to suppress disorders and to enforce respect for the safety of

foreign lives and property and put an end to strikes and agitations which are
harmful to Chinese and foreign commercial interests.
(2) of a reminder that the Powers have throughout shown willingness to
undertake a full enquiry into the facts of the Shanghai riots and to discuss
results with the Chinese Government. Extraneous matters mentioned in the
thirteen Articles relating to Shanghai, but not immediately connected with the
riots, must form the subject of separate negotiations which the Powers are
prepared to undertake at an early date.
(3) of the text of the proposed declaration arranged in a manner to suit its
context in the reply and revised in accordance with the suggested Japanese
amendments which appear in the main to meet such modifications as have
been proposed by other Powers.

Whilst disposed to think that the exact text of the reply and the question of publicity
can best be left to the discretion of the Corps Diplomatique at Peking His Majesty’s
Government consider that the whole matter should be expedited in order that the
Chinese may be given no further cause to doubt the sincerity of the Powers with regard
to the fulfilment of their obligations under the Washington Treaties.
I accordingly have the honour to request that you will be so good as to acquaint me at
the earliest possible moment with the attitude of the United States Government towards
the above proposals. In the event of the United States Government concurring therein
His Majesty’s Government are prepared to recommend the change of procedure as
outlined above to the other Powers concerned, the majority of whom have already
intimated that they approve action and the draft declaration in the form originally
proposed.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 655]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., July 20, 1925.
[Received July 21.]
No. 702
SIR: With reference to my immediately preceding note I have the honour to inform you
that the Japanese Government have suggested the following amendments to the
proposed joint declaration,97 the draft text of which I conveyed to you in my note No.
683 of July 7th.
After the words “as a whole” add “The Washington Conference further passed a
resolution for the establishment of an international Commission to enquire into the
existing conditions of the administration of justice in China with a view to the eventual
relinquishment by the several Powers of their respective rights of extraterritoriality.”
Before the words “have not affected” insert “and Commission”.
Delete the passage in the declaration from “while the Powers themselves consider that”
down to the words “earliest opportunity” and substitute therefor “and the Powers
declare their willingness to consider sympathetically and to help fully the just and
reasonable aspirations that the Chinese people may seek to attain through means
equally legitimate.”
After the words “expedite meeting of the Tariff Conference” add “and Commission on
question of extraterritoriality.”
Delete from “present tariff system” to “towards this end” and substitute “present tariff
and judicial arrangements as will give effect to the terms and spirit of the agreement
reached at the Washington Conference and will materially contribute to the
establishment of those conditions of internal stability and international accord which
are necessary for the assumption by China of her proper place in the comity of
nations.”
Delete from “anti-foreign agitation” down to the words “present government [present
treaties?]” and substitute therefor “agitation threatening the security of foreign lives
and property persists in China and especially so long as it expresses itself in the form of
an organized movement designed to extort forcibly from the Powers the unconditional

abandonment of rights and interests assured to them by present treaties. Such agitations
seem to be pregnant with graver possibilities than the mere disintegration of
responsible authority.”
In the last sentence the words “not only will” should be deleted and the sentence itself
should end with the words “the hope of the Powers for constructive cooperation with
China will be frustrated.”
His Majesty’s Government approve the above proposed amendments to the draft
declaration and in bringing them to your notice, I have the honour to express the hope
that the United States Government may also be disposed to concur in their adoption
and with the suggestion that the revised text of the declaration should be embodied in
the reply to the representations of the Chinese Government.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON
97 The text of the Japanese draft as received by the Department on July 21 is printed on

[Document 656]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., July 20, 1925.
[Received July 21.]
No. 703
SIR: I have the honour to refer to my immediately preceding notes regarding the reply to
be returned by the Diplomatic Body at Peking to the representations addressed to them
by the Chinese Government on June 24th last.
His Majesty’s Government now inform me that the Italian proposal, to which reference
was made in paragraph two of my note No. 701, is that the identic reply by the Powers
to the above-mentioned Chinese representations should embody and itself constitute
the public declaration previously suggested by His Majesty’s Government.
I have [etc.]
(For His Majesty’s Minister)
JOHN BALFOUR

[Document 657]

The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State22

undated
The Washington customs treaty provided for the early convocation of a conference at
which, by agreement between China and the Powers, certain economic measures
should be adopted for the benefit of China as a whole. The Washington Conference
further passed a resolution for the establishment of an international commission to
inquire into the existing conditions of the administration of justice in China, with a
view to eventual relinquishment by the several Powers of their respective rights of
extraterritoriality.
The spirit animating the Powers remains today what it was then. Various subsequent
changes in the situation which have delayed the meeting of the conference and the
commission have not affected the original intentions of the Powers; on the contrary,
they have confirmed these intentions, and the Powers declare their willingness to
consider sympathetically and helpfully just and reasonable aspirations that the Chinese
people may seek to attain through means equally legitimate.
The Powers are accordingly anxious to expedite the meeting of the Tariff Conference
and the commission on the question of extraterritoriality, with the desire to devise in
cooperation with the Chinese people such modifications of the present tariff and
judicial arrangements as will give effect to the terms and the spirit of the agreement
reached at the Washington Conference, and will materially contribute to the
establishment of those conditions of internal stability and international accord which
are necessary conditions of the assumption by China of her proper place in the
community of nations. But it is obvious that no effective progress toward this end can
be made so long as the present agitation threatening the security of foreign lives and
property persists in China, and especially so long as it expresses itself in the form of an
organized movement designed to extort forcibly from the Powers the unconditional
abandonment of the rights and interests assured to them by the present treaties. Such
agitation seems to be pregnant with graver possibilities than the mere disintegration of
responsible authority.
The Powers hope that they are mistaken in this estimate. But they feel it their duty
solemnly to warn the Chinese Government that should these apprehensions be justified
an entirely new situation will be created in which the hope entertained by the Powers
for a new era of constructive cooperation with China will be frustrated.
98 This Japanese draft of the proposed joint declaration in reply to the Chinese note of

[Document 658]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, July 23, 1925.
all dated July 20, 1925, with further reference to the suggested reply to the
representations recently addressed by the Chinese Government to the Corps
Diplomatique at Peking. The Government of the United States is in complete accord
with the opinion of the British Government that it would be inadvisable to make any
delay in acquainting the Chinese Government with the attitude of the Powers. It is
gratified to learn from your note No. 701 that the British, Japanese and Italian
Governments agree with the views of this Government that the best way to meet the
questions raised in the Chinese Government’s note is to announce the willingness of the
Powers concerned to proceed at an early date to the fulfillment of the undertakings
entered into at the Washington Conference in regard to the calling of the Special
Conference on Tariffs and the sending of the Commission on Extraterritoriality. At
present the only point at which there appears to be any lack of accord in the views of
the Powers is in regard to the precise phraseology of the communication whereby the
attitude of the Powers will be communicated to the Chinese Government.
Careful consideration has been given to the view of the British Government that the
reply of the Diplomatic Body at Peking should embody “an emphatic statement that
there can be no discussion of particular reforms, much less a review by the Powers of
their treaty relations with China until the Chinese Government have given evidence of
their ability and willingness to suppress disorders and to enforce respect for the safety
of foreign lives and property and put an end to strikes and agitations which are harmful
to Chinese and foreign commercial interests.” The American Government believes
itself to be in substantial accord with the attitude of the British Government upon this
point in the sense that it is obviously impracticable for the Special Conference to be
convened in the midst of civil war or under conditions of anti-foreign agitation which
might in any way prejudice or hamper its deliberations or its complete freedom of
action. As a matter of practical policy, however, this Government is of the opinion that
it would be preferable not to make the complete restoration of order by the Chinese
Government a condition precedent to the discussion of particular reforms or a review of
treaty relations because of the possible difficulty of attaining subsequent unanimity
among the Powers as to the fulfillment of the condition desired. This Government
believes that it will suffice to convey fair warning to the Chinese Government of its
responsibility for the preservation of order, the suppression of antiforeign agitation, the

protection of the persons and property of foreigners, and the maintenance of conditions
which will make it possible for the Conference to function, clearly indicating the
definite intention of the Powers to hold the Conference in the manner provided by
treaty and placing squarely before the Chinese Government the fact that it will be that
Government’s responsibility alone, if conditions remain or become such that the
Conference cannot convene as intended. By this method of approach, it is believed that
the end desired may be equally as well achieved without at the same time running the
risk of creating another issue between the Chinese Government and the Powers, or of a
division among the Powers themselves, as to the holding of the Conference.
The Government of the United States feels in short that to include in the note an
emphatic statement that there can be no discussion of particular reforms, much less a
review by the Powers of their treaty relations with China until the Chinese Government
has given evidence of its ability and willingness to suppress disorders, strikes and
agitations, would tend to defeat its own purpose. It is felt by this Government that the
primary effect of convening the customs conference and the Commission on
Extraterritoriality would afford the Chinese Government the very means by which it
could effectively deal with the situation, and without which it would remain impotent.
The conditions laid down by the British Government would in the opinion of the
Government of the United States create in the minds of the Chinese Government and
people a suspicion that the Powers were merely endeavoring to find grounds for
delaying the carrying out of their commitments of the Washington Conference and far
from exercising a calming effect on the country would tend to add new stimulus to the
disorders, strikes and agitations.
The Government of the United States has no objection to the views of the British
Government that the reply should indicate the willingness of the Powers to undertake a
full inquiry of the facts into the Shanghai riots.
The Government of the United States desires to call the attention of the British
Government to the fact that the proposed reply to the Chinese note suggested by the
Japanese Government, in amendment to the British proposal of July seventh, does not,
as does the British proposal, suggest that the Powers are willing to take steps for the
comprehensive revision of the treaties at an early opportunity. It feels that some
reference should be made to this in the proposed reply.
The Government of the United States agrees with the British Government that the exact
text of the reply and the question of publicity can best be left to the discretion of the
Corps Diplomatique at Peking. In order that the British Government may understand
the views of the Government of the United States as to the nature of the reply which it
would like to see transmitted to the Chinese Government I quote the following text
which is being communicated to Mr. MacMurray at Peking for consideration with the
representatives of the other Powers in Peking.99

“Careful consideration has been given to the important questions raised in the
note of the Chinese Government by the Government of the United States,
which has for some time been aware of the growing feeling in China in favor
of a readjustment of the Chinese treaty relations with the foreign Powers, and
has watched the growth of that sentiment with a constant and sympathetic
interest. It is believed that the Chinese Government does not require to be
reminded of the concrete evidence of this interest which has been made
manifest on each occasion when a question of treaty revision has occupied
the attention of the two countries. The United States is now prepared to
consider sympathetically and helpfully the Chinese Government’s proposal
for the modification of existing treaties in measure as the Chinese authorities
demonstrate their willingness and ability to fulfill their obligations and to
assume the protection of foreign rights and interests now safeguarded by the
exceptional provisions of those treaties. It is because of a most earnest desire
to meet the aspirations of the Chinese Government that the Government of
the United States desires to impress upon the Chinese Government the
necessity of giving concrete evidence of its ability and willingness to
suppress disorders and enforce respect for the safety of foreign lives and
property.
“My Government sympathizes with the feeling of the Chinese Government
that the tariff schedules attached to the various treaties between China, the
United States and other Powers have become a severe handicap upon the
ability of China to adjust its import tariffs to meet the domestic economic
needs of the country. It must not be forgotten, however, that these tariffs were
first inaugurated in 1842 and they were a modus operandi originally devised
to meet and remedy a condition which had been a fertile source of friction in
the relations between the two countries due to the uncertainties connected
with the rates and methods of collecting the then existing tariffs. Schedules of
those tariffs were seldom available for the information of the merchant, who
was hampered in his business by the unusual abrupt and various methods in
the assessment and the collection of the duties. It is the belief of my
Government that the conventional tariff was welcomed, not alone by the
United States and other Powers, but by China, as a diplomatic solution of
what had proved to be a very vexatious question.
“Since the revision of the treaty relations between the United States and
China of 1903, the United States has given particular attention to every
evidence of effort on the part of the Chinese Government in the direction of
fiscal reform which could be taken as an assurance that the old cause of
international friction need no longer be feared and that the conventional tariff
could be abandoned.

“It was at the time of the negotiation of the Commercial Treaty of 19031 that
the Chinese Government expressed a desire to reform its judiciary system
and to bring it into accord with that of western nations. The United States
agreed to give every assistance to such reform and stated that it would be
prepared to relinquish extraterritorial rights when satisfied that the state of
the Chinese laws, the arrangement for their administration and other
considerations warranted it in so doing. Having in mind this promise, my
Government has observed each measure that the Chinese Government and its
people, during the twenty two years which have passed, have taken for the
establishment of an independent judiciary and the enactment of laws for the
administration of justice. It has been gratified to note the progress that has
been made in this connection. The establishment of courts and the enactment
of laws, however, do not in themselves meet all the requirements of the
situation. Courts cannot function and develop properly or consistently
without the aid of a stable government, capable and willing to maintain them
and enforce their findings and decisions. It is regretted that the inability of
the Chinese Government during the past several years fully to enforce the
mandate of its authority has made it difficult for the courts and judiciary
already established to function in a normal manner.
“The questions of the conventional tariff and the extraterritorial rights under
which citizens and subjects of the treaty Powers reside in China are two of
the important questions raised by the Chinese Government’s note. Both
received consideration at the Washington Conference and it is the belief of
the Government of the United States that the most feasible method for
dealing with them is by a constant and scrupulous observance of the
obligations undertaken at that Conference. To that end the Government of the
United States is ready to appoint its delegates to the Special Conference on
Chinese tariff matters provided for in the treaty of February 6, 1922,2 and is
furthermore ready to accept any reasonable proposal for extending the scope
of that Conference to enable it to deal fully and completely with all matters
related to its purpose. My Government is also willing, either at the tariff
conference or at a subsequent time, to take up the subject of a comprehensive
revision of the treaties, looking toward ultimate tariff autonomy.
“Before it can form any opinion as to what, if any, steps can be taken to meet
the desires of the Chinese Government in regard to the question of
extraterritoriality and those special sanctions of the treaties under which its
citizens live and conduct their enterprises in China, my Government desires
to have before it more complete information than has heretofore been
available, and the most feasible way in which the question can be approached
and considered is to send to China the commission provided for in Resolution
V of the Washington Conference3 in the expectation that the investigation

made by that commission will help to guide the treaty Powers as to what, if
any, steps should be taken as regards the relinquishment, by gradual means or
otherwise, of extraterritorial rights at this time. My Government is now ready
to appoint its commissioner to sit with the commissioners of the other
interested governments in accordance with that resolution and hopes that that
commission may be able to proceed at an early date to begin the work of
collecting data necessary to enable it to make a report. It is prepared to
instruct its commissioner to join his colleagues in including in their report
recommendations based upon their findings which will enable the
governments concerned to consider what, if any, steps may be taken with a
view to the relinquishment of extraterritorial rights.”
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
99 The text of the draft reply was also telegraphed to the American diplomatic
representatives in Belgium, Denmark, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands, Norway, Peru, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden with instructions that it be
communicated to the respective Foreign Offices.

[Document 659]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)4
you by Tokyo July 22.5
Department has now received British Embassy’s reply to its note, text of which was
[Here follows the substance of the three notes from the British Chargé, dated July 20,
also the text of the Department’s reply, dated July 23, printed supra, which contains an
alternate draft reply to the Chinese note of June 24.]
You will use above quoted text as basis for discussing with your colleagues the texts of
replies which will be made to Chinese Government’s note and evidence of the attitude
that this Government desires to take. Department does not insist on wording as given
but desires opportunity to approve any suggested changes.
Repeat to Tokyo as Department’s No. 92 omitting last paragraph, referring to Tokyo’s
Department’s reply to British Embassy to Japanese Foreign Office for its information.
KELLOGG
4 See last paragraph for instructions to repeat to Tokyo as Department’s No. 92.
5 The Japanese proposal referred to is the same as the Japanese draft reply to the
Chinese note of June 24, handed to the Secretary by the Japanese Ambassador on July
6 Telegram No. 148 not printed.
7 Not printed.

[Document 660]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
submit formally to colleagues until corrected.
2. I nevertheless took occasion this morning to read it to my Japanese colleague who
expressed himself gratified by the fact that despite somewhat different distribution of
emphasis our draft seems to represent substantially the views of his Government save
insofar as it refers to tariff autonomy in the concluding sentence of fourth [fifth]
paragraph of your draft.
3. I had myself intended to suggest that that sentence be revised to read “My
Government is also willing either at the Tariff Conference or at a subsequent time to
take up the subject of a renewed consideration of the treaties with a view to the
possibility of ultimate further relaxation of the provisions restricting the rates of duty
leviable upon imports and exports.” The phrase “tariff autonomy” is one of the
catchwords of the radical movement and has acquired connotations of a sort that make
its use dangerous because we could not control or even foresee the constructions which
might be placed upon it by the Chinese public. The same is in less degree true of the
phrase “comprehensive revision.”
4. In the following paragraph I also suggest the substitution of the word “safeguards”
for “sanctions” in view of the confusion that might arise from the very different
significance of this word as used by the French.
5. While asking authority to make these amendments and reserving possible comment
upon minor points let me say that in substance and in tone I think this draft is
admirably adapted to meet the present situation. I propose to discuss it next informally
with British Chargé d’Affaires and the Italian Minister and upon getting a satisfactory
reading will communicate it officially to representatives of powers signatory and
adherent to Washington customs treaty and resolution on extraterritoriality.
6. Should it prove impossible to obtain almost immediate concurrence of those
representatives in an identic note based upon your draft I strongly recommend that we
send our own note and let the others send what they see fit in reply to the Chinese note
of June 24. It would strengthen my hand in dealing with indecision and petty criticisms

which I apprehend on the part of certain of the colleagues if you were to authorize me
in my discretion to say that we are prepared to act in that manner. In that event it seems
to me that it would be advisable that no two representatives should send notes in
identical terms lest we thereby give the Chinese more convincing evidence of
incomplete solidarity among the interested powers than if each were to reply separately.
Repeated to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

[Document 661]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Received 7:40 p.m.]
293. 1. It may be helpful to the Department to receive an analysis of the tentative
impressions I have thus far been led to form in regard to the present situation in China
which seems to me more critical than any since Boxer year. Among the vicinal
elements I have found Chinese feeling, primarily racial, secondarily national, aroused
to an emotional fervor which I was scarcely prepared to realize even after a dozen years
of observing the growth of national self-consciousness in China. The Shanghai incident
seems to have awakened instincts and passions hitherto dormant, and given an element
of fanaticism to what were behind the somewhat unsympathetic and desultory
aspirations of the small articulate portion of the Chinese people.
2. I am not inclined to believe that an outburst of feeling has resulted solely or even
primarily from Bolshevik incitement. The propaganda of the Soviets has no doubt
hastened and given direction and impetus to the new development, supplying it with
catch words and lending it the encouragement of Soviet moral and material support; but
the movement seems to me to be fundamentally an evolution of native Chinese thought
and feeling.
3. It is so much a matter of psychological rather than material considerations that I feel
that any attempt to evaluate the situation must take account of imponderable emotional
elements far more than of any concrete claims or grievances. The basic factor seems to
be that the Chinese, in common with other Asiatic peoples, have particularly since the
war been growing more favorably self-conscious, less in awe of the western peoples,
and more determined to assert themselves and resent the assumed superiority of the
white races. Insofar as it was political in character, that tendency has, I believe, been
fully appreciated and discounted by the Department, which has foreseen the difficulty
if not in fact the impossibility of maintaining special treaty rights in the face of growing
nationalism in China.

4. That tendency has recently been vastly complicated however by more subtle
elements of feeling latent in the minds of the Chinese and now brought to the surface
by an emotional upheaval. Chinese who were heretofore most friendly and congenial
with foreigners are now stirred to intolerance and pour out of their memories long

stored-up recollections of abuses and indignities on the part of foreigners towards their
people—instances of jostling off the sidewalks, of the kicking of rickshaw coolies, and
the like. Even though it expresses itself in political terms, the present crisis of feeling, it
seems to me, is to be construed as a revulsion against what the individual Chinese feels
to be the offense to his personal dignity and self-esteem implicit in the overbearing
attitude of the white man towards the Chinese. It is an inferiority complex which under
the stress of an almost nation-wide excitement prompts him to a hysterical self-
assertion that is subjective rather than objective, and that involves antiforeign feeling
only indirectly and as an incident to the assertion of self.
5. This feeling has been further complicated by the fact that thinking Chinese are aware
of the failure they are making in the organization of their national life and morbidly
conscious of the poor showing that they have made in the eyes of foreign nations. It is
especially true of Chinese human nature that it flinches from recognition of its own
deficiencies and by an instinctive subconscious process seeks excuses in the action of
others. It is natural and easy for the Chinese to gloss over the miserable political
conditions which they realize and resent by reference to such catchwords as unequal
treaties or foreign imperialism.
6. Under the impulse of this passionate determination no longer to be “looked down
upon” there seems to be coming about a further change in the attitude of the Chinese
towards their obligations. It is unfortunately true that for several years they have been
growing more lax and indifferent towards such standards of honesty and responsibility
as used to be traditional in this country. That was a negative attitude however; now
there is apparent a tendency towards positive repudiation of obligations. Not only the
professional radicals … but even certain sober and conservative elements appear to be
drifting into a state of mind that takes it for granted that treaty obligations must be
repudiated as incompatible with the sovereignty and dignity of the nation. Even Hsiung
Hsi-ling, once Prime Minister under Yuan Shih-kai, has argued to me that China could
not take part in the Special Conference or the Commission on Extraterritoriality as such
participation would be an acknowledgement of the right of powers to dictate to China
in the matters involved. In the course of our conversation he was altogether frank in
acknowledging that China would not for instance be capable now or in the proximate
future of fulfilling the judicial functions that would devolve upon her if we were to give
up extraterritoriality. But despite this admission he insisted that this inequality in the
treaties must be adjusted by China without regard to the pretensions of the powers.
7. A less radical view was presented to me by Sun Pao-chi, who was Minister for
Foreign Affairs under Yuan and more recently Prime Minister. He came apparently at
the instance of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to whom I had taken occasion to say
that we stood upon the provisions of the Washington Conference as affording the
means to make progress towards the realization of China’s aspirations in the matter of
customs and extraterritoriality. Sun urged that the Washington Conference decisions

which have been in abeyance for three years and more mean nothing to the radical
element whose opinions the Government is not in a position to ignore; and that to
strengthen the position of the Government against them the powers in their replies to
the Chinese Government’s notes of June 248 should at least hold out hopes of a new
conference within a year to reconsider the revision of the whole treaty relationship
between China and the powers. He was quite candid in making clear the view that this
suggestion was designed merely to save the face of the Government and that he did not
urge that the powers really go very far in making actual concessions; he seemed to feel
that it was more important that the powers should make some sort of an avowal of
respect for China’s dignity as a nation even though he acknowledged himself very little
concerned with the material extent of any such concessions as might be made.
8. Such expressions of views dispose me to feel that in the present agitation for treaty
changes the dominant motive is not a dissatisfaction with the treaties themselves so
much as it is a manifestation of discontent with a sense of inferiority which the Chinese
have come to feel is symbolized by the special provisions in the treaties. The more
intelligent of the Chinese know that those provisions of the treaties arose out of
conditions which have scarcely been appreciably modified since then, and that any
radical change in them at the present time would seriously jeopardize foreign trade
which is now more than ever necessary to their normal economic development, and
would induce disputes and difficulties in China’s relations with the foreign powers.
Even some of the more radical Chinese with whom I have talked have shown
themselves aghast at the suggestion that tariff autonomy for which they clamor would
put enormously increased revenues into the hands of whichever military faction might
happen at the time to be in control of Central Government. The great bulk of the
agitators doubtless do not know what it is that they are asking for in demanding
abolition of unequal treaties. The treaty provisions are obnoxious to them not because
of what those provisions actually mean but because they seem to represent a stigma of
inferiority or afford a convenient political slogan.
9. I present these observations not with any idea of decrying what is genuine and to be
respected in the aspirations of the Chinese people but to bring to the attention of the
Department the unrealities of the present situation with respect to the Chinese political
demands which must in my opinion be treated on a psychological basis rather than
from the standpoint of strict logic or of systematic political concept. It is not easy in
such a turmoil of nationalistic feeling to determine what is essential and what is
incidental. Yet a substantially correct determination must be made if the concessions
we are prepared to make are actually to serve the real needs of this people and of our
own.
10. Repeated by mail to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637].

[Document 662]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Paragraph 3. Phraseology of your suggested change I think too indefinite and
might lead to the opinion that we have no serious intentions of considering
the whole subject of tariff revision. In view of Department’s No. 125 of July
1, noon, it seems to me that present language is clear and expresses our real
intentions. If you are convinced, however, that the words “looking toward
ultimate tariff autonomy” are very objectionable I would prefer to omit them
rather than to use the indefinite language which you propose. The phrase
“comprehensive revision” was used deliberately to include the idea contained
in the following passage which I quote from a note, No. 683, of July 7,
hope that the tariff conference will be but the first step in a comprehensive
revision of the treaties which they express their willingness to undertake at
the earliest opportunity.”
Paragraph 4. I approve substitution of word “safeguards” for word
“sanctions.”
Paragraph 6. I approve your proposed action.
KELLOGG

[Document 663]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
autonomy” ought not to be used [garbled group]. As the sentence is phrased the
omission suggested by you would seem to imply opening Special Conference for the
reconsideration of all treaty matters including such questions as missionary rights and
the surrender of concessions and leased territories which the interested powers would
not of course consent to discuss. To make your meaning entirely definite might I not
substitute the words “treaty provisions dealing with customs duties” for “looking
toward ultimate tariff autonomy.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 664]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 1:15 p.m.]
noon.
1. I had a conversation July 27 with the Japanese Minister in the course of
which he inquired as to my views on proposed American-British-Japanese
cooperation. In somewhat general terms I expressed our desire for
harmonious action in the sense indicated in my telegram of July 16, 9 p.m.,
second paragraph.
2. Yoshizawa then told me that he specifically hoped the representatives here
of the three powers would cooperate to facilitate a solution of the Shanghai
situation. He said that his Government has been dissatisfied at the
unwieldiness of the diplomatic corps as an instrument for conducting
negotiations with the Chinese Government, and that it would like to establish
such close working relations between the American, British, and Japanese
Legations that this group could take the lead in giving coherence and
direction to the action of the diplomatic corps.
3. We frankly discussed the difficulties arising in every endeavor to secure
efficient and practical action by the diplomatic corps, due to the punctilios
and theorizings of representatives of certain countries having negligible
interests in China. We were in complete agreement as to the need of more
definite leadership by those powers having the greatest responsibilities and
interests. I took the liberty of assuring him that my Government would gladly
have me fully cooperate with the British and Japanese for that purpose while
agreeing with him that we should be careful to avoid giving offense to
representatives of other powers by seeming to constitute a cabal against
them. Yoshizawa informed me that the British Chargé had given him to
understand that the British Government was favorable to the Japanese
suggestion.

4. Except for saying that there was particular need for good understanding
among the three powers in view of the critical situation in China, Yoshizawa
gave no indication at all that his Government contemplated more general
cooperation. I rather think that the particular object which he stated is really
the only immediate object of the Japanese Government, although probably it
wishes gradually to develop and extend American-British-Japanese
cooperation. Very likely the more general suggestions made to Mayer,
balloon to find out how far we are ready to go along with the Japanese
Government.
5. As I felt that the present purpose of the Japanese Government in this matter
has dwindled down to relatively narrow limits, I delayed making a report
until I should have a chance to see whether the British Chargé would take up
the subject with me. I had a long conversation with him yesterday chiefly
about the Shanghai affair and he did not refer to the Japanese suggestion
although I remarked that I had discussed your draft reply to the Chinese note
of June 24 with Yoshizawa. My conclusion is that the British do not attach
any great importance to the Japanese suggestion.
6. Copy of this telegram is being mailed to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

[Document 665]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
desire that the joint note or, if there should be no agreement upon a joint note, any note
sent separately by us should be restricted in such a manner as to give to China the
impression that we are not in good faith genuinely willing to give consideration to the
matter of tariff revision but intend that the discussion be confined to the increasing of
particular rates under the Conventional Tariffs. The United States is ready to give
consideration to the entire matter of treaty revision in regard to tariffs and all other
subjects to the extent that they concern us. I fail to understand the reason for the
unwillingness of the British to participate in a joint note that is as broad as the British
proposal concerning treaty revision as set forth in their No. 683 of July 7, quoted in the
Department’s telegram No. 170, July 28, to the Legation. In the event that we have to
send a separate note, it should not be limited to the tariff. In case you are strongly of
the opinion that it is very inadvisable to use the words “tariff autonomy”, the words
“looking toward ultimate tariff autonomy” may be omitted by you, inserting the words
“dealing with the entire subject of the tariff” in the joint note. If, however, a separate
note is sent by us, the words “looking toward ultimate tariff autonomy” should be
omitted and nothing more.
KELLOGG

[Document 666]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., July 30, 1925.
[Received August 1.]
No. 723
SIR: I have the honour to inform you, with reference to your note of the 23rd instant
dealing with Chinese affairs, that His Majesty’s Representative at Peking has been
notified that the United States Government have drafted an alternative text for the reply
to the Chinese note of June 24th last, and that this text has been cabled to the United
States Minister with instructions to consider it with his British and other Colleagues. At
the same time Mr. Palairet has been informed that the American draft differs so
radically both in form and substance from the Anglo-Japanese text that in the opinion
of His Majesty’s Government there is small possibility of your being disposed to accept
the latter, although both the French and Italian Governments have now agreed to it. In
the circumstances, Mr. Palairet has been authorised to discuss the two texts with Mr.
MacMurray and his other Colleagues in the hope of combining both in a new agreed
text which, however, is to be submitted to His Majesty’s Government for approval
before communication to the Chinese Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
In order to assist Mr. Palairet in his deliberations, he has been informed that His
Majesty’s Government disapprove the statement in the American draft reply that the
extraterritorial Commission will be instructed to make recommendations to enable the
Powers to consider what steps may be taken for relinquishing their extraterritorial
rights, inasmuch as my Government feel that the Commission should be allowed to
make such recommendations as may appear to them desirable without any lead from
the Powers. His Majesty’s Representative at Peking has further been informed that the
statement in the American draft that the revision of treaties should contemplate ultimate
tariff autonomy seems both gratuitous and likely to encourage Chinese pretensions
unnecessarily. Mr. Palairet, moreover, has not been left in any doubt that, in the opinion
of His Majesty’s Government, the general tone of the Corps Diplomatique’s reply
should be less encouraging to the Chinese than in the American text, and it is felt that
phrases such as “constant and sympathetic interest” of the United States Government
towards the anticipated treaty move, and “gratification at progress in the improvement
of the Chinese judicial system”, etc., should be omitted from the communication in
question.

In reminding Mr. Palairet that the original object of the Powers’ declaration was to
warn the Chinese Government that the former stand by the Washington principles and
are not to be coerced into further concessions, he has been informed that His Majesty’s
Government would like particularly to retain the passage included in the Anglo-
Japanese draft reply referring to strikes and agitations.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 667]
The Secretary of State to the Minister of China (MacMurray)
180. The Japanese Ambassador called upon me yesterday and stated with reference to
Government understood that this Government was not only ready to appoint its
delegates to the Special Conference on Chinese tariff matters, but was furthermore
prepared to accept any reasonable proposal for extending the scope of that conference
and also to take up, either at the Tariff Conference or at a subsequent time, the subject
of a comprehensive revision of the treaties looking toward ultimate tariff autonomy. He
stated that the Japanese Government is inclined to believe that in the Powers’ reply to
the Chinese note, it would be safer and wiser to mention only those matters, which they
are convinced, are possible of realization and not to refer to those pertaining to the
extension of the scope of the Tariff Conference, much less to that of tariff autonomy.
He said that the Japanese Government believe that to make reference at this juncture in
the Powers’ note to China to a matter which cannot be confidently expected to be
realized is to give a false hope to the Chinese people and bring about confusion. He
said that the Japanese Government was therefore constrained to take exception to the
American proposal to make reference in the Powers’ note to China to the questions of
extending the scope of the Tariff Conference and also of tariff autonomy.
I explained to the Japanese Ambassador that I was very definitely of the opinion that
the reply which should be made to the Chinese Government at this time should be so
cast as to show the willingness of the Powers to discuss any matters, even including the
question of tariff autonomy, which might be brought up at the time when the
conference meets. I stated that in my opinion in the present condition of public
sentiment in China and in view of the kind of agitation that was going on that no
conference on tariffs simply limited to the exact terms of the Nine-Power Treaty could
be expected to meet the situation. I stated that I have felt that there must be a
willingness of all the Powers to meet China and to discuss the entire tariff situation. I
stated that I was not insisting on the use of the precise words “tariff autonomy”
necessarily but said that the wording of the note should be so phrased as to cover tariff
autonomy should it be advanced as a question. I read to him that portion of
the term “looking toward ultimate tariff autonomy” the words “dealing with the entire
subject of the tariff” and stated that I hoped that this phraseology would meet the
objections which the Japanese Government had to the use of the other term.

I stated that the phraseology in our proposed draft regarding the broadening of the
scope of the conference was based on the language of the British proposition referred
I hope that you will not fail to make it clear to your colleagues that this Government for
its part is ready and willing to do just what it says it will do in the draft note
communicated to you in Department’s 165, and that it is not willing to join in any
identic replies which would not indicate that willingness.
KELLOGG

[Document 668]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. Except as the Department might instruct me otherwise, in view of what follows, I
shall amend draft reply to the Chinese Government as authorized by your 170, July 28,

2. The latter telegram reached me while in conversation with the Japanese Minister,
who called yesterday evening to read me a copy of a telegram by which his
Government instructed Matsudaira to explain to you the difficulty which the Japanese
Government finds in assenting to the American draft insofar as it conveys a formal
promise to consider tariff autonomy at the Special Conference. As the Japanese
Ambassador will no doubt make clear, his Government feels that tariff autonomy, on
the removal of all conventional restrictions upon the tariffs leviable by the Chinese
Government, is a theoretical desideratum scarcely possible of realization in connection
with the Special Conference, and that we should at least be cautious in holding out
hopes of accomplishing what may or may not prove feasible—the more so as
concession on this point, in advance of any practical experience beyond the strikes and
boycotts which the agitators have inaugurated with a view to forcing their point, might
tend to encourage and sanction such methods and even justify and make possible the
use of tariff discriminations as a means of influencing future negotiations between
China and the powers.
5. Japanese Minister said that this introduction into our draft note to the Chinese
Government (which of course means full publicity) of our willingness to consider tariff
autonomy was a surprise to his Government; and he added Shidehara had asked him
whether I would not be willing to convey to you my personal opinion on the question.
6. I trust the Department will not misunderstand my saying that, since this further
development of its views in the matter of the Chinese tariff, I have felt a mental
reservation on this particular point. Conceding theoretical rightness of the Chinese

tariff autonomy, I frankly acknowledge my doubts of the tactical expediency of making
public avowal of the willingness to adopt that theorem at a moment when we are being
argued and bullied into accepting it by a radical group which has no real faith in its
own propaganda and would resent it if we granted their demands under circumstances
which gave the advantages of this concession to any of the several military cliques
which are likely to profit by it. … Either way the kaleidoscope falls, the majority of
agitators would feel that we foreigners had backed the party momentarily in power. I
present agitation is an unreality which makes it likely that action taken in Washington
on sound abstract basis would locally appear to be a means of foreign support of Tuan
or some favored successor in the same way that the Japanese support[ed] him in 1917
and 1918.
7. I have therefore ventured to tell my Japanese colleague that I would be willing to
convey to you … an explanation of my personal view that it would not be tacitly
[tactically?] sound to announce publicly at this time that we are prepared to go beyond
the terms of the Washington Conference provisions lest we should thus prejudice the
possibility of our restraining the importunities of artificially formed unions of coolies
and school boys who are organizing to uphold diplomatic relations of the Government.
8. … Seeking, however, to detach myself from any preconceptions that antedated a
first-hand experience of the abnormal Chinese reaction to the Shanghai incident of May
30th I cannot but acknowledge (if the Department desires my frank opinion) that it
would be wiser to adhere literally to the provisions of the Washington Conference and
let any developments therefrom be recommended by the Special Conference, rather
than anticipate them at this time when even the most reasonable concession is liable to
be interpreted as an abdication on principle of rights which we possess and ought not to
surrender except upon adequate assurances of at least an honest effort to extend to our
interests the treatment that one civilized government accords to the citizens of another.
That is not now the case and I foresee no possibility of its being the case so long as
China continues to be a congeries of competing military factions. We are in fact dealing
not with a government but a simulacrum, which there are certain obvious political
conveniences in recognizing. To go beyond the letter and beyond the spirit of our
Washington treaty obligations in recognizing the hypothetical sovereignty of that
government is not only to exceed what I recall as the purposes of the Washington
Conference but also to encourage a spirit of irresponsibility with which even the
soberest Chinese have recently been infected through various Bolshevik and juvenile
nationalistic influences.
9. If the Japanese Government finds it of importance to make an issue on the question
of Chinese tariff autonomy, as to which I felt warranted in conveying as personal
opinions certain theretofore accepted views of the Department, I candidly think it

would be worth while agreeing with the Japanese rather than insisting upon taking a
separate and probably isolated position on this issue.
10. Japanese Minister expressed to me his Government’s hope that I would not
distribute among interested colleagues our draft reply to the Chinese Government until
some agreement had been reached among channels of Japanese and American
Governments. In order not to preclude possibility of agreement among those three
Governments, which I judge important for the purpose in view, I am withholding
communication of your draft to my colleagues until I hear further from you. I urgently
request instructions.
MACMURRAY

[Document 669]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
conversation which Japanese Ambassador had with me on July 31, evidently in
response to his Government’s instructions mentioned in paragraph 2 of your telegram.
… In any case, the Japanese Government should have been prepared for this
opinion that “the present situation in China makes it necessary for the special economic
conference to assume a position a little beyond the scope of the conference in order to
the British Embassy here communicated to the Department the text of a proposed
declaration which the British Government desired to use as the basis for an identic
expression on the part of the Powers of their attitude toward the Chinese proposals, the
opening sentences of which I now quote more fully:
“The Washington Customs Treaty provided for the early convocation of a
conference at which by the agreement between China and the Nine Powers
certain economic measures should be adopted for the benefit of China as a
whole. The spirit animating the Powers remains today what it was then.
Various subsequent changes in the situation which have delayed the meeting
of a conference have not affected the original intentions of the Powers; on the
contrary, they have confirmed these intentions whilst the Powers themselves
consider that the objects of the Washington Conference are to fulfill an
agreement to be reached at the Tariff Conference which will require to be of a
more far-reaching and comprehensive nature than was originally
contemplated. The Powers further hope that the Tariff Conference will be but
the first step in a comprehensive revision of the treaties which they express
their willingness to undertake at the earliest opportunity.”
British viewpoint was adopted in preparing Department’s draft of proposed reply as
this Government was and is ready to extend the scope of the conference beyond that
originally intended by the treaty. You should know that British Government submitted
its views also to Japanese Government and that Japanese amendment of British
proposal omitted all reference to extension of scope of conference. It would therefore
seem that Shidehara, finding British Government and this Government ready to extend

the scope of the Conference, is endeavoring as a last resort to bring about a
reconsideration of this matter on the part of this Government by referring to your
conversation in Tokyo expressing views held by the Department prior to consideration
of Chinese proposals of June 24.
I have just received a note from British Embassy14 informing me of instructions which
the British Government have communicated to their Chargé in Peking for his guidance
in discussing with you American draft. The note states, inter alia, that British Chargé
has been “informed that his Majesty’s Government disapprove the statement in the
American draft reply that the Extraterritorial Commission will be instructed to make
recommendations to enable the Powers to consider what steps may be taken for
relinquishing their extraterritorial rights, inasmuch as my Government feel that the
commission should be allowed to make such recommendations as may appear to them
desirable without any lead from the Powers.” You should point out to British Chargé
that language of American draft states that this Government desires to instruct its
commissioner to include in his report recommendations based upon the findings of the
commission which will enable the Governments concerned to consider “what, if any,
steps may be taken” and not “what steps may be taken.” The British note also objects to
the use of the term tariff autonomy. This objection will be met, it seems to me, by
also objects to the use of phrases such as “constant and sympathetic interest” and
“gratification at progress in the improvement of the Chinese judicial system.” I have no
objection to the omission from the text of draft reply of the clauses “and has watched
the growth of that sentiment with constant and sympathetic interest,” “sympathetically
and hopefully [helpfully?]” and “it has been gratified to note the progress that has been
made in this connection.”
With reference to paragraph 10 of your telegram you should know that text of
Department’s draft reply has been communicated to all of the Powers party to the
Washington Conference and to those Powers who have indicated their adherence to
Resolution No. 5. They were told that this draft was to be used by you as a basis for
discussing the Powers’ reply to Chinese Government’s policies of June 24.
KELLOGG

[Document 670]
The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
Office.
In conversation the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs stated that he felt sure that the
Japanese Government were not prepared to go beyond the terms of the Washington
Conference for the present in any discussion with the Chinese Government. The ideas
of tariff autonomy and revision of the treaties were capable of such broad interpretation
and had been the subject of so much irresponsible comment that the Japanese
Government did not see how a reference to them would serve any good purpose at the
present time. Besides these questions had been deliberately excluded from the
settlements made at Washington and the Japanese could not see any good reason for
bringing them up again.
He then reiterated that the Japanese wished above all things to work in conjunction
with the British and ourselves in meeting the present situation. The Washington
Conference provided a basis upon which all agreed. What was necessary now was the
carrying out of existing treaties and not the assumption of new obligations. Japan has
always been ready to do her share towards making the Washington engagements a
reality, and would be prepared to consider on their merits any germane proposals that
might be made in the course of the Customs Conference or in the work of the
Extraterritorial Commission. But Japan would not consider it wise [to] go beyond the
terms of present engagements in replying to the Chinese note. He added that the
Japanese Government hoped that this reply to the British note did not indicate an
alteration in point of view from that set forth in our last communication to the Japanese
I replied that while I was not at liberty to discuss the China situation I should of course
inform my Government of the Japanese attitude as he had stated it.
Repeated to Peking.
NEVILLE

[Document 671]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 5, 1925—noon.
1. From a conversation which the British Chargé d’Affaires had with me yesterday in
pursuance of the instructions referred to in your telegram I infer that the British Foreign
Office is concerned less with the substance of our draft note than with the relative
emphasis placed in it upon our willingness to accede to Chinese wishes to the point of
subordinating the emphasis upon China’s responsibilities.
In order to meet what I understand to be the British views, I would suggest the
modifications below.
2. Latter part of fourth sentence, first paragraph, of draft might be made to read:
“The Government of the United States desires to impress upon the Chinese
Government the necessity of giving concrete evidence of its ability and
willingness to enforce respect for the safety of foreign lives and property and
to suppress disorders and antiforeign agitations which embitter feeling and
tend to create conditions unfavorable for the carrying on of negotiations in
regard to the desires which the Chinese Government has presented for the
consideration of the treaty powers.”
This language is in part suggested by that of your note of the 24th [23rd?] to the British
Embassy.
3. The last two sentences of draft note might be replaced by the following:
“My Government is now ready to appoint its commissioner to sit with the
commissioners of the other interested governments in accordance with that
resolution. It hopes that that commission may be able to begin at an early
date its investigation into the existing conditions of the administration of
justice in China, and to make a report which will serve as a basis for the
recommendations to be made, in pursuance of the resolution, for the purpose
of enabling the governments concerned to consider what, if any, steps may be
taken with a view to the relinquishment of extraterritorial rights.”

4. If these modifications are acceptable to you I suggest that you inquire through the
Embassy at London whether they would with other amendments already approved
bring the British Foreign Office to adopt our draft.
MACMURRAY

[Document 672]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, August 5, 1925.
which is a reply to my note of July 23, dealing with Chinese affairs. The substance of
the British Government’s comments upon the suggested draft which I communicated to
you in my note of the 23rd instant has been communicated to the American Minister at
Peking by telegraph. It seems necessary however to invite your attention to what
appears to be a misinterpretation on the part of the British Government of the text of
the American draft, for I note that the British Chargé at Peking has been informed that
the British Government disapproved the statement that the extraterritorial commission
“will be instructed to make recommendations to enable the Powers to consider what
steps may be taken for relinquishing their extraterritorial rights”. You say that the
British Government feels that the Commission “should be allowed to make such
recommendations as may appear to them desirable without any lead from the Powers.”
I think that if you will read carefully the draft quoted in my note of July 23, more
particularly that part of the text thereof which appears on page 11,17 you will observe
that this Government’s proposed draft states “it is prepared to instruct its commissioner
to join his colleagues in including in their report recommendations based upon their
findings which will enable the governments concerned, to consider what, if any, steps
may be taken with a view to the relinquishment of extraterritorial rights”. I feel that
thus phrased the sentence is all inclusive and does not carry, as the British Government
seems to believe, any intention on the part of this Government to give any direction to
its Commissioner other than this Government’s desire that he consider the question and
give to it his views. This Government desires to examine any proposition which the
Chinese Government wishes to make regarding the abolition of extraterritorial
privileges and then decide, on the basis of the recommendations made by its
Commissioner, what, if any, steps may be taken to meet the Chinese proposal.
I note that the British Government is of the opinion that the general tone of the reply
which is to be made by the Corps Diplomatique should be less encouraging to the
Chinese than in the American text, and that it objects to such phrases as “constant and
sympathetic interest” of the United States Government towards the anticipated treaty
move, and “gratification at progress in the improvement of the Chinese Judicial
system”. Instructions have been sent to the American Minister in Peking to the effect
that I have no objection to the omission of these words from the note, if the British
Government finds it impossible to use phraseology of a similar character.

Accept [etc. ]

Frank B. Kettoce

1’ This reference is to the last sentence of the note.

[Document 673]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
AIDE-MEMOIRE
Confirming his conversation with Mr. Chilton on the 5th instant the Secretary of State
informs him that the American Ambassador at London was instructed yesterday18 that
desiring to meet the British point of view regarding the text of the proposed reply to the
Chinese Government’s proposals of June 24, quoted to Mr. Chilton in Department’s
note of July 23, 1925, the Department has authorized the American Minister at Peking
to make the following changes in that text.
In the first paragraph he has been authorized to omit the phrase “sympathetically and
helpfully” and to amend the latter part of the fourth sentence of the first paragraph to
read
“the Government of the United States desires to impress upon the Chinese
Government the necessity of giving concrete evidence of its ability and
willingness to enforce respect for the safety of foreign lives and property and
to suppress disorders and anti-foreign agitations which embitter feeling and
tend to create conditions unfavorable for the carrying on of negotiations in
regard to the desires which the Chinese Government has presented for the
consideration of the treaty Powers”.
In paragraph two the words “irregular, arbitrary” are to be substituted for the words
“unusual, abrupt”.
In paragraph four the American Minister has been authorized to omit the sentence “it
has been gratified to note the progress that has been made in this connection”.
In paragraph five he has been authorized to substitute the words “dealing with the
entire subject of the tariff” for the words “looking toward ultimate tariff autonomy”.
In paragraph six he has been authorized to substitute for the word “sanctions” the word
“safeguards”. In this paragraph he has also been authorized to substitute for the last two
sentences the following
“My Government is now ready to appoint its commissioner to sit with the
commissioners of the other interested Governments in accordance with that
resolution. It hopes that that commission may be able to begin at an early

date its investigation into the existing conditions of the administration of
justice in China and to make a report which will serve as a basis for the
recommendations to be made, in pursuance of the resolution, for the purpose
of enabling the Governments concerned to consider what, if any, steps may
be taken with a view to the relinquishment of extraterritorial rights”.
The American Ambassador at London has been instructed to communicate the above
amendments to the British Foreign Office and to state that it is hoped that with these
amendments the British Government will find itself able to accept the American draft
and so instruct its Chargé at Peking.
WASHINGTON , August 6, 1925.
18 Telegram of August 5; not printed.

[Document 674]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
reported to you as coming from British and Japanese Governments, on the American
draft of note have been received: On July 28 the American Embassy at Brussels
reported19 the receipt of note from Foreign Office stating that the views of the Belgian
Government were in accord with those of the United States. The note stated that the
Belgian Government considered it extremely opportune to call together, as soon as
possible, a conference for the revision of the customs tariff and the abolition of likin
and to convoke at the same time a commission of inquiry on the subject of
extraterritoriality. The Belgian Government also stated that it believed that, if the
Governments should inform the Chinese Government, without delay, of their decisions
in principle and of the intentions of the Western Powers to treat the problems which
would be raised at these conferences in the widest and most generous spirit, such action
could not fail to produce in China a relaxation of tension.
The American Legation at The Hague reported on July 2819 that the Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs had informed it that the Dutch Government was in complete accord
with the American draft, that it desired an identic note to be sent to the Chinese
Government.
On July 31 the American Embassy at Rome reported19 that it had received a note from
the Italian Foreign Office to the effect that the Italian Government agreed in principle
with the essential points of the American draft. The note of the Italian Government
stated that:
“The Royal Government is disposed to lend its willing collaboration with a
view to calling the conference for the augmentation of the Chinese tariff as
well as the Commission on Extraterritoriality.”
The Italian Government indicated that in the course of the Conference account must be
taken of the financial and economic obligations previously assumed by China toward
one or the other of the Powers.
On July 18 the American Embassy at Paris reported20 that the French Minister at
Peking had been instructed to promote the following ideas:

“1. No discussion of principle bearing on the conventional rights of the
Powers can be accepted before the complete reestablishment of order.
“2. Such a revision cannot be envisaged except in so far as the Chinese
Government conscious and mindful of its responsibilities will seem to be in a
position to assume effectively the obligations which are incumbent upon a
sovereign state for the protection of foreigners throughout entire territory of a
thoroughly open China.
“3. As soon as the reestablishment of order is effected the conference for the
revision of the customs can be evoked at once.
“It will be given power to examine, after the accomplishment of its normal
task, the conditions under which China will be able to obtain gradually in the
future new customs agencies until it recovers its customs autonomy.
“4. The conditions under which China will gradually be able to obtain the
relinquishment of extraterritoriality will be examined before its adjournment
by the commission on extraterritoriality naturally qualified for this work.”
In a later report of August 6 the American Embassy at Paris stated20 that it had been
informed by the Chief of the French Cabinet, Mr. Leger:
“That when the French Government had received the draft declaration
proposed by the British prior to the receipt of our text, they had informed the
British their text was acceptable suggesting only a slight modification which
he indicated had reference to the reestablishment of China’s financial credit.
He added that they had later received the Japanese draft; that as the
differences of opinion involved only the preamble or declaration of principle
he presumed these differences would be thrashed out in Peking. Leger further
said they considered our draft too mild and liberal in tone; that the British
was perhaps too sharp and states that French Government therefore favored
the Japanese draft as a good compromise.”
KELLOGG
19 Telegram not printed.
19 Telegram not printed.
19 Telegram not printed.
20 Telegram not printed.
20 Telegram not printed.

[Document 675]
The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
151. The Minister for Foreign Affairs today in conversation stated that so far as the
Extraterritorial Commission was concerned, he found himself in substantial agreement
with the American point of view and had told the British so. In regard to the actual text
of the reply to the Chinese note on this point the Japanese Government would have
some comments to make as they do not agree entirely with the statement contained in
the instructions to MacMurray (Draft 92)22 but they are not differences of principle.
So far as concerns tariff, the Japanese Government would find itself unable to go
beyond the terms of existing treaties or the Washington Conference engagements. All
the considerations urged in this connection had been brought up at Washington and he
did not see that conditions in China warranted any further concessions. Dissension
[Discussion?] on this point was objectionable for at least two good reasons:
(1) China has no government machinery capable of enacting tariff legislation
and a conference that proposed to consider the whole question of tariff would
have to consider methods of levying tariffs which would make the conference
too complicated and might result in its break-down;
(2) Japan and perhaps other powers, who have large vested interests in China,
might find themselves in difficult circumstances if they placed the unfettered
right to levy duties in the hands of irresponsible politicians. Japanese opinion
would not countenance such action.
In addition to these considerations Japan was confronted with interests of great weight
and importance resting on treaty and contractual bases which she would have to take
account of. It would be extremely difficult for Japan to reexamine the bases upon
which treaty obligations rest. He did not see, therefore, how agreement among the
powers would be possible unless all are prepared to cooperate on the only common
ground we now have—the Washington Conference. Peking informed.
NEVILLE

[Document 676]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., August 11, 1925.
[Received August 12.]
No. 738
SIR: I duly telegraphed to my Government the contents of the note which you handed to
me at the State Department on the 5th instant on the subject of the situation in China.
I have now been instructed by His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs, to inform you that he agrees with your view regarding the extraterritorial
Commission, as explained in that note, and which Mr. Chamberlain understands as
being identical with that expressed in the Washington Conference Resolution.
His Majesty’s Government have informed their Representative at Peking that the
United States Government have submitted a draft on the lines of the former American
draft, different in wording and less severe in tone, but embodying all the suggestions
made in the instructions sent to His Majesty’s Representative in Peking, the substance
of which I communicated to you in my note No. 723 of the 30th ultimo, with the
exception of that portion which specifically referred to strikes, upon which His
Majesty’s Government will not insist.
His Majesty’s Representatives accredited to the other interested Powers have been
instructed to inform the Governments of those Powers of this new United States draft,
and to say that it sufficiently meets the point desired by His Majesty’s Government.
His Majesty’s Representatives above-mentioned have been informed that, in the
interests of international solidity, His Majesty’s Government would be prepared to
adopt this draft as a basis for an identic reply to the Chinese Government, which they
are most anxious to expedite and are instructing His Majesty’s Representative at Peking
to arrange with his colleagues accordingly.
His Majesty’s Representatives to the interested Powers are being also instructed to
inform the Governments to which they are respectively accredited that His Majesty’s
Government appreciate the support in this matter rendered by these Governments and
to express the hope that they will concur in this further development and send similar
instructions to their respective Representatives in Peking.

I am to add that His Majesty’s Government would regard it as most unfortunate if the
replies of all the Powers were not identical. They regard this as an essential sign of
solidity, in the interests of which they are prepared to defer to the United States draft.
I am also to emphasise the fact that His Majesty’s Government are most anxious to
expedite the reply to the Chinese Government.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 677]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., August 19, 1925.
[Received August 20.]
No. 753
SIR: In my note No. 738 of the 11th instant on the subject of China I had the honour to
state that His Majesty’s Government would regard it as most unfortunate if the replies
of all the Powers to the Chinese note were not identical, and I added that my
Government regarded this as an essential sign of solidity in the interests of which they
were prepared to defer to the American draft.
His Majesty’s Government now have reason to believe that the Japanese Government
may be inclined to question the inclusion of Chinese tariff autonomy in the agenda of
the conference to be held in the near future, and that the Japanese attitude may result in
a divergence of view between the Powers and consequent further delay in replying to
the Chinese note. This being so, His Majesty’s Representative at Peking has been
reminded that recent developments in China would seem to indicate the use of a
movement aiming at the abolition of extraterritoriality and looking to complete fiscal
autonomy. This movement, in the opinion of my Government, cannot be ignored and
can only be met by a gradual and dignified surrender of treaty rights by the Powers.
As you are aware, His Majesty’s Government were originally in favour of indicating
their policy, as outlined very briefly above, in their reply to the Chinese note. When,
however, the British draft note was amended by the Japanese Government my
Government did not adopt a rigid attitude but recommended the Japanese alterations to
the United States and other Governments concerned, although His Majesty’s
Government are still inclined to feel that it would be more advantageous to adopt the
course originally suggested. Should the United States and Japan agree to omit all
mention of the decision of the Powers to consider helpfully the reasonable and just
aspirations of China on the question of tariffs, or succeed in agreeing to a formula of
compromise, His Majesty’s Government would offer no objection.
Mr. Palairet has had it made clear to him, however, that if no agreement can be arrived
at between the Governments of the United States and of Japan, His Majesty’s
Government would have no option but to decide upon a draft of their own similar, if
not identic, with either the Japanese or American. I need hardly add that my
Government would regret exceedingly having to take such action, as it would

inevitably draw attention to the differences existing among the Powers. This, in the
opinion of my Government, would be more likely to encourage the pretensions of
China than a carefully drafted identic undertaking to cooperate in furthering the
aspirations of that country.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 678]
The Acting Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, August 22, 1925.
you state that the British Government has reason to believe that the Japanese
Government may be inclined to question the inclusion of Chinese tariff autonomy in
the agenda of the conference to be held in the near future, and that this attitude on the
part of Japan may result in a divergence of views between the Powers and a consequent
further delay in replying to the Chinese note. I agree with the views of the British
Government that recent developments in China seem to indicate a movement aiming at
the abolition of extraterritoriality and looking to complete fiscal autonomy, and that this
movement can only be met by a gradual and dignified surrender of treaty rights by the
Powers, with particular reference to the Japanese attitude on this question.23
It gives me pleasure to be able to inform you that on the 20th instant the Japanese
Ambassador informed me that the Japanese Government was prepared to accept the
modified draft of the reply to the Chinese proposals offered by the American
Government, provided the last two sentences of paragraph five could be amended to
read as follows:
“To that end the Government of the United States is ready to appoint its
delegates to the Special Conference on Chinese tariff matters provided for in
the Treaty of February 6, 1922, and is furthermore willing, either at that
Conference or at a subsequent time, to consider and discuss any reasonable
proposal that may be made by the Chinese Government for a revision of the
treaties on the subject of tariff.”
This information was transmitted by telegraph to the American Embassy at London on
the 21st instant for communication to the British Government. The American proposed
draft embodying the modifications offered by the British and Japanese Governments
now reads as follows: [Here follows text, the same, except for certain changes in form,
as note No. 41, September 4, from the American Minister to the Chinese Minister for
This Government is willing to accept the Japanese wording, provided it is acceptable to
the other Powers, in the interest of international cooperation, for it believes that this
wording leaves the Conference free to entertain any proposals which the Chinese may

wish to make. I hope that this will mean that the Powers, through their representatives
at Peking, will be able now to reach an early conclusion as to their replies to the
Chinese proposals of June 24. I have instructed the American Minister at Peking as to
our views in this matter.
Accept [etc.]
JOSEPH C. GREW
23 Apparently the last phrase in this sentence was intended to be the opening phrase in
the next paragraph.

[Document 679]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., August 26, 1925.
[Received August 27.]
No. 766
SIR: I have the honour to refer to your note of the 22nd instant on Chinese affairs and to
convey to you an expression of the gratification felt by His Majesty’s Government at
the agreement reached between the Governments of the United States and Japan in
regard to the proposed reply to the Chinese note. While in the opinion of my
Government the American draft embodying the British and Japanese modifications is
not wholly suitable for an identic note, His Majesty’s Representative at Peking has
been instructed to confer with his American Colleague with a view to reaching a
definite agreement.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 680]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. Conference with interested colleagues today resulted in personal
agreement upon a considerable number of amendments to the text of draft
note all of which are matters of mere form. I shall give these amendments in
a separate telegram.25
2. Belgian, British and Dutch representatives were prepared to send amended
note without further instructions. Japanese Minister must first communicate
amended text to his Government which will doubtless approve, as it has
accepted the draft in principle.
3. French, Italian and Portuguese representatives have received no
instructions whatever with respect to our draft. I suggest that urgent
representations be made to the Governments in question to hasten
instructions.
MACMURRAY
24 Not printed.

[Document 681]
Statement Issued to the Press by the Department of State, August 31,
192526
August 31, 1925
SPEECH OF THE HONORABLE FRANK B. KELLOGG, SECRETARY OF STATE, BEFORE THE ANNUAL MEETING OF THE AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION,
DETROIT, MICHIGAN, SEPTEMBER 2, 1925
Mr. Kellogg said:
The events in China of the last few months have again brought to the forefront its
relations with the other Powers and have made it necessary for the Government of the
United States to declare its policy in relation to Chinese affairs. In brief, that policy
may be said to be to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of China, to
encourage the development of an effective stable government, to maintain the “open
door” or equal opportunity for the trade of nationals of all countries, to carry out
scrupulously the obligations and promises made to China at the Washington
Conference, and to require China to perform the obligations of a sovereign state in the
protection of foreign citizens and their property.
It is quite impossible in the few moments allotted to me to discuss all the complicated
issues involved in the present Chinese situation. I shall, therefore, but briefly sketch the
more important, which chiefly concern the conventional Chinese tariffs and the
extraterritorial rights of foreign residents in China. The import tariffs, and to some
extent the export tariffs, of China are controlled by treaties between China and the
various Powers. The first conventional tariff schedule was appended to the first treaty
made with Great Britain in 1842;27 the same schedule was added to the first treaty with
the United States in 1844,28 and to treaties made with other foreign Powers at later
dates. These treaties have been changed and the rates revised from time to time but the
principles involved in the original conventional tariff have remained the same. It has
become evident that there is a wide feeling in China that the tariff schedules attached to
the various treaties have become a severe handicap upon the ability of China to adjust
its import tariffs to meet the domestic economic needs of the country. It must not be
forgotten, however, that these tariffs were not adopted as a sinister means of controlling
the fiscal policies of the Chinese Government but merely as a modus operandi devised
to meet and remedy a condition which had become a fertile source of friction in the
relations between China and the Powers due to the uncertainties connected with the
rates and methods of collecting duties under the then existing tariffs. Schedules of

those tariffs were seldom available for the information of foreign merchants, who were
hampered in their business by the irregular and arbitrary methods adopted in the
assessment and the collection of the duties. It is believed that these conventional tariffs
were welcomed not only by the United States and the other Powers but by China as a
happy solution of a question which for more than forty years had vexed the relations
between China and the other countries.
The last commercial treaty affecting the tariffs between the United States and China
was made in 190329 and various treaties with other Powers were made substantially at
the same time. The rates under these treaties have been revised twice since that time.
There seems to be some confusion in the public mind as to just what rights Americans
and other foreigners enjoy under the extraterritorial provisions of the treaties with
China. I do not have the time to describe in detail the conditions under which foreign
merchants lived and carried on their trade in China during the sixty-odd years prior to
1842, the year when immunities as to persons and property, now termed extraterritorial
rights, first appeared in a formal treaty between China and a Western Power. It is
sufficient for me to say that the account of the relations between resident foreign
merchants in China and the Chinese authorities of that period is replete with incidents
involving conflicting claims, the foreigner claiming exemption from Chinese law and
the Chinese claiming jurisdiction over him and his property. To borrow the language of
the Encyclopædia Britannica30 as quoted in Webster’s Dictionary31 “extraterritoriality”
is defined as a term of international law “used to denominate certain immunities from
the application of the rule that every person is subject for all acts done within the
boundary [boundaries] of a state to its local laws.” Insofar as China is concerned the
British Treaty of Nanking of 1842 marks the legalized beginning of the system of
extraterritorial rights in China. Extraterritorial rights as applicable to Americans were
first defined in the American Treaty of 1844 which stipulates clearly the method by
which the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the United States Government was to be
exercised. Article XXI of that Treaty reads as follows:
“Subjects of China who may be guilty of any criminal act toward citizens of
the United States, shall be arrested and punished by the Chinese authorities
according to the laws of China; and citizens of the United States, who may
commit any crime in China, shall be subject to be tried and punished only by
the Consul, or other public functionary of the United States thereto
authorized, according to the laws of the United States. And in order to the
prevention of all controversy and disaffection, justice shall be equitably and
impartially administered on both sides.”
With respect to civil suits, between Americans, or between Americans and citizens or
subjects of other non-Chinese States, Article XXV of the same treaty provides:

“All questions in regard to rights, whether of property or person, arising
between citizens of the United States in China, shall be subject to the
jurisdiction of and regulated by the authorities of their own Government. And
all controversies occurring in China between citizens of the United States and
the subjects of any other Government shall be regulated by the treaties
existing between the United States and such Governments respectively,
without interference on the part of China.”
As to disputes between citizens of the United States and subjects of China, the same
treaty further provides, Article XXIV as follows:
“And if controversies arise between citizens of the United States and subjects
of China, which can not be amicably settled otherwise, the same shall be
examined and decided conformably to justice and equity by the public
officers of the two nations acting in conjunction.”
This last provision was made more specific in the Treaty of 1880,32 Article IV, which
reads as follows:
“When controversies arise in the Chinese Empire between citizens of the
United States and subjects of His Imperial Majesty, which need to be
examined and decided by the public officers of the two nations, it is agreed
between the Governments of the United States and China that such cases
shall be tried by the proper official of the nationality of the defendant. The
properly authorized official of the plaintiff’s nationality shall be freely
permitted to attend the trial, and shall be treated with the courtesy due to his
position. He shall be granted all proper facilities for watching the
proceedings in the interests of justice. If he so desires, he shall have the right
to present, to examine, and to cross-examine witnesses. If he is dissatisfied
with the proceedings, he shall be permitted to protest against them in detail.
The law administered will be the law of the nationality of the officer trying
the case.”
Here, as in the case of the conventional tariffs, the Government of the United States
introduced into its treaty with China special provisions, not for the purpose of
hampering or otherwise limiting the sovereign rights of a friendly nation, but merely as
a modus operandi intended to remedy a vexatious condition which had for many years
proved what seemed an almost insurmountable obstacle to the maintenance of friendly
relations between the two countries. There was not then—and there is not now—any
desire permanently to limit the sovereignty of China. Pursuant to these treaties
Congress has enacted the necessary laws to enable the American Consuls in China to
perform the necessary judicial functions attendant upon the hearing and settling of
complaints brought against American citizens by the Chinese. The extraterritorial

judicial machinery of the Consular Courts was added to and made more efficient when
Congress completed the obligations assumed by the United States and created at
Shanghai the United States Court for China which has both original and appellant
jurisdiction in cases where American citizens are defendants in China.
In the Commercial Treaty of 1903 between the United States and China, it was agreed
as follows: “The Government of China having expressed a strong desire to reform its
judicial system and to bring it into accord with that of western nations, the United
States agrees to give every assistance to such reform and will also be prepared to
relinquish the extraterritorial rights when satisfied that the state of the Chinese laws,
the arrangement[s] for their administration, and other considerations warrant it in so
doing.” Following this treaty there have been a growing demand in China and an
agitation for the abolition of conventional tariffs, of extraterritorial rights, and other
special privileges enjoyed by foreigners in China. There have been of late years an
advance in education and a growing feeling of nationalism to which is largely due the
demand for revision of the treaties in these respects.
China, having taken part with the Allies in the Great War, presented these demands at
the Versailles Conference, but the Powers declined to consider them, holding that they
were outside the province of that Conference. When the Washington Conference was
called by President Harding, it included the consideration of certain Pacific and Far
Eastern questions, China again asked for a modification of the treaty rights of foreign
Powers particularly as regards the tariff and extraterritorial rights. At that Conference,
certain treaties were made: One between the nine participating Powers relating to
principles and policies to be followed in matters concerning China and the other
between the same Powers relating to the Chinese customs tariff, and a resolution was
unanimously adopted in relation to extraterritoriality.33
In Article I of the Treaty in relation to the principles and policies to be followed in
matters concerning China, it is provided that:
“The Contracting Powers, other than China agree:
(1) To respect the sovereignty, the independence, and the territorial
and administrative integrity of China;
(2) To provide the fullest and most unembarrassed opportunity to
China to develop and maintain for herself an effective and stable
government;
(3) To use their influence for the purpose of effectually establishing
and maintaining the principle of equal opportunity for the

commerce and industry of all nations throughout the territory of
China;
(4) To refrain from taking advantage of conditions in China in
order to seek special rights or privileges which would abridge the
rights of subjects or citizens of friendly States, and from
countenancing action inimical to the security of such States.”
The Treaty in relation to the Chinese tariffs in substance provided for a certain revision
of the duties, which has already taken place,34 and for the calling of a special
conference on the question of abolition of likin, a local transportation tax in China, and
granting in lieu thereof certain additional surtaxes to China. This convention was to be
called within three months after the ratification of the treaty by all the Powers. These
treaties were made in February 1922. They have been ratified by all the Powers and
came into force on August 5, 1925, by the deposit on that day of the ratifications with
the Department of State in Washington. Resolution V of the Washington Conference,
provided in substance that within three months after the adjournment of the
Conference, the participating Powers should establish a Commission, to which each
Government should appoint one member, to inquire into the present practice of
extraterritorial jurisdiction in China and into the laws, judicial system, and methods of
judicial administration of China with a view to reporting to the Governments of the
several Powers their findings of fact in regard to these matters and their
recommendations as to such means as they may find suitable to improve existing
conditions of administration of justice in China and to assist and further the efforts of
the Chinese Government to effect such legislation and judicial reforms as would
warrant the several Powers in relinquishing, either progressively or otherwise, their
respective rights of extraterritoriality. The appointment of these delegates to the
Conference should have been made in May 1922 but China requested a postponement
of one year. All the Powers agreed to a postponement but it proved impossible to obtain
any unanimity on the part of the Powers as to a new date and no date has ever been
fixed. China now asks for the execution of these treaties and resolutions and, in
addition, demands that the various Powers take up with China a general revision of the
treaties to the end that ultimately the conventional tariff may be abolished and
extraterritorial rights given up.
The Washington Treaty between the nine Powers relating to Chinese Customs tariff
having been ratified by all the Powers and ratifications exchanged in Washington on
August 5, 1925, that Treaty came into force and the Special Conference has been called
to meet in Peking on October 26, 1925. The United States has appointed as its
representatives John V. A. MacMurray, American Minister to China, and Silas H.
Strawn, a lawyer of Chicago. The Treaty provides for a Special Conference to prepare
the way for putting into effect the provisions of previous treaties whereby China agreed
to abolish likin and the Powers, in return, consent to an increase in the tariff duties.

These prior treaty stipulations had not been executed because China had failed to do
away with likin. Another of the duties of the Special Conference is to determine the
conditions under which a surtax on imports to be imposed pending the abolition of likin
is to be levied. In the invitation which China has issued to the Powers for that
Conference35 which is to take place at Peking on October 26, China recalls the fact that
its delegates at the Washington Conference when assenting to the terms which
eventually were written into the Washington Treaty, stated at the 17th meeting of the
Committee on Pacific and Far Eastern questions of the Washington Conference, that it
was not their intention to relinquish their position, but that they intended on all
appropriate occasions in the future to bring up again for consideration the desire of the
Chinese Government regarding tariff autonomy, and it asks that this matter be
favorably considered by the forthcoming Special Conference. I believe that the Powers
have all come to the conclusion that the Conference will have to be broadened beyond
the strict letter of the Washington Treaty. For its own part, this Government is willing,
either at this Conference or at some subsequent time, to consider with China a
comprehensive revision of the treaties dealing with the entire subject of the tariff.
China is also demanding the abolition of the privileges of extraterritoriality by foreign
Governments. This question of extraterritoriality was considered, as I have shown, in
our Treaty of 1903, where we promised we would give every assistance to China that
we could in the reform of her judicial system and be prepared to relinquish
extraterritorial rights when satisfied that the state of the Chinese laws, the arrangements
for their administration and other considerations would warrant us in so doing. This
subject took more concrete form at the Washington Conference, as I have shown, by
Resolution V. Under that Resolution, as before stated, it was provided that a special
commission should be appointed to investigate the question of extraterritoriality and
Chinese laws and judicial system and to make recommendations as to the means they
may find suitable to improve the laws and judicial system of China and to assist and
further the efforts of the Chinese Government to effect such legislation as would
warrant the relinquishment, either progressively or otherwise, by the Powers of their
respective rights of extraterritoriality. The United States is willing to take up the subject
and examine it and has appointed as its special commissioner for this purpose Mr. Silas
H. Strawn, of Chicago, an eminent lawyer, who is also going to participate in the Tariff
Conference. This Government is willing through this Commission to examine the
whole question of extraterritoriality and desires the Commission to make a speedy
report with recommendations upon their findings which will enable this Government to
consider what if any steps may be taken with a view to the relinquishment of its
extraterritorial rights. I know, in a general way, that within the last few years China has
made some progress in the enactment of laws, in reform of her judicial proceedings, in
the education of judges and lawyers, with a view to fulfilling her aspirations to be
relieved of these extraterritorial restrictions upon the exercise of her sovereign powers.
I believe the people of this country sympathize with these aspirations of the Chinese
people and that this Government would be willing to give up these extraterritorial

rights as soon as China shall demonstrate that her laws and the administration of the
laws and judicial system are adequate for the protection of foreign lives and property
within China. China has invited commerce and development and, of course, it is her
duty as a sovereign nation to fulfill her obligations under the laws of nations and to
protect foreigners in their lives and property. I am sure that the United States has
always been most desirous to respect and uphold Chinese sovereign rights and the
development of a stable government. I know that I have since I became Secretary of
State worked earnestly to carry out the provisions of the treaties and resolutions
adopted at the Washington Conference with respect to the holding of the Tariff
Conference and the appointment of the Commission on Extraterritoriality.
Unfortunately the conditions in China have not been such as to further her aspirations
in these respects. I shall not attempt, of course, to review the various changes in
government, the fall of the empire and the establishment of the republic, but simply to
call attention to the fact that within the last few months, there have been riots and anti-
foreign demonstrations which have caused loss of life, not only of foreigners but of
Chinese. There has been a recurrence of anti-foreign demonstrations such as has [have]
not existed since the Boxer Rebellion. The Powers have been compelled to protect their
nationals by armed force. I believe the Chinese Provisional Government has made an
effort to restrain this anti-foreign hostility and disorders but its efforts have not been
completely successful. Nevertheless, I do not believe that these unfortunate conditions
should constitute a reason why the United States and the other Powers should not
scrupulously adhere to the pledges they made to China in the Washington Conference
to meet her in the spirit of helpfulness with the hope that she may realize her ambitions.
These are some of the problems which will have to be settled in the near future, and,
for one, I am willing to face them now, to meet the representatives of the Chinese
Government frankly and discuss the whole subject. But these conventional tariffs,
extraterritorial rights and foreign settlements have come about through treaty
arrangements with China under which thousands of Americans and foreigners have
taken up their residence and carried on their business within that country. The United
States owes to them the duty of adequate protection and; the Chinese Government must
have a realization of its sovereign obligations according to the law of all civilized
nations. In the discussion and settlement of these problems, one of the most difficult
questions is whether China now has a stable Government capable of carrying out these
treaty obligations. I am very sure that the people of the United States do not wish to
control, by treaty or otherwise, the internal policies of China, to fix its tariffs, or
establish and administer courts but that they look forward to the day when this will not
be necessary.
26 For release after delivery of the Secretary’s address.

31 First edition, 1919.
34 See ibid. , pp. 816 ff.

[Document 682]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
instructions to send identic replies in the form agreed on by us August 26, the senior
minister has now circularized the proposal that the notes be despatched September 4th
accompanied by unofficial Chinese translation in the preparation of which Chinese
secretaries are collaborating.
MACMURRAY

[Document 683]
The American Minister (MacMurray) to the Chinese Minister for Foreign
Affairs (Shen)36
PEKING, September 4, 1925.
No. 41
EXCELLENCY: With reference to my Legation’s note (No. 1094) of June 26th last, I have the
honor to inform Your Excellency that the important questions raised in your note of
June the 24th have been carefully considered by the Government of the United States
which has for some time been aware of the growing feeling in China in favor of a
readjustment of Chinese treaty relations with the foreign Powers. It is believed that the
Chinese Government does not require to be reminded of the concrete evidence of this
interest which has been made manifest on each occasion when a question of treaty
revision has occupied the attention of the two countries. The United States is now
prepared to consider the Chinese Government’s proposal for the modification of
existing treaties in measure as the Chinese authorities demonstrate their willingness and
ability to fulfill their obligations and to assume the protection of foreign rights and
interests now safeguarded by the exceptional provisions of those treaties. It is because
of a most earnest desire to meet the aspirations of the Chinese Government that the
Government of the United States desires to impress upon the Chinese Government the
necessity of giving concrete evidence of its ability and willingness to enforce respect
for the safety of foreign lives and property and to suppress disorders and anti-foreign
agitations which embitter feeling and tend to create conditions unfavorable for the
carrying on of negotiations in regard to the desires which the Chinese Government has
presented for the consideration of the treaty Powers.
My Government sympathizes with the feeling of the Chinese Government that the tariff
schedules attached to the various treaties between China and other Powers have
become a severe handicap upon the ability of China to adjust its import tariffs to meet
the domestic economic needs of the country. It must not be forgotten, however, that
these tariffs were first inaugurated in 1842 and that they were a modus operandi
originally devised to meet and remedy a condition which had been a fertile source of
friction in the relations between China and the foreign Powers due to the uncertainties
connected with the rates and methods of levying the tariffs then existing. Schedules of
those tariffs were seldom available for the information of the merchant, who was
hampered in his business by the irregular, arbitrary, and varying methods in the
assessment and the collection of the duties. It is the belief of my Government that the

conventional tariff was welcomed not alone by the Powers but also by China as a
diplomatic solution of what had proved to be a very vexatious question.
Since the conclusion, in 1902 and 1903, of the commercial treaties referred to in Article
II of the Treaty relating to the Chinese Customs Tariff, signed on February 6, 1922, my
Government has given particular attention to every evidence of effort on the part of the
Chinese Government in the direction of fiscal reforms which could be taken as an
assurance that the old causes of international friction need no longer be feared and that
the conventional tariff could be abandoned.
It was at the time of the negotiation of those treaties that the Chinese Government
expressed a desire to reform its judiciary system and to bring it into accord with that of
Western nations. The Powers party to those Treaties agreed to give every assistance to
such reform and stated that they would be prepared to relinquish extraterritorial rights
when satisfied that the state of the Chinese laws, the arrangements for their
administration and other considerations warranted them in so doing. The Powers have
since then observed attentively each measure that the Chinese Government, during the
twenty-two years which have passed, has taken for the establishment of an independent
judiciary and the enactment of laws for the administration of justice. The establishment
of courts and the enactment of laws, however, do not in themselves meet all the
requirements of the situation. Courts cannot function and develop properly or
consistently without the aid of a stable Government capable and willing to maintain
them and enforce their findings and decisions. It is regretted that the inability of the
Chinese Government during the past few years fully to enforce the mandate of its
authority has made it difficult for the courts and judiciary already established to
function in a normal manner.
The questions of the conventional tariffs and of the extraterritorial rights under which
nationals of the treaty Powers reside in China are two of the important questions raised
by the Chinese Government’s note. Both received consideration at the Washington
Conference, and it is the belief of the Government of the United States that the most
feasible method for dealing with them is by a constant and scrupulous observance of
the obligations undertaken at that Conference. To that end the Government of the
United States is ready to appoint its delegates to the Special Conference on Chinese
Tariff matters provided for in the Treaty of February 6, 1922, and is furthermore willing
either at that Conference or at a subsequent time to consider and discuss any reasonable
proposal that may be made by the Chinese Government for a revision of the Treaties on
the subject of the tariff.
Before it can form any opinion as to what, if any, steps can be taken to meet the desire
of the Chinese Government in regard to the question of extraterritoriality and those
special safeguards of the treaties under which its nationals live and conduct their
enterprises in China, my Government desires to have before it more complete

information than has heretofore been available: and the most feasible way in which the
question can be approached and considered is to send to China the Commission
provided for in Resolution V of the Washington Conference, in the expectation that the
investigation made by that Commission will help to guide the Treaty Powers as to
what, if any, steps should be taken as regards the relinquishment by gradual means or
otherwise of extraterritorial rights at that time. My Government is now ready to appoint
its Commissioner to sit with the Commissioners of the other interested Governments in
accordance with that Resolution. It hopes that that Commission may be able to begin at
an early date its investigation into the existing conditions of the administration of
justice in China and to make a report which will serve as a basis for the
recommendations to be made in pursuance of the Resolution for the purpose of
enabling the Governments concerned to consider what, if any, steps may be taken with
a view to the relinquishment of extraterritorial rights.
I avail myself [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
36 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Minister in China in his despatch No.
Affairs by the diplomatic representatives in China of Belgium, France, Great Britain,
Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, and Portugal.

The Special Conference on the Chinese
Customs Tariff37
37
The powers represented at the Conference were China, the United States, Belgium,
Denmark, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain,
and Sweden.
The American delegates were John V. A. MacMurray and Silas H. Strawn; the
American technical advisers were Mahlon F. Perkins, Stanley K. Hornbeck, and Arthur
H. Evans.
[The minutes of the Conference were published under the title, The Special Conference
to this publication, John V. A. MacMurray, in a letter of April 12, 1929, to Herbert
“You will note that this volume contains no imprint other than Peking 1928,
and gives no indication of the authority under which it was issued. It is
understood, however, that it was compiled and edited, under authorization of
the Nationalist Government at Nanking, by one who had been of the
Secretariat of the Chinese Delegation to the Special Conference, and more
recently associated with the Nanking administration.
Complimentary copies of this volume have been rather sparingly distributed
among the foreign Legations here—not by the Nationalist Government but
by an official of the Foreign Office acting in his personal capacity.
This is the only published record of the proceedings of the Special
Conference, which ended inconclusively in consequence of the breakdown of
the internationally recognized governmental authority in China, in April,
1926.”]
[684] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[685] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[686] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
[687] The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
[688] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[689] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[690] The Chinese Minister (Sze) to the Secretary of State
Washington, August 19, 1925.
[691] The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister (Sze)
Washington, August 21, 1925.

[692] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[693] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[694] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
Washington, September 9, 1925.
[695] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[696] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[697] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[698] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[699] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[700] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[701] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[702] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[703] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[704] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[705] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)

[706] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[707] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[708] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
[709] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[710] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
[711] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[712] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State

[713] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[714] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
[715] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[716] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
[717] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
[718] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
[719] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State

[720] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
[721] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
[722] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
[723] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
[724] Mr. Silas H. Strawn, of the American Delegation, to the Secretary of State

[Document 684]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 23, 1925—noon.
1. Minister for Foreign Affairs states that according to present calculations,
and of course dependent upon French ratification of customs treaty39 which
French Minister forecasted to him should take place in about two weeks,40 he
desires to call Special Conference for September 1st at Peking. Minister for
Foreign Affairs seemed in some doubt whether it was for Chinese
Government to call the conference.
find an obstacle to the convening of the Special Conference or cause for
embarrassment in that regard in the fact that the participating powers have
not recognized the Chinese Government de jure.
3. Special Conference not discussed at meeting of Heads of Legation of April
MAYER
38 Not printed.
40 Instruments of ratification of the nine-power treaty relating to the revision of the
Chinese customs tariff were deposited at Washington Aug. 5, 1925.
38 Not printed.

[Document 685]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[Paraphrase]
85. This Government believes that after the customs treaty comes into force following
its ratification by the French Government, it would be appropriate for the Chinese
Government to issue a call convening the Special Tariff Conference. This Government
would be willing to accept the tentative date of September 1, provided that date is also
convenient for the other governments which signed or have adhered to the treaty.
KELLOGG

[Document 686]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 2:35 p.m.]
195. From Perkins.42
1. As a result of my informal talks with Mr. Waterlow,43 it appears that the
British Government wholly concurs in the view that it is very important that
the Special Conference meet at an early date. I am informed that the opinion
which was expressed by Mr. Wellesley44 concerning the conference (see
which the British Government now wishes to follow. The British place much
importance upon concerted action on the part of America, Japan, and Great
Britain, and Waterlow suggests that these powers should inform the Chinese
Government that they are ready to hold the Special Conference contingent
upon a settlement of the Shanghai affair and the cessation of antiforeign
agitation. Waterlow said it was essential that the Chinese should not receive
the impression that the action of the powers is the result of pressure or
weakness.
2. Waterlow believes the early meeting of the conference of such importance
that technicalities should be brushed aside in the event of the French not
proceeding to ratify the treaties. He fears that the French may not take early
action on this subject.
3. Concerning the constitutionality of the Chinese Government and the
question of the possibility of its agreements being repudiated by later
governments, Waterlow is willing to short-circuit such matters and to
negotiate with the Government as it now exists.
4. I am of the opinion that the British Government would be glad to consider
any suggestion of the American Government looking toward action as above
indicated.
HOUGHTON

42 Mahlon F. Perkins, of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, who
had been sent to London to confer with the British Foreign Office regarding the Special
Conference for the Revision of the Chinese Customs Tariff.
43 S. P. P. Waterlow, head of the Far Eastern Department of the British Foreign Office.
44 Victor Wellesley, Assistant Under Secretary of State in the British Foreign Office.
45 Not printed.

[Document 687]
The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
present, MacMurray47 stated his general views on the following points:
1. The policy should be a middle course between China’s national aspirations
and rights of foreign governments under the treaty. The present situation in
China makes it necessary for the special economic conference to assume a
position a little beyond the scope of the conference in order to reestablish
Chinese confidence. It is necessary to find a course between sternly rebuffing
the Chinese claims on the one hand and weakening the foreigners’ position
by allowing the disorders to control the action of the conference.
2. The powers might find themselves in a position where they will have to
grant the two and a half percent48 for political reasons even though this might
not otherwise be advisable.
3. The purpose of the customs treaty obligates the powers to make the
conference a means of abolishing the likin. It may be possible to induce the
Chinese to bring into unity the central and local governments. This is worth
considering for the good that might be produced and it might impress the
Chinese with the need of coming to such an agreement though the conference
may be unable to go very far in this direction.
4. The conference will have to decide as to the disposition of the additional
two and a half percent if allowed. Hypothetically it is desirable to devote the
additional income to internal constructive work but with the large unsecured
debts the conference may have to devote the funded increased income to
China’s unsecured and inadequately secured debts. We think this two and a
half percent should be distinguished from customs revenues heretofore
allocated as security for the Boxer loans. The British claim the contrary.
5. It is unknown and impossible at present to know whether the two and a
half percent will provide revenue for funding the total of these debts and
leave some amount for administrative purposes. No plans have yet been

worked out and none can be until full data of claims are available. In
considering such debts no distinction can justly be maintained between
external and internal. Both must be dealt with on the same basis.
6. Debts of Finance Department and of Communications cannot be
distinguished because of the fallacious assumption that the railways’ earnings
are adequate. Due to political conditions we know that they are quite
inadequate.
7. Each claim should be established on its individual merits based on the
amount actually received by the Chinese Government.
8. While the conference cannot legally act as a judicial body, in practice it
may have to do so through full cooperation between the powers.
Shidehara expressed agreement with the general statement of the situation, the
proposed treatment of it politically and adjustment of debt claims. He said he knew of
some sham debts where no money passed. He suggested a convening of the
Extraterritoriality Commission without delay.
MacMurray answered that it seemed they should not sit at the same time because one
would be played off against the other and would interfere with the best results and
encourage the Chinese to attempt to control the action of each; that it would be better if
the Extraterritorial Commission were convened at a fixed date after the completion of
the work of the economic conference. Shidehara answered “perhaps that would be the
better way of treatment.”
As to the British claim that the two and one-half percent should be a part of the
customs revenues, which would thus be deposited in certain banks, Shidehara
responded “That means that it would go to the custodian bank. I think we might well
align ourselves with you on this point.”
MacMurray further suggested that the two and a half percent is described as a surtax,
the amount, time and disposition of which the conference is specifically authorized to
fix and clearly there is no reason for increasing the security of the secured loans.
Shidehara then suggested that an additional two and a half percent would have the
effect of a substantial protection to the industries of China and it occurred to him that to
be accompanied by this protective feature the powers might propose a countervailing
excise tax of two and a half percent on domestic productions for the benefit of the
provinces. This would be agreeable to them and might help to induce them to surrender
at an earlier date the likin. Shidehara further suggested that an average of seven and
one-half percent duty on all imports is very high, as high in fact as the average duty in
high tariff countries like the United States—and a 12 percent duty is unheard of

MacMurray suggested that this might raise a number of political and other questions on
which we should reserve judgment. While the provinces would be glad to have this
additional income, not the surrender of the likin but other means of increasing revenues
might result; and the people might regard this as a further burden attributable to foreign
influence.
MacMurray left this morning for Kobe to rejoin his ship for Shanghai. Copy to Peking.
BANCROFT
46 Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs.
46a Edwin L. Neville, first secretary of Embassy in Japan.
47 John V. A. MacMurray, newly appointed Minister to China, en route to his post.
48 Surtax provided for by art. III of the Chinese customs treaty, Foreign Relations, 1922,

[Document 688]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Received 3 p.m.]
discussing questions connected with the Special Conference and urged that its scope
should be extended to include question of tariff autonomy which had been reserved by
the Chinese delegation at Washington Conference.
2. I told him that I had received from my Government an intimation of its willingness
to have Special Conference consider any question which might arise in connection with
the tariff; and I took occasion to inform him that you had prepared a draft of a reply49
to the Chinese Government’s note of June 24th,50 in which draft you took a very
advanced position on this subject and hoped to obtain acquiescence of the other
interested Governments to which you had submitted it.
3. At a meeting of the interested chiefs of mission August 7th, senior minister raised the
question of preparing definite agenda in advance of the Special Conference. I said that
my own view would favor going into that conference with a program based strictly
upon the Washington customs treaty with no attempt to specify in advance relevant
matters which we might be willing to consider and that we should leave it for the
conference to develop and to obtain authority to deal with such further matters as its
deliberations might prove necessary or desirable.
4. Does this meet with your approval? I apprehend that if we attempt in advance of the
conference to specify additional subjects which might be considered, we will find
ourselves from that time on debating mere generalities and unable to bring the
discussion back to the concrete purposes the conference was designed to serve. A
communication along the line of your draft reply to the Chinese note of June 24th (your
readiness to go beyond the immediate scope of the conference.
MACMURRAY
portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637].

[Document 689]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
your telegram. If an identic note along lines of American draft communicated in my
scope of conference and serve as preliminary basis of conference agenda. Otherwise it
would be better to go into the conference on the basis of the treaty and leave
conference to develop and to obtain authority to deal with such further matters as its
deliberations might prove necessary or advisable.
KELLOGG

[Document 690]
The Chinese Minister (Sze) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, August 19, 1925.
SIR: Acting under instructions from my Government I have the honor to transmit to your
Government an invitation to a Special Conference relating to the Chinese Customs
Tariff from the Chinese Government as follows: In accordance with Article XI [II] of
the Treaty between the United States of America, Belgium, the British Empire, China,
France, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands and Portugal relating to the Chinese Customs
Tariff signed at Washington on February 6, 1922,53 a Special Conference shall meet in
China within three months after the coming into force of this Treaty on a day and at a
place to be designated by the Chinese Government with a view to continuing and
completing the work of the Washington Conference relative to Chinese Customs
questions.
In connection with the said Treaty it may be recalled that on January 5, 1922, at the
17th meeting of the Committee on Pacific and Far Eastern Questions of the Washington
Conference, the Chinese Delegation in giving their assent thereto declared that it was
their intention to bring up again the question of the restoration to China of her tariff
autonomy for consideration on all appropriate occasions in the future. In pursuance of
the above declaration the Chinese Government proposes that the said question be also
brought up at the forthcoming conference and expects some arrangement will be made
to remove the tariff restrictions hitherto imposed upon China.
The said Treaty as provided in Article X, thereof, takes effect August 5, 1925, being the
date of the deposit at Washington of all the Ratifications of the Treaty. Accordingly the
Chinese Government in pursuance of the article referred to above has the honor to state
that it intends to have the Special Conference meet on October 26, 1925, at the City of
Peking, in which the Government of the United States is hereby invited to participate.
Besides instructing our Legation at Washington to transmit the above invitation to your
Government, I have the honor to request that you be good enough to take note of the
above invitation and communicate to the Waichiao Pu at Peking the names and titles of
the representatives of your Government as soon as possible.
Accept [etc.]
SAO-KE ALFRED SZE

[Document 691]
The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister (Sze)
WASHINGTON, August 21, 1925.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of August 19, 1925, in
which you invited the attention of this Government to the Treaty between the United
States of America, Belgium, the British Empire, China, France, Italy, Japan, The
Netherlands and Portugal relating to the Chinese customs tariff, which was signed at
deposit of all of the ratifications at Washington, as provided for in Article X thereof.
You referred to Article II of the Treaty, which provides for the convening of a Special
Conference, to prepare the way for the speedy abolition of likin and for the fulfillment
of the other conditions laid down in Article VIII of the Treaty of September 5, 1902,
between Great Britain and China,54 in Articles IV and V of the Treaty of October 8,
1903, between the United States and China,55 and in Article I of the Supplementary
surtaxes provided for in these articles; and in which it is further stated that the Special
Conference shall be composed of representatives of the Signatory Powers, and of such
other Powers as may desire to participate and may adhere to the present Treaty, in
accordance with the provisions of Article VIII, in sufficient time to allow their
representatives to take part, and that it shall meet in China within three months after the
coming into force of the present Treaty, on a day and at a place to be designated by the
Chinese Government. You were so good as to inform me that your Government has
designated October 26, 1925, as the date of the Special Conference and the city of
Peking as the place where it shall meet.
I have the honor to inform you that I have carefully noted the date and place designated
by your Government for the meeting of the Special Conference and that the
representatives of the United States Government will be prepared to take part in its
deliberations on October 26, 1925.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 692]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
342. 1. The Minister for Foreign Affairs having raised with the senior minister the
question whether the delegates to the Special Conference would be furnished with full
powers, the representatives of powers signatory to customs treaty decided to send their
Governments an identic telegram of which the text in translation is as follows:
2. “As regards full powers for the Special Conference it seems desirable that
the powers should confer at Washington as to whether it is advisable to
furnish them to the delegates and if so what would be the substance of such
full powers, which should be identical.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 693]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
to John Van A. MacMurray and Silas Strawn, its delegates to Special Conference on
Chinese Tariffs, full power and authority for and in the name of the United States to
meet and confer with the duly authorized representatives of other Governments
signatory or adherent to the Nine Power Treaty of February 6, 1922, and represented at
the Special Conference, being invested with like authority, and with them to negotiate,
conclude and sign any treaties, conventions or other acts adopted by the Special
Conference, the same to be transmitted to the President of the United States for his
ratification by and with the consent of the Senate thereof.
The above information is being communicated to other interested Governments
through diplomatic missions which are being instructed at the instance of the Secretary
of State to express the hope that they will find themselves able to issue similar
authority to their delegates to the forthcoming Conference.
GREW

[Document 694]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
WASHINGTON, September 9, 1925.
SIRS: I am transmitting to you herewith the following instructions for your guidance in
the performance of your duties as the American Delegates to the Special Conference
called by the Chinese Government to convene at Peking on October 26, 1925, in
accordance with the provisions of the Nine Power Treaty Relating to the Chinese
Customs Tariff, concluded at Washington on February 6, 1922. As you will observe,
these instructions are of a general character. The number of Powers participating in the
Conference, the complexity and technical character of the matters to be dealt with, and
the necessity of constant and careful consideration being given to the changing political
situation in China, render impracticable the framing of detailed instructions. It would,
moreover, in any event be my desire that you have a broad latitude of discretion in
dealing with the specific questions which will confront you. At the same time, it is
equally desirable that the Department should be kept fully informed upon all matters of
importance and its instructions sought when needed.
Until the last few months, it had been the belief of this Government, and presumably
that of the other foreign governments concerned, that the provisions of the Customs
Treaty would suffice for the present to meet the Chinese desires on the subject of tariff
revision. The events of the last few months have, however, made it evident that these
provisions will not satisfy those desires as a step in progress toward ultimate tariff
autonomy. Chinese aspirations toward freedom from what they consider to be
oppressive restrictions imposed upon them by the Powers are not confined to Customs
matters alone, but embrace other subjects upon which they are equally insistent that
radical changes be made. I am sympathetic with the aims of the Chinese, and desire to
bring about such modifications in our treaties with China as may be just and
practicable; but I do not desire to apply abstract principles in disregard of actual
conditions in China and of such practical courses of action as may be recommended by
a careful consideration of these conditions. I am of the opinion, however, that, with
respect to the Tariff, the Special Conference ought to go beyond the strict scope of its
activities as defined in the Customs Treaty and enter into a discussion of the entire
subject of the conventional tariff, even including proposals looking toward ultimate
tariff autonomy. I am also of the opinion that other subjects dealt with in our treaties
with China deserve reconsideration at an early date and that the Special Conference
may well serve as the first step toward a consideration of these matters. These views
have been already set forth in the course of instructions of the last few months to the

American Legation at Peking. It must be borne in mind, however, that the purposes of
the Special Conference and the scope of its activities as they now stand are defined by
treaty and are a matter of treaty obligation. The work of the Conference cannot,
therefore, be modified or extended without the concurrence of the governments of all
Powers signatory to the Treaty. It is my hope that, either before the opening of the
Conference or during the course of its sessions, agreement may be obtained which will
enable the various delegations to take up for discussion such further matters relating to
its purpose as will constitute a program sufficiently liberal in its agenda to satisfy the
demands of the conservative elements of the Chinese people and at the same time not
be subversive of the fundamental rights and interests of all the Powers concerned. With
this contingency in mind, you are being equipped with full powers to negotiate with the
representatives of the Chinese and other signatory or adherent Powers, and to conclude
such agreements as may be adopted by the Special Conference, the same to be
submitted to the President of the United States for his ratification by and with the
advice and consent of the Senate. Such negotiations on your part will eventually call
for further instructions; for the present instructions have been framed with a view to
your guidance merely in matters specified in the Treaty, the agreements of the
Conference in regard to which do not appear to call for subsequent approval by the
Senate.
I am of the opinion that the ultimate interests of the United States will best be served by
your work being approached in the broadest spirit and with the purpose of rendering
the utmost possible contribution to the improvement of trade and of the general welfare
in China in so far as these matters may be promoted by the decisions reached in the
Conference. The primary function of the Conference is described in Paragraph 1 of
Article II of the Customs Treaty wherein it is clearly indicated that its main objective is
the amelioration of conditions of trade through the diminution and ultimate removal of
local taxation on merchandise in transit. Although in the treaties referred to in Article
II, China agreed to abolish likin and the Powers concerned agreed in return to consent
to an increase in the import tariff to 12½ percent ad valorem, likin has in fact never
been abolished; and, in recent years, numerous other forms of taxation, such as “sales
taxes” and “protection fees”, have been additionally imposed upon goods offered for
sale which have in effect nullified to a certain extent the provisions of the conventional
tariff. From such information as is available on the subject, it appears doubtful whether
the Chinese Government, however desirous of so doing, is now, or in the near future
will be, able to take any effective measures for the abolition of likin or even to make
any substantial progress toward that end. Nevertheless, such an assumption, however
well justified it may seem from a survey of existing conditions in China, cannot be
taken as an established fact. It is my earnest hope that the contrary may prove to be the
case. The Chinese Government must be given an opportunity to present such plans as it
may have formulated on the subject; and these proposals should receive your careful
and sympathetic consideration. They should, however, be studied strictly in the light of
their practical applicability to conditions now existing in China. It is essential that any

scheme which may be adopted by the Conference have a reasonable promise of
fulfillment; for I desire to avoid the conclusion of any new agreements which may
remain inoperative as have the pertinent provisions on the subject in the treaties above
referred to in Article II.
In dealing with the question of the abolition of likin, I am of the opinion that the
representatives of the Powers other than China are entitled to negotiate with the
Chinese representatives on the subject of an increase in tariff, beyond the 2½ percent
surtax specifically authorized in the treaty, up to a maximum rate of 12½ percent as
contemplated in the treaties referred to in Article 2 of the treaty. Such negotiations
appear to be justified in view of the language employed in Article II that the
Conference is to “prepare the way for the speedy abolition of likin …57 with a view to
levying the surtaxes provided in those articles.” The Treaty would not however appear
to contemplate negotiations of this character apart from, or except in conjunction with,
a satisfactory plan for the abolition of likin. Such arrangements as might be concluded
with respect to any plan going beyond the 2½ percent surtax specified in the Treaty
could, of course, not be definitive as in the case of the levying of the 2½ percent surtax
and would have to be submitted for the ratification of the various governments
concerned in accordance with their respective constitutional methods.
With regard to the authority granted in Article 3 of the Treaty to levy a surtax on
dutiable imports at the rate of 2½ percent ad valorem and at 5 percent ad valorem in the
case of luxuries, it is not my desire to restrict the scope of your discretion by precise
directions. The following observations are, however, offered as indicative of the trend
of my thought upon this subject. In the first place, I am of the opinion that the levying
of the surtax is substantially mandatory upon the Conference and that, notwithstanding
the possible existence of conditions which might lead the Conference to a contrary
view, the Conference would not be acting in complete good faith, were it to take
advantage of the broad terms of its charter to impose such conditions either as to the
date of the application of the surtax or the disposition of the new revenues as would, in
effect, nullify the plain intent of the Treaty that China is to receive the increases stated.
In this connection it is to be noted that, although the levying of the surtax is by
implication allied with the subject of the interim provisions to be applied prior to the
abolition of likin, the Treaty does not specifically condition the levying of the surtax
upon any measures to be taken with respect to likin; and the Conference is given a free
hand to levy the surtax “as from such date, for such purposes, and subject to such
conditions as it may determine.” I regard the choice of this language as fortunate,
particularly in view of recent developments in the political situation; for it gives the
Conference full authority to make such a disposition of the additional revenues as will
suit the exigencies of the times.
The assignment of the revenues to be derived from the 2½ percent surtax as
compensation to local authorities in any plan for the abolition of likin would not appear

to be practicable in view of the insufficiency of the revenues available from the surtax
even if it were so used in toto. Should, however, the Conference discuss and conclude
arrangements whereby some reasonable plan were evolved for the diminution and
gradual removal of the present vexatious restrictions upon domestic trade and in return
therefor the Powers concerned were to consent to an increase, graduated or otherwise,
of the tariff to a maximum of 12½ percent ad valorem, I should be inclined to feel that
the assignment of these revenues, to such an extent and in such a manner as might be
necessary to the practical working out of such a scheme, would perhaps prove to be the
most beneficial purpose to be served. As I have stated above, I should not be satisfied
with a mere paper arrangement or with any plan which did not have a reasonable
promise of measurable success in application and which was not calculated to facilitate
trade or exercise a tranquillizing and stabilizing effect upon the political situation.
The matter has been brought to my attention of using the revenues from the 2½ percent
surtax for the purpose of refunding the large unsecured debt of the Chinese
Government, or at least for refunding the external portion of that debt. I am informed
that the amount of existing unsecured and inadequately secured obligations of the
Chinese Government to American citizens is in the vicinity of $30,000,000; largely
consisting of loans in default and of debts incurred for materials supplied to the
Chinese Government. These creditors are of the opinion that there is no reasonable
prospect of these claims being liquidated through other means than by the revenues
available from the 2½ percent surtax. I am informed, furthermore, that the nationals of
other Powers have claims aggregating large sums, the Japanese claims equaling
approximately the claims of all other foreign nationals combined. The Treaty providing
for the Special Conference did not of course contemplate an increase of the Chinese
Customs Tariff for the purpose of satisfying foreign claims against China. There is no
express provision in that Treaty that the claims to which I have referred are to be
considered in connection with the conditions under which the 2½ percent surtax is to be
levied; and it would not appear that any Delegation to the Conference could of right
insist upon a consideration of these claims. On the other hand, it would appear that the
Conference has full authority, if it so desires, to consider such claims under the broad
scope given it to determine the conditions under which the surtax is to be levied.
I am inclined to the view that the Conference should discuss the general advisability of
using the surtax revenues for the refunding of China’s unsecured obligations and
should consider the question of the sufficiency of these new revenues for this purpose.
The unsecured obligations, with rapidly increasing interest, threaten to reach
proportions which may soon make it almost impossible to relieve the acute financial
situation of the Chinese Government. This debt must, unless repudiation is
contemplated, be recognized as an obligation which the Chinese people as a whole will
have to meet. The earlier the matter is studied and some attempt made to find a
solution, the better it will be for all parties in interest. It is fully recognized that the
subject must be handled in the light of the political situation and not merely as a purely

financial problem. I desire especially to avoid having the impression created that the
principal motive on the part of the Powers in assenting to an increase in the tariff is to
find means to collect the debts of their respective nationals. The Conference should not
lay itself open to the charge of being a Debt Collecting Commission. In this
connection, it would be essential to treat the subject of the unsecured debt as a whole
and not to lay emphasis solely upon the external debt.
It is of course not now possible to say whether it will prove practicable to deal with the
unsecured debt through relief afforded by revenues from the surtax. The practical
aspect of the question must be studied by those who are qualified to make such
investigations. It is hoped that such studies as may be made will result in the formation
of a plan which may be used to alleviate the present financial emergency of the Chinese
Government and at the same time safeguard the fundamental and legitimate interests of
its creditors. Whatever may be the outcome of the matter, I am of the opinion that the
subject should not be left outside the scope of the discussions of the Conference.
The subject of cooperation with the other Delegations to the Conference, I regard as
one of great importance. Without effective cooperation on the part of China and of the
Powers I doubt if it will be possible for the Conference to attain any high degree of
success. I desire, however, that, while exhibiting toward all a most liberal spirit of
cooperation, you should retain your complete independence and avoid the possibility of
any charge that the American Government is taking sides for or against any other
government represented at the Conference.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
57 Omission indicated in the original instruction.

[Document 695]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Special Conference, 12 persons (including Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Finance, and
Communications, the Chinese Minister to the United States, Liang Shih-yi, W. W. Yen,
C. T. Wang and Admiral Tsai), I understand that it is the Government’s intention to give
plenipotentiary powers to 6 of the 12, the others constituting something in the nature of
an advisory commission.
2. Hawkling Yen has been appointed secretary general of the Chinese delegation. He
thinks, though it has not yet been determined, that this involves his becoming secretary
general of the conference.
3. Arrangements are being made for the holding of plenary and committee meetings
and for large force office room for the several delegations in what used to be the
Presidential Palace.

4. While I hope soon to be in a position to give more definite information as to the
plans of the Chinese Government in regard to the conference it may be useful to the
Department to know what I gather to be the tentative program of the administration.
There has been worked out (apparently under the inspiration of W. W. Yen and Liang) a
fairly coherent project involving the following points:
A. Renunciation in principle by the treaty powers of all right of restriction
upon the customs tariffs leviable by China.
B. Undertaking by the Chinese Government to levy, at any rate for a specific
period of years and after a transitional period of perhaps two or three years,
graduated “scientific” tariff involving a free list and some four or five
classifications up to rate of 30-odd percent on luxuries which my Chinese
informants state would be in all tantamount to an average of between 8 and 9
percent on imports.
C. Likin and other internal taxes on trade to be abolished forthwith.

D. Arrangements to be made by the Central Government with the several
provinces whereby in exchange for the abolition of internal taxes, provinces
would receive in due ratio an equivalent portion of increase in customs
revenue amounting to approximately 60 percent of the anticipated Mexican
dollars 100,000,000 annually to be collected by the customs.
E. The remaining 40 percent of increase to be devoted to purposes of a loan
for the funding of the external debt, domestic obligations of the Government
being taken care of separately by charges upon the salt and other revenues.
5. In the course of informal conversations I have taken occasion to intimate that in
exercising its prerogative in initiating agenda of the Special Conference the Chinese
Government would be well advised to avoid presenting at the outset the point-blank
issue as to what the Chinese call “tariff autonomy” lest a somewhat academic point
should thereafter overshadow the conference and create an atmosphere of antagonism
between Chinese and foreign opinion. It is my impression however that as a result of
pressure which this administration is not courageous enough to oppose, the Chinese
will find themselves impelled to make the best compromise they can between a
sweeping claim for idealistic formula of “tariff autonomy” and a practical proposal for
tariff arrangements which the powers could accept without too great an apprehension
that present or a future administration would tax foreign trade out of existence under
the plea of financial necessities and with complete disregard of the consequences that
might thereafter recoil upon a succeeding administration.
6. The above prognostications and suggestions are made purely tentatively in order to
enable the Department and Strawn to consider the matter as fully as may be possible in
the light of information at hand to date. I assume that the Department has kept Strawn
fully advised of the abnormal political or psychological situation which must
necessarily constitute a background to the work of the conference.
MACMURRAY

[Document 696]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
I have prepared and given to Strawn a letter59 containing instructions on suggestions in
your message. I should approve the acceptance of the tentative Chinese proposals in
No. 388 or some similar program.
In that letter I said in substance: It has been my idea from the beginning that within the
near future we would have to release China from its conventional tariffs and give up
extraterritoriality. That is the trend of modern events in relation to all self-governing
countries where extraterritorial privileges have existed. It is reasonable to suppose that
a great nation like China will not long permit foreign control of its domestic affairs. It
was with a view to meeting what I believe to be a growing demand in China that I
shaped the policy outlined in the note of the Nine Powers60 and in my speech at
Detroit.61 I believed then and I believe now that such action will go farther toward
alleviating the anti-foreign sentiment in China than anything else. It is my desire,
therefore, if we can work out a plan whereby tariff autonomy will now or eventually be
given to China and extraterritoriality given up that this be done and that you should
bear this in mind in your negotiations. I believe also that this meets the approval of the
great body of American sentiment and will be approved by the Senate and the
Congress. I think the fear which Japan and England and perhaps some of the other
countries have is that China will use this power to exclude foreign trade entirely or to
discriminate between the nationals of the different Powers. So far as the latter is
concerned, of course a treaty can provide against any discrimination. A middle ground
might be found along the lines of the plan suggested in your 388 whereby the Powers
renounce in principle conventional tariffs and China levies certain rates for a term of
years which would insure protection of foreign interests. This might satisfy the Chinese
public sentiment and the public sentiment in this country and assure that definite steps
had been taken for the renunciation of tariff control. I am not, of course, prepared to
say that it is wise for us to declare for unconditional surrender of conventional tariffs
and extraterritoriality at once. We may be driven to this position if the Powers are not
willing to make reasonable concessions.
As to your 393, if you can get these views before the officials or the public in China in
some way, it might counteract the propaganda against the note which is evidently going

on. Do you suggest that I give any publicity here to such views beyond what I have
done in my speech at Detroit?
KELLOGG
58 Latter not printed.
59 Not printed.

[Document 697]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., September 18, 1925.
[Received September 19.]
No. 822
SIR: With reference to previous correspondence on the subject of the forthcoming
Conference to consider the question of the Chinese Tariff, I have the honour, on
instructions from His Majesty’s Government, to inform you that their delegates to the
Tariff Conference are being instructed on the following lines: whilst of opinion that the
grant forthwith of complete tariff autonomy is out of the question in the present stage
of Chinese administration and fiscal development, His Majesty’s Government have no
intention of rejecting the request of the Chinese Government for eventual full tariff
autonomy. It must, however, in the opinion of His Majesty’s Government, be made
clear at the outset that such autonomy can only come in stages and in the measure in
which the Chinese authorities carry out their part of the programme adopted at the
Conference. His Majesty’s Government trust that the Conference will enable this
principle to be confirmed, and to be put into practical application.
In bringing the above information to your notice, I have the honour to add that His
Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs proposes, in a speech to be
delivered today, to outline the policy of His Majesty’s Government with regard to
China.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 698]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
418. I have just received from senior minister mimeographed circular entitled
“Provisional Agenda for the Special Conference on Chinese Customs” which has been
handed to him by the Foreign Office for distribution, reading as follows:
“A. Tariff autonomy. (1) Adoption by the Chinese Government of
the Chinese general customs tariff. (For practical convenience a
period is to be agreed upon within which to make preparations for
the coming into force of tariff autonomy and application of the
Chinese general customs tariff.) (2) Abolition of likin.
B. Provisional measures to be taken during the interim period. (1)
Levy of an interim surtax. (2) Levy of a surtax on articles of luxury.
(3) Arrangements to unify the rates of customs duties at the land
and maritime frontiers. (4) Valuation of commodities.
[C] Related matters. (1) Arrangement[s] to ascertain the country of
origin of imported goods or produce. (2) The depository
[depositing] of customs revenues.”
Copy by mail to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

[Document 699]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
423. 1. The Chinese Secretary has learned by discreet inquiry that the Soviet Chargé
very recently asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs whether the Soviet Government
would not be invited to take part in the Tariff Conference. The Chargé was informed
that this would not be possible, as the Soviet Union was not a party to the customs
treaty and was not entitled to adhere to that treaty, as it did not have a treaty with China
providing for a 5 percent tariff, which under article 8 was the eligibility requirement for
adherence to that treaty. The Soviet Chargé proposed that he should address a formal
note to the Minister for Foreign Affairs but the Minister asked him not to do so. There
have been no further developments in this matter.
2. I have learned that the German Minister has been very persistent in urging both the
Chief Executive and the Minister for Foreign Affairs that Germany be invited to the
conference. The request has been refused as Germany has no treaty right to a 5 percent
tariff.
3. The German Minister has presented the matter to me somewhat differently. In a
conversation he urged that although Germany may not be entitled to participate in the
conference, it should be enabled to give its adherence to the Washington Conference
treaties and resolutions concerning China so that Germany could cooperate in the
policies set forth therein. I should think that this would be desirable so far as concerns
Chinese questions if it could be arranged without involving participation by Germany
in the conference and without causing embarrassment by the obvious necessity of
refusing to offer an opportunity for the Soviet Government to adhere under somewhat
similar circumstances.
MACMURRAY

[Document 700]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. Minister for Foreign Affairs informs me that the “provisional agenda” was prepared
by the commission recently appointed by the Government to deal with matters in
connection with the Special Conference and was informally submitted in response to
the senior minister’s intimation that it would be desirable that the Chinese Government
give some indication of its purpose in the conference and afford some opportunity for
our Governments to consider and possibly make suggestions regarding agenda.
2. The Chinese proposals were informally considered at a meeting of the interested
diplomatic representatives Tuesday. There was general tendency to assume that the
placing of “tariff autonomy” in the forefront of the agenda is a mere face-saving device
and that the Government will be even glad to skim over that heading with a high-
sounding declaration. For my own part I disagree with that viewpoint and consider that
the administration in power will for the sake of additional revenues be prepared to put
up hard fight and appeal to nationalistic agitation to support its claims. I therefore
pointed out that the creation of an immediate issue in regard to the question of “tariff
autonomy” and the association of the likin question with that issue rather than with the
provisions of the customs treaty presuppose a basis entirely different from that of the
uncertainty in which we are left by the failure of the Chinese Government to live up to
its obligations and to deal loyally with us in the Federal Wireless case62 as a test of the
principle of the open door, I declared myself unable to express any views on the subject
of the proposed agenda without instructions.
3. The interested representatives then decided to send to their respective Governments
the following identic telegram (in translation from the French):
“In communicating to their respective Governments the draft programme
given below, drawn up by the Chinese Government for the Special
Conference for the Revision of the Customs Tariff, and which was submitted
to them unofficially, the representatives of the interested powers wish to
make the following remarks: The question of tariff autonomy, being only a

question of principle concerning which the primary purpose of the Chinese is
to formulate a vœu, should be mentioned alone under the heading A in the
following form: ‘the Chinese Government, referring to the declaration made
by its delegation at the Washington Conference, proposes to submit to the
Special Conference the question of tariff autonomy’; the explanatory formula
which follows would disappear.
The abolition of likin would figure under the heading B; heading C would
include the temporary measures at present indicated under paragraph B, to
which would be added the two ‘related matters’.
Finally, a heading D would refer to the board of reference provided for in
resolution IV of the Washington agreement.63 These modifications are
intended (1) to give to the Chinese Government reference to autonomy the
value of a wish only, which will not commit the foreign governments; (2) to
separate the question of likin from that of autonomy to which the Chinese
apparently wish to link it; (3) to mention the board of reference which did not
figure in the Chinese draft. The interested representatives request their
Governments to authorize them to continue on these bases the unofficial
conversations begun with the Chinese Government for the definite drawing
up of the programme.”
4. I concur in the advisability of the modifications suggested and feel that the agenda as
thus modified might be adopted if it were made clear in the terms of acceptance that the
determination of the question of “tariff autonomy” is not to be made a condition
precedent to the consideration of the matters for which provision was made by the
treaty, but will be considered in connection with those questions.
5. I request your instructions.
6. Repeated to Tokyo for the information of the Embassy and of Strawn.
MACMURRAY

[Document 701]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
Government cannot exceed the authority granted to it in the treaties and resolutions
adopted by the Washington Conference. As Germany is one of the countries described
in article 8 of the treaty relating to principles and policies to be followed in matters
concerning China which have treaty relations with China and are recognized by the
signatory powers,64 the German Government has been invited to adhere to that treaty.
Soviet Russia has not been invited to adhere to this treaty because while it has treaty
relations with China it is not recognized by all of the powers signatory to the treaty.
The Chinese customs tariff treaty provides in article 8 that the United States shall invite
the adherence of nonsignatory powers which at the time of the signing of the treaty
were recognized by the signatory powers and had treaties with China limiting the
customs rates to 5 percent on imports and exports. Germany and Soviet Russia have not
been invited to adhere to this treaty because they do not qualify under the provisions of
article 8.
The fifth resolution of the Washington Conference, that relating to extraterritoriality in
China,65 may be acceded to by nonsignatory powers which have treaties with China
granting them extraterritorial rights. This Government does not understand that either
Germany or Soviet Russia are qualified under this resolution to participate in the
coming Commission on Extraterritoriality as at present they do not have extraterritorial
rights in China.
GREW

[Document 702]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
the acceptance of a proposal such as that outlined in your No. 388 of
September 10, 11 a.m., which I consider a “reasonable proposal” such as the
Powers have by their identic notes of September 466 told the Chinese
Government they were willing to consider at the forthcoming Conference. I
fail to perceive objection to proposal under heading A of provisional agenda
explanatory formula, which I regard as a friendly gesture which the Powers
should accept. In view of present widespread national feeling I believe that
any arrangements for the abolishment of likin which may be coupled with
arrangements looking to the foreseeable relinquishment of treaty restrictions
upon China’s right to regulate its tariffs [will be?] far more likely to meet
with the cooperation of the provinces that is necessary to its successful
accomplishment than will one that is linked with the arrangements or
surtaxes called for under the Treaty of February 6, 1922.
2. As stated in my written instructions of September 9 to you and to Mr.
Strawn I desire at this Conference to avoid the conclusion of any
understanding which will fail of execution as did the 1903 treaty because of
unpopularity in the provinces, whose support, because of their dependence
upon likin as a source of revenue, is absolutely necessary to the successful
solution of this question.
3. You should not leave your colleagues in any doubt about my attitude upon
these matters. We are going into the forthcoming Conference seriously to
cooperate with the Chinese in arriving at some workable solution of the
question of Chinese tariff, which will go as far as it is fair to go in satisfying
the nationalistic aspirations of the Chinese and yet insure American trade
freedom from unequal or discriminatory treatment. If we cannot do this in
cooperation with the other Powers at this Conference we must then negotiate
separately.

have our Delegation go into the Conference on the simple basis of the joint
the Chinese Government has offered a provisional agenda in response to the
suggestion of the Senior Minister which, in the light of recent extreme
agitations which have swept China, I consider reasonable and friendly, I feel
it should be accepted. I feel that much can be accomplished both in the
discussions which the Diplomatic Body is now having with the Chinese
Foreign Minister, and later in the Conference, if emphasis is laid upon our
sincere desire to cooperate rather than dictate to the Chinese in these matters.
A new tariff treaty embodying (a) a renunciation in principle of our present
treaty right of restricting China’s freedom of action in tariff matters, (b) a
guarantee to American commerce of most favored nation tariff treatment and
providing against discriminatory or unequal action, (c) the acceptance on
behalf of the United States of a Chinese general tariff, as applicable to
American goods for a specified period and (d) providing for a decision at the
end of that period on the questions of the continuance or revision of said
general tariff, or of the complete restoration to China of tariff autonomy,
would, in my opinion, be acceptable to this Government as a solution of this
question.
5. I have no objection to inclusion of discussion of Board of Reference in the
agenda of the Conference.
KELLOGG

[Document 703]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
290. The Belgian Chargé informs me that Belgian Delegation to Special Conference
has been instructed to request Conference to include Banque Beige pour l’Étranger
among foreign financial establishments to receive funds proceeding from new Customs
receipts. In this connection see Department’s mail instruction to you of April 29, 1922,
No. 139.68 I informed him that if question of deposit of Chinese Customs funds is
brought up at Conference the American Delegation will take the position that banks of
all nationalities be treated on a basis of equality including American. I explained to him
that this did not mean that this Government would urge that surplus Customs funds be
deposited with foreign banks.
KELLOGG
68 Not printed.

[Document 704]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. At today’s meeting of the interested ministers all others but Japanese and Spanish
representatives (who had received no instructions) stated their Governments have
authorized approval of the modifications of Chinese tentative agenda referred to in my
telegram 425.69 They and I concurred in authorizing the senior minister to discuss the
proposed modifications with the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs not as a proposal
of the diplomatic body, but as an informal suggestion.70
MACMURRAY
68 Not printed.
70 Mr. Oudendijk, the Senior Minister, stated in the first meeting of the committee on
program and procedure of the Conference, October 27, that when the Chinese Minister
for Foreign Affairs sent word to him that the time was too short for making these
alterations, the agenda was allowed to remain as it was. See The Special Conference on
the Chinese Customs Tariff, p. 57.

[Document 705]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Extract]
292.
p.m. is approved.
KELLOGG

[Document 706]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. It would appear that no such definite program as outlined paragraph 4 has
been adopted. Various members Chinese commission have from time to time
intimated their desire to talk over confidentially with me in advance the
conference plans of the Government but up to the present time have either
postponed actual discussion or spoken in obviously evasive generalities. It
seems clear that the Government is still undecided upon its course of action.
2. From reliable informants in intimate relations with the Ministry Finance I
learn that the financial authorities of the Government are wholly skeptical of
the practicability of proposals for so-called tariff autonomy and regard as the
crux of the problem the possibility of inducing the powers to consent to
interim surtax of 5 percent instead of 2½ provided by the treaty. Could they
obtain this they would propose to use entire revenues from this surtax as the
basis for a loan, bulk of which would be devoted to the funding of unsecured
foreign and domestic debts and the balance to (a) preparations for the
abolition of likin, (b) administration purposes and (c) constructive purposes.
Apparently the measures contemplated under (a) would consist of
experiments in arrangements with various provinces for the abandonment of
internal taxation on the movement of trade in return for a subsidy out of the
customs surtax revenues; and the constructive measures contemplated would
not consist in the building of railways or similar undertaking but in carrying
out of ordinary functions of government now neglected because of lack of
funds.
3. These plans of the financial authorities evidently represent what the
administration in power would desire to obtain for itself from the conference
with a view to rehabilitating its credit deficiencies, consolidating its tenure of
power and for that purpose realistically accepting comparatively slight
immediate advantage in preference to any prospects of more far-reaching
better success in the future. These wholly practical purposes of the financial
authorities are sharply contested by the diplomatic and political elements

which are anxious to conciliate nationalistic feeling by forcing the issue on
the question of tariff autonomy.
4. In consequence of this confusion of purposes it now seems probable that
the Chinese will enter the conference without any definite program of action
asking initially that the principal [principle of?] tariff autonomy be conceded
but presenting no concrete plan by which foreign trade would be safeguarded
against arbitrary exactions by either central or local authorities whether at the
ports or in transit through the interior. It is to [be] apprehended that the
insistence of the idealists upon an unqualified concession of tariff autonomy
such as none of the powers could accept in justice to their own legitimate
interests may precipitate a situation in which a new outburst of demagogue
fervor may make it impossible for the more practical elements of the Chinese
Government to propose any satisfactory conditions for such a concession.
5. In anticipation of the possibility of obtaining tariff autonomy the
Government is considering and has allowed to become public a [apparent
omission] of regulations governing levy of tariffs which contemplate
imposition of duties ranging up to 40 percent and higher in case of wines and
tobacco. Tariff attached to these regulations has not been made public. I
understood however that the duty on cotton goods has been reduced to less
than present 5 percent as bait to England and Japan whereas very high rate on
tobacco was explained to my informant by a Chinese official with the
statement that this item principally interests us [U. S.?] which is already
benevolently disposed. I should welcome such instructions or suggestions as
the Department may be able to give for guidance of delegation in meeting
such forms of discrimination which cannot be met by most-favored-nation
clause.
Copy by mail to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

[Document 707]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
1. It seems to me most important that as far as possible the principles
governing future tariff relations between China and other countries be
worked out before detailed rates that might be applied under tariff autonomy
are considered. So many points of controversy are involved in the question of
detailed rate schedules that the possibility of agreement on anything would be
endangered should such discussions be entered upon, even informally, in
connection with the conference. You may take such action as you think
advisable to impress this view upon the interested parties.
2. Unconditional most-favored-nation treatment is a vital underlying
(b). Refer in this connection to the seventh article of the treaty with Germany
which became effective this month71 (see Congressional Record for February
no discrimination and that when any benefit is granted to any one country the
other countries shall receive it unconditionally without request.
3. The possibility of disadvantageous treatment of American trade will
remain, as you suggest, even with provisions accepted for most-favored-
nation treatment. This might result either from restrictions upon imports and
exports, rate schedules, or classification of goods. The following comments
are offered regarding these points:
(a) Obviously it will be very difficult to devise any tariff system
that will affect equally the Chinese trade of the several foreign
countries. The Department feels that if China in good faith applies
reasonable principles in tariff-making, no country can with reason
object. It is reasonable, for example, that necessities should not
bear as high a tax as luxuries. Our Government would not object in
principle if higher rates were placed on American luxuries,

provided like products from other countries were taxed
proportionally. As suggested in paragraph 1 of this telegram, it is
important, of course, pending agreement in principle to avoid
bickering over such matters. For the protection of American
interests it is also important that there shall be no deals between the
Chinese and powers not in the conference that under any new tariff
would place American trade at an unfair disadvantage.
It is difficult for the Department to instruct you further on this point
until it receives further advices regarding developments. Follow
this question closely and keep us fully informed.
(b) Probably the question of restrictions on imports or exports will
not come up. The following is, however, mentioned for your
guidance: The position which the Department has taken is that such
restrictions, for example licensing or prohibitions, if maintained,
shall provide that with respect to commodities, valuations, and
quantities the United States shall receive as favorable treatment as
is given to any other country. In this connection see recent modi
vivendi, such as the exchange of notes with Greece,73 printed as
Treaty Series No. 706.
(c) The Department has hesitated to include provisions regarding
discrimination through classification of commodities in our
treaties, as with the American practice of tariff-making it is
doubtful whether it is practical to give assurance that our
legislation would not through inadvertence contravene such
provisions. It would, however, lessen the danger of discrimination
by classification if a provision were included to the effect that the
principles of most-favored-nation treatment shall be liberally
interpreted and that neither customs rates nor classifications shall
be used by either of the contracting parties as a means of
discrimination against the commerce of the other.
4. The Department believes that agreement with respect to most-favored-
nation treatment should be reciprocal, that China should be given such
treatment as well as granting it to others.
5. Telegraph to the Department for instructions if any question as to national
treatment of shipping is presented.
As the situation develops you will be given more specific instructions.

KELLOGG

[Document 708]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
[Received October 24—4 a.m.]
for Foreign Affairs, W. W. Yen, C. T. Wang, Huang Fu, Alfred Sze74 and Admiral Tsai
Tink-kan as delegates with full powers to the Customs Conference.
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]
74 Sao-Ke Alfred Sze, Chinese Minister at Washington, did not attend the Conference.

[Document 709]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 26, 1925.
Summary number 1. Tariff Conference opened this morning at 10 a.m., presided over
by Shen Jui-lin, Minister for Foreign Affairs and chairman of the Chinese delegation,
who was chosen chairman of the conference by acclamation upon nomination of Mr.
Oudendijk, Netherlands Minister and senior minister.
The Chief Executive of the Provisional Government, Marshal Tuan Chi-jui, delivered
brief address of welcome and after referring to Washington Conference and particularly
to section 1 of article I of nine-power treaty, stated that Chinese people attached great
import to this declaration and that an opportunity would be provided at this conference
for its realization. He renewed the claim for tariff autonomy and on this subject made
following statement:
“The idea of tariff autonomy is not a new one, it is an inherent right of a
sovereign nation. We, therefore, trust that friendly nations, actuated by spirit
of equality and mutuality, will appreciate our position. The existing tariff
regime in China is contrary to economic principles, and consequent loss of
revenue to us cannot be fully estimated. It is true that with enforcement of the
national tariff and the revision of rates, the burden of the importers will be
somewhat increased. It will, however, remove the disadvantages under which
the Chinese people have long been laboring, thereby improving their
financial conditions, increasing their purchasing power and help develop
their infant industries. China is recognized as one of the great markets of the
World. The improvement of her financial condition[s], the growth of her
wealth and the development of her industries will not only be a blessing to
herself but also a source of benefit to the friendly nations. Believing that self-
aggrandizement is a step to self-destruction and that mutual assistance is the
basis of mutual salvation, my expectations grant [expectation is great] that
this conference will be guided by the principle of equality and mutuality.
Furthermore, the general feeling of unrest and dissatisfaction [,either] within
a nation or between nations, may be traced to economic inequality. The
establishment of a tariff regime in China on a basis of equality is the means
towards stabilizing the economical reparations [economic relations] between
China and the World, and forms the foundation of international [peace].”

The Minister for Foreign Affairs next addressed the conference, and, after thanking the
delegates for the honor of selecting him to preside and extending a warm welcome to
the delegates and their respective staffs, he referred to the many international
conferences which have been held since the close of the Great War. He spoke
particularly of the Locarno Conference; because, as he stated, its achievements are still
fresh in our memory and have resulted in the readjustment of the relations between the
interested powers in the light of and in harmony with the new conditions which have
arisen since the signing of the Versailles Treaty. He said further that the Washington
Conference has had a more direct effect on the Pacific and the Far East than any other
conference. In referring to the Chinese customs tariff he said:
“I am inclined to think, and I feel confident that my opinion is [shared] by all
of you present, that the treaty tariff regime in China, inaugurated some eighty
years ago to meet a condition which no longer exists today, is entirely out-of-
date and should not be allowed to continue to prevail. I, therefore, venture to
hope that you, the distinguished delegates of this conference, inspired by the
spirit of good will and sympathy and availing yourselves of the opportunity
now offered, will arrive at [a] readjustment of the Chinese customs questions
so that China may be enabled at an early date to exercise her sovereign rights
of tariff autonomy.”
In concluding, he said that Dr. C. T. Wang, one of the Chinese delegates to the
conference, would lay before it on behalf of the Chinese Government certain proposals
for the settlement of the Chinese customs questions and that he was firmly convinced
that the conference, animated by the spirit of justice, would agree to the proposal[s].
C. T. Wang spoke next and referred to the presentation of the question of tariff
autonomy at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 and also at the Washington
Conference. He stated that it remains a matter of regret to the Chinese Government that
the tariff proposals have not been accepted, in that he offered [sic] section 1 of article I
of the nine-power treaty relating to principles and policies, and stated that, placing full
reliance on the spirit of the nine-power treaty, the Chinese Government makes the
following proposals for the removal of the restrictions imposed by existing treaties
affecting the customs tariff:
The customs participating powers formally declare to the Government of the
Republic of China their respect for its tariff autonomy and agree to the
removal of all the tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties.
The “Government of the Republic of China agrees to the abolition of likin
simultaneously with the enforcement of the Chinese national tariff law which
shall take effect not later than the 1st day of January, 1929.

Previous to the enforcement of the Chinese national tariff law, an interim
surtax of 5 percent on ordinary goods, 30 percent on A grade luxuries
(namely, wine, tobacco) and 20 percent on B grade luxuries shall be levied in
addition to the present customs tariff at 5 percent ad valorem.
The collection of the above-mentioned interim surtaxes shall begin three
months from the date of signature.
The decisions relative to the above four articles shall be carried into effect
from the date of signature.
Chinese tariff law referred to in proposals 2 and 3 in Wang’s speech is a law
promulgated October 24, 1925, by the Chief Executive of the revolutionary
government and will be telegraphed tomorrow or later.75
Following Dr. Wang’s address, the American Minister spoke as follows:
“It is with a particular satisfaction that we of the American delegation take
our place[s] in this conference called in pursuance of one of the treaties
concluded at the Washington Conference [and] with the object of effectuating
the purpose[s] of that treaty. [It] is our earnest hope that the work of the
present conference may be carried on in the same spirit of mutual good will,
hopefulness, and confidence, which characterized the proceedings at
Washington.
There lies before this assembly a definite task imposed by the customs tariff
treaty. We, for our part, approach these duties with [a] hearty good will,
determined to do our share in bringing into practical operation the principles
and the purposes established by the treaty. In so doing we are prepared to
consider carefully, with open minds and in a generous spirit, any reasonable
plan which may be proposed with a view to realizing [the] hopes and
inspirations [aspirations] of the Chinese people in regard to the customs tariff
of China.
We are hopeful that the deliberations of this conference, actuated by mutual
respect and sympathetic understanding, may result in arrangement[s] that,
while safeguarding the just interests of the foreign nations, may also be the
means of assisting the Chinese people in developing and maintaining a sound
national life.”
The French Minister in his address laid special emphasis on the necessity for the
financial rehabilitation of China. He confined himself in the main to pleasant references
to the conference and to the program of work.

The British Minister in his speech referred to the kind words of welcome spoken by
Marshal Tuan and the Minister of Foreign Affairs and concluded as follows:
“This Customs Tariff Conference is, as you all know, the outcome of an
engagement solemnly entered into by the nine powers including China which
participated in the Washington Conference and its scope and objects were
clearly laid down and defined in the treaties signed by those powers on the
6th of February 1922.
His Britannic Majesty’s Government, in accepting the invitation of the
Chinese Government to take part in this conference and in appointing their
delegates thereto, have been actuated by precisely the same motives which
impelled him [them] to join in the resolutions respecting China adopted at
Washington and to becoming [become] cosignatories of the Washington
treaties; merely [namely] their earnest desire to assist the Chinese nation in
the realization of its legitimate aspirations as [and] in the achievement of
resolutions [results] beneficial to China as a whole.
His Majesty’s Government wish the British delegates to approach the
conference in a generous and sympathetic spirit and I am authorized to state
that this delegation be [is] prepared to discuss the question of tariff autonomy
either at this conference or, if that cannot be arranged, at [a] later date.
We are anxious that the conclusions reached by this conference may make it
possible for the Chinese [to] establish a thoroughly sound fiscal system and
[to] raise adequate revenues for the needs of the Central Government and
also [those of] the provincial authorities. One of the essential aims of the
conference as laid down in the Washington treaty is the elaboration of
measures leading to the abolition of likin and other internal levies on trade
and in the view of His Majesty’s Government this must necessarily entail
some readjustment of the fiscal relations between the Central Government
and the provinces which will take into due account the financial necessities
of the component parts of this great Republic.
We are convinced that British interests and Chinese interests are essentially
the same. We have no doubt that it is in British interests only less than in
Chinese interests to promote the establishment of a united, independent,
orderly and prosperous China. We naturally recognize that the attainment of
this aim lies in the hands of the Chinese themselves, but so far as British
assistance may be practicable and may be desired, I can assure you that the
wholehearted cooperation of this delegation is at the disposal of the Chinese
delegation and of all our other colleagues.”

Mr. Hioki, chairman of the Japanese delegation, stated that his delegation have come
here with the curious [serious] conviction that some definite results [in] the direction of
a common purpose and a common understanding between China and other powers may
well be attained at the present conference. He pledged that delegation’s wholehearted
cooperation to this end and predicted that [deliberations of] the conference will be
marked on all sides by fairness and moderation in spirit and simplicity and directness in
method. He stated that Japan has always watched with keen interest every effort made
by the Chinese people for the realization of their legitimate national aspirations. He
stated also that Japan had at one time been subjected to unilateral restrictions upon her
freedom of action in matters of fiscal and judicial administration and referred
particularly to the fact that the present tariff restrictions in China had their counterpart
in Japanese history of tariff restrictions in Japan and their relinquishment finally in
1911. Concluding this historical résumé he said:
“China is still following the same paths that we once pursued. The
difficulties, the embarrassment[s], and the perplexities that confront China
today have once been ours. The Japanese delegation will approach the
problems before this conference with sympathy and understanding and with
intimate apprehension of the Chinese position.
I am happy to state at the outset that the Japanese delegation are fully
prepared to consider in the friendliest way the question of tariff autonomy
which appears in the agenda presented by the Chinese delegation.”
Mr. Hioki then referred to certain provisions of the customs treaty particularly articles
II and III concerning respectively likin and the 2½ [percent] surtax which he stated
could provide additional revenue of approximately 99 [29] million dollars in silver. He
made reference also to a general readjustment of Chinese finances and stated that the
Japanese delegation would on another occasion make concrete suggestions on this
subject. He stated also that the Japanese delegation would not be disinclined to take up
any proposals which might be put forward with a view to the levying of a reasonable
surtax, higher than 2½ [percent], pointing out that such a proposal might be considered
as falling within the terms of article II of the treaty. He remarked, however, that since
this would constitute an intermediate step prior to the total abolition of likin, it would
be requisite for China to effectuate at least a partial abolition of likin as well as to fulfill
certain conditions provided for in the treaties between China and other powers. Mr.
Hioki here returned to the question of tariff autonomy and reiterated the statement that
the Japanese delegation will consider sympathetically and helpfully any reasonable
plan of the Chinese Government in this regard but stated that the goal could be reached
only by successive stages and that immediate and unconditional surrender by the
powers of their existing treaty rights is not within the contemplation of China herself.
Mr. Hioki then proposed the following alternative plan:

“First. That a statutory tariff on a fair and reasonable basis be
established for general application subject to the provisions of a
special conventional tariff on certain specified articles to be agreed
upon separately between China and each of the powers directly
interested; or
Secondly. That a graduated tariff so devised as to be acceptable to
the powers concerned be established at an average rate of not more
than 12½ per centum ad valorem and generally in a manner
consistent with the provisions of article II of the Washington
Treaty.”
Mr. Hioki also said that: “The inauguration of a regime of tariff autonomy in China
implies the existence of an adequately strong and unified government, and presupposes
a complete removal of all restrictions which might impede the [freedom of] intercourse
of [and] trade between China and other powers.” He expressed the hope that:
“Endowed with remarkable qualities of self-government and supported by the growth
of [nationalism now] so manifestly asserting itself in the country, the Chinese people
will succeed in the accomplishing of reforms toward these ends, as much desirable for
their own welfare as for the common good of all nations.”
In conclusion, Mr. Hioki stated:
“I desire to reaffirm, on behalf of the Japanese delegation, our faith in the
spirit of friendliness which animates this important gathering. We ardently
hope and believe that by frank discussion and neighborly cooperation, by
mutual assistance and concession and by the exercise of due respect for one
another’s rights and interests, the present conference will find equitable
solution for every problem before it to the satisfaction of all and thus
demonstrate its will to live and let live.”
The Belgian delegate, Mr. Le Maire de Warzée Hermaile; the Danish delegate, Mr.
Henrik de Kauffmann; the Italian delegate, Mr. Vittorio Cerruti; the Netherlands
delegate, Mr. W. J. Oudendijk; the Norwegian delegate, Mr. Johan Michelet; the
Portuguese delegate, Mr. Joâo Antonio de Bianchi; the Spanish delegate, Mr. Justo
Garrido y Cisneros; and the Swedish delegate, Mr. Ewerlöf, all made brief addresses
referring to the work which lies before the conference and the sympathetic and hopeful
attitude in which they approached it.
Upon the conclusion of the above-mentioned addresses Mr. Hawkling Yen was chosen
secretary general of the conference by acclamation. A committee on program and
procedure consisting of Mr. C. T. Wang, for the Chinese delegation, and the chairmen

of the other delegations was chosen and is to meet tomorrow. The conference then
adjourned subject to call.
MACMURRAY
of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711].

[Document 710]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Conference 5. 1. Committee on program and procedure met this morning, C. T. Wang
p.m.,76 was accepted after considerable discussion, principal question in dispute being
whether disposal of the proceeds of surtaxes to be collected under items (1) and (2) of
section B of the agenda should be placed on the agenda as item (3). Italian Minister
made this proposal which was supported strongly by French and to a certain extent by
British Minister. Chairman Wang declared that his Government understood that agenda
has been accepted by the powers. There was general objection taken to this by the
delegates, the senior minister explaining that the matter of the acceptance of agenda
had never come to a final conclusion owing to the fact that the alterations therein
suggested by the powers had not been discussed with the Chinese Government as the
latter declared that there was not time for such discussion and that therefore the agenda
could not be said to have been definitely accepted. Chairman explicitly declared
Chinese Government opposed to any change in the agenda as recently published but
that Chinese Government intended to bring up question of disposal of proceeds of
surtaxes in appropriate committee meeting. British Minister suggested compromise that
minutes of committee meeting of this morning contain statement by chairman that
Chinese delegation would discuss the question at issue in appropriate committee.
Italian Minister remained obdurate as did chairman. I then suggested Chinese
delegation at this committee meeting embody British Minister’s suggested compromise
in a minute to be put to vote. This was done and following minute passed:
“It is understood that the question of the disposal of the proceeds from the
surtaxes as provided in items (1) and (2) under B (Provisional Measures to be
Taken During the Interim Period), as well as the question[s] of the date of
enforcement [and of] the conditions subject to which they are to be imposed,
will be dealt with by the committee on section B.”
2. In view of the evident disposition of the chairman to regard the terms of agenda as
preventing consideration of any matters not expressly inscribed thereon, I made a
reservation, as did British Minister, to the effect that any matter contained in the nine-
power customs treaty or the resolution concerning board of reference should be open to
discussion by the conference.

AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]
76 Not printed; the text of the agenda transmitted in this telegram is the same as that
699].

[Document 711]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 28, 1925.
Summary number 2. Following are the customs tariff laws promulgated October 24th,
1925 and referred to by Dr. C. T. Wang in his address on October 26th.
“ARTICLE 1. Foreign articles upon their import into any open port in
China shall be subject to an import duty according to the provisions
defined in this law.
ARTICLE 2. With the exception of tobacco, wine, and articles similar in
nature to those under Government monopoly which shall be
otherwise provided for, the highest rate of import duty shall be 40
percent and the lowest 7½ percent. The tariff schedule will be
promulgated separately.
ARTICLE 3. The duty-paying value of goods subject to a specific duty
shall be fixed, converted or adjusted on the basis of their average
prices prevailing during the preceding year.
ARTICLE 4. The duty upon value of goods subject to an ad valorem
duty shall be fixed on the basis of their wholesale prices prevailing
at the port of entrance.
ARTICLE 5. In event an agreement exists with any country on terms of
reciprocity with regard to the import duty of certain articles, the
tariff on such articles shall be in accordance with that agreement.
ARTICLE 6. In event any country subjects Chinese articles to less
favorable treatment than those of other countries, the Government
may by mandate impose [an] import duty on articles from that
country in addition to the duty as prescribed in the tariff, such
increase of duty not to exceed in amount the value of such articles.
ARTICLE 7. In event a country grants an export bounty on its articles,
the Government may by mandate impose an import duty on such

goods of the same amount as the said bounty, in addition to the
duties prescribed in [the] tariff.
ARTICLE 8. In event the prices of foreign articles are intentionally and
unreasonably lowered to such an extent that the Government
considers it a disturbance to the market, it may by mandate impose
a duty equal to the proper prices, in addition to the duties
prescribed in the tariff.
ARTICLE 9. Articles unentered in the tariff shall be subject to a tariff on
the same scale as goods of the same or similar nature listed in the
tariff.
ARTICLE 10. The following articles shall be exempt from import duty:
Articles belonging to chiefs of foreign states and their suites
visiting China; articles for the personal use of foreign ambassadors
or ministers accredited to China or articles for the official use of
foreign ambassador’s [embassies or] legations; arms, ammunitions,
powder, explosives and munitions of war of every description
imported by the Government; articles purchased or donated for
relief purposes; samples of merchandise which are only fit to be
used as such; native articles reimported within three years after
exportation without any change in character and form; exported
articles shipped by vessels which cleared from Chinese ports, but
brought back on account of damage or danger to the vessel.
ARTICLE 11. The following articles, if imported for reexport within
one year, shall be exempted from import duty, but a deposit must
be made at the time of importation of an amount equivalent to the
amount of import duty payable: Articles imported for the purpose
of having work done thereon; articles imported for repair; articles
imported for the purpose of scientific research; articles imported
for trial.
ARTICLE 12. The import of the articles specified hereunder is
prohibited: Salt; opium, utensils for smoking opium, poppy seeds,
morphine, Chin Tan, hung wan, pai wan, and all pills containing
morphine, opium or cocaine; counterfeit, altered or imitation coins,
paper money or other negotiable papers; books, pictures, carvings
and other articles injurious to public safety or morals.
ARTICLE 13. The importation of arms, ammunitions, powders,
explosives and other munitions of war of every description is

prohibited, except by the Government.
ARTICLE 14. The importation of the following articles is prohibited
except with special permission of the Government: Saltpetre,
chlorate of potash, sulphur, zinc (powder, spelter), hydrochloric
acid, nitric acid, sulphuric acid, yearrow [yellow] phosphorus and
explosives for industrial purposes.
ARTICLE 15. The following articles may be imported in reasonable
quantities after analysis and joint certification by Government-
registered medical practitioners, druggists and chemists as to their
proper use and after report to and further examination by the
customs authorities: Morphine; cocaine and hypodermic syringes;
antiopium pills containing morphine, opium or cocaine; stovaine;
heroin; strychnine; thebaine; cghanja; hashish; bhang; cannabis
indica; tincture of opium; laudanum; codeine; dionin; and all other
derivatives of opium and cocaine.
ARTICLE 16. Date on which the present law shall be put into operation
shall be determined by mandate.
ARTICLE 17. On the date this law is put into force, the national tariff
regulations promulgated on December 25th, the Sixth Year of the
Republic of China, 1917, shall become null and void.”
“Law regulating the import duty on tobacco and wine:
[ARTICLE 1. Foreign tobacco and wine on] importation same into any
open port in China shall be subject to an import duty according to
the tariff given in this law.
ARTICLE 2. The import duty on tobacco and wine shall range from 50
percent to 80 percent ad valorem.
ARTICLE 3. Duty-paying value shall be fixed, converted or adjusted on
the basis of the average wholesale prices prevailing during the
preceding year.
ARTICLE 4. The date on which this law shall take effect will be
promulgated by mandate.”
The following press communiqué was issued by the [secretary] general of the
conference today:

“The committee on program and procedure appointed by the conference in its
number 1, Chü Jen T’ang. There were present Dr. C. T. Wang of the Chinese
delegation and heads of all the other delegations, with their respective
secretaries.
The secretary general was present.
On the proposal of the Netherlands delegate, Dr. C. T. Wang was elected
chairman.
A discussion of the agenda took place and it was decided to appoint three
committees to deal with the three groups of questions on the agenda:
Committee one to deal with tariff autonomy.
Committee two to deal with progressional [provisional] measures to be taken
during the interim period.
Committee three to deal with related matters.
It was decided that a drafting committee was to be appointed.
The committee also passed on the rules of procedure and it was decided that
the three committees should immediately proceed with their work.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 712]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
PEKING [undated].
Conference 6. 1. At a meeting of the committee on tariff autonomy this morning China
reiterated request that powers concede principle of tariff autonomy effective coincident
with the abolition of likin January 1st, 1929. Most of the powers expressed willingness
to concede principle but British, ourselves, and some others reserved decision until
further examination of China’s plan for abolition of likin and internal taxes. Italian
delegation elaborated plan proposed by Hioki as reported in summary 1.77 Meeting
adjourned until next Tuesday.
[Paraphrase]
2. We submit for your approval the following as a tentative basis for us:
(a) Put the 2½ percent surtaxes provided for in the Washington Treaty into
effect at the earliest possible date.
(b) Concede to China the right to tariff autonomy effective on January 1,
1929, or, if possible, at a later date, likin to be abolished at the same time.
(c) Secure an agreement that full surtaxes will be collected at land frontiers
the same as will be collected at the seaports.
(d) Agree that the first revision of tariff rates provided for in the Washington
Conference treaty shall be made in 1926 and that the revised schedule shall
become effective on January 1, 1929.
(e) Agree that, conditional upon the abolition of likin by July 1927, in all
seaboard provinces, the 2½ percent surtax on exports and the 7½ percent
surtax on imports, authorized in the treaties of 1902 and 1903, shall become
effective January 1, 1928, making a uniform maximum rate on all frontiers of
7½ percent on exports and 12½ percent on imports.
(f) Agree that if by July 1, 1928, abolition of likin shall have been completed,
the Chinese general customs tariff shall come into effect on January 1, 1929,

and that a second special conference on the Chinese customs tariff shall be
held May 1, 1928, at Peking to ascertain the facts in that regard.
(g) Secure a declaration by China of its purpose to maintain in its present
form the Chinese Customs Administration.
(h) Secure agreement that Custom Administration shall refund unauthorized
likin payments should likin not be abolished and provinces try to impose
likin in addition to the customs dues.
3. Revenue derived from surtax to be used (1) to pay the rebates mentioned under
section (h); (2) to give the provinces compensation for the abolition of likin; (3) to
refund unsecured debt; (4) for the Central Government’s administrative expenses.
4. As you fully realize, the Chinese Government is so lacking in stability that there is
great danger that this or a succeeding government may renounce the treaties unless we
concede some of the demands.
5. We request telegraphic instructions as soon as possible.
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]
709].

[Document 713]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 31, 1925.
Summary number 3. The following is the substance of the press communiqué issued
last night by the Committee on Tariff Autonomy following its meeting in the forenoon:
“The committee on tariff autonomy held its first meeting October 13th [30th]
with the American, Belgian, Danish, French, British, Italian, Japanese, Dutch,
Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish and Swedish delegates present.
Doctor C. T. Wang was elected chairman of the committee.
Doctor Wang, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, presented the Chinese
proposals on tariff autonomy, which he had previously submitted to the
five proposals be dealt with in committee one, reserving 3 and 4 to be dealt
with by committee two, and 5 to be discussed separately afterwards.
Mr. Hioki further elucidated the proposals advocated by him on behalf of the
Japanese delegation on October 26th, with the following statement:
‘At [the] first plenary session of this conference, the Japanese
delegation had the honor to suggest their alternative plans by which
tariff autonomy is to be restored to China. However, as the
[presentation] of these plans was of somewhat laconic character, [I]
feel it pertinent to add a few words with a view, to elucidating the
nature of our proposals.
By the first alternative plan, we suggest the inauguration of a
Chinese statutory tariff for general application, together with [a
special tariff on certain] articles which are to be agreed upon by
treaty separately between China and [the] interested Powers. While
the statutory tariff is to be made by China freely as it pleases, such
tariff should be so devised as not to hurt the trade relations between
China and other countries. In fact, the adoption of a fair and
reasonable statutory tariff should reduce to the minimum the

number of those countries requiring separate arrangements with
regard to special tariffs.
[In reviewing] the history of Japanese recovery of tariff autonomy,
I brought out the fact that the revised treaties of 1894 between
Japan and [the] Powers did not come into effect until after 5 years
from the date of signature and remained in force for the following
12 years. We believe this precedent deserves our attention; China
may well take a similar course.
In his speech at the opening session, Doctor C. T. Wang indicated
the determination of the Chinese Government to effect the abolition
of likin and to bring about the enforcement of a Chinese national
tariff law within 3 years. China within such a [preparatory] period
may conclude with other Power[s] treaties along the lines of [the]
first plan, which will become operative simultaneously with the
enforcement of the Chinese national tariff law. The new treaties
will supersede the existing treaties between China and other
Powers and will remove unilateral restrictions imposed upon China
with respect to customs tariff. In case the first alternative is
approved by the present conference, it is the intention of the
Japanese delegation to suggest that during such period, prior to the
enforcement of the Chinese statutory tariff, an interim surtax be
levied in accordance with the provisions of article 3 of the
Washington treaty.
The second plan suggested by us proposes the establishment of a
tariff regime [which] would be, in a general manner, consistent
with the stipulations of the treaties of 1902 and 1903 between
China and the other Powers. In [case] this plan should be adopted,
we would propose the inauguration of a graduated tariff since a
uniform tariff at the rate provided for by these treaties is
unreasonable and unscientific [and] works to the detriment of trade
between China and foreign countries.
When we compare these two alternative plans, it appears to us that
the first plan is to be preferred to the second. The latter plan is
based on the treaties between China and other powers conclude[d]
more than 20 years ago. Their stipulations seem difficult in more
[some] cases of being put into practice and not exactly in harmony
with the present economic conditions. For instance, these treaties
provide for not only the maintenance, but for an increase in the
rate, of the existing export duty, [which] is entirely incompatible

with modern practices. Moreover, in devising a common schedule
of tariff by readjustment of the numerous complicated and
conflicting interests of the powers, the plan would encounter
serious obstacles, perhaps impossible of being overcome within the
time that is at the disposal of this conference. On the contrary,
under the first plan, the steps to be taken would be definitely
decided upon at this conference. At the same time, it would give
each interested Power ample time, during the preparatory period,
for arriving at a separate agreement with the Chinese Government
on the subject of special tariff, while China, upon the abolition of
likin and the removal of other obstructions to trade, will be able to
enforce a national customs tariff law with the full accord of the
Powers. It is by far the simpler and more practicable means [to] set
China on the direct road to tariff autonomy.’
Mr. Strawn, in [behalf] of the American delegation, expressed willingness to
go beyond the Washington treaty, and to accord to China relief, but wished to
be fully advised as to the plans for the abolition of likin which must be
accomplished coincidently with the institution of tariff [autonomy].
Mr. Kauffmann, Danish delegate, who spoke after Mr. Strawn, made a
statement virtually to the same effect.
The Belgian delegate accepted in principle the proposal to accord China tariff
autonomy enforcement, suggesting that a transitory period should precede
it[s] going into force and expressing the hope that this period be as short as
possible.
The French delegate [said] that he was prepared to consider it [in] the most
friendly and generous spirit and to submit to his Government any reasonable
proposals which might be put forward by the Chinese to meet their
aspirations in regard to the customs tariff.
Mr. Oudendijk stated that the right of tariff autonomy [is] an inherent
sovereign right and that the Netherlands Government would do its best to
arrive at a satisfactory settlement of the question.
The Italian [delegate] said that the proposals would be examined in the
friendliest spirit and that the complete abolition of likin must precede full
tariff autonomy.
The Portuguese delegate said that he expected that the proposals issued at the
conference will lead; to complete tariff autonomy.

The Norwegian delegate gave his assent in principle to proposal Number one
of the Chinese program but requested more definite information.
The Spanish delegate said that he would give support to all resolutions
favorable to China adopted at this conference.
The Swedish delegate withheld definite commitments in the absence of
instructions from his Government.
The British delegate took a similar attitude, saying, however, that the British
delegation was prepared to discuss the proposals to establish tariff autonomy
in the widest spirit but wished time to consider them.
Following the presentation of these views, Dr. Wang read the following
memorandum on the abolition of likin:
‘1. Measures leading to the abolition of likin and the dates.
Inasmuch [as] the Special Conference [on] Chinese Customs, being
inspired by the spirit of the Washington Conference [in] its respect
for China’s sovereignty, is aiming at tariff autonomy, there should
be a determination to abolish likin which prejudices the economic
growth of the Chinese people, so that their productive energy may
thereby be developed.
On the other hand, likin and commut[ation] tax or duty partaking of
the nature of likin hitherto collected by the provinces constitute the
main source of revenue for the province[s]. Therefore, it appears
impossible to abolish such taxes all at once. It is necessary to
divide into different period[s] within which to execute the plan of
likin abolition, for the authorities concerned of the Central
Government have to examine carefully all the details relating to
likin such as the various original denominations, rules governing
their collecting, location of the barriers, forms of certificates and
passes, and the receipts, et cetera. After such examination, different
steps have to be taken.
It is now proposed that, in conformity with the annexed table
relating to the procedure for likin abolition, the different provinces
should, beginning from December, 1925, and within a period of six
months, prepare reports, and, at the same time, commissioners
should be sent to the provinces for investigation. The results of the
investigations should, within another period of six months, be
conjointly examined by the Ministry of Finance and the

Commission for the Reorganization of Finance. A fund should be
provided enough to compensate likin for one year. At the end of
February, 1928, the plan for likin abolition will be completely
executed.
2. Means for the compensation of the abolition of likin and the fund
for the same purpose.
Although no accurate statistics are available [as to] the revenues
derivable from likin for the different provinces, the approximate
total amount [is] estimated at 70 million silver dollars per year. It is
feared that after the abolition of likin the [provincial revenue]
might suffer a great loss. The Central Government should,
therefore, provide in advance a special fund to compensate the
losses after investigation, and to remit the various [quotas] to the
different provinces according to their respective annual deficits
resulting from likin abolition. For this purpose, two different
periods are proposed. During the first period, a portion of the
increased customs revenue derivable from the surtaxes should [be]
appropriated for compensation as stated in [the] first paragraph for
one year. During the second period, when tariff autonomy [is] put
into force, appropriation should be made out of the customs
revenue itself. It is evident that after the means for the
compensation of likin have been revised, a reliable fund will
thereby be secured so that the provincial revenues will not be
affected and likin can actually be abolished.’
Following this statement a memorandum was submitted showing in detail the
measures to be taken by the Chinese Government in the interim period before
the going into force of tariff autonomy, [such as] issuance of bonds for the
compensation of likin abolishment and for constructive purposes, distribution
of funds to various provinces as compensation for likin, the abolition of
inland transit dues—which contemplates a gradual abolishment of all such
taxes.”
MACMURRAY
78 Telegram in three sections.

[Document 714]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
[Paraphrase]
1. Situation described in paragraph 4 of your telegram is fully understood by
the Department. For this reason your suggestion that we make reasonable
concessions to meet the demands of China is approved. As was indicated in
success of negotiations which involve an undertaking for the abolition of
likin on the part of the present Chinese administration or of any government
which is likely to succeed it. Since, however, the Chinese delegation has
made a proposal which includes a plan for the abolition of these provincial
taxes and as this certainly is to the advantage of foreign trade, the
Department considers that it is best to encourage the Chinese to put this
proposal into effect. The Department sees no objection to your working on
the basis outlined in the paragraph numbered 2 in your telegram.
2. Department suggests that you consider whether it is possible to deduct
from sums allotted to a province which collects protested likin the amount of
any rebates made by the Chinese Customs Administration as provided in your
section (h). In this way the province would have to assume certain
responsibility.
3. With reference to your paragraph 3, the Department suggests the following
order for the disposal of revenue derived from the surtax: (1) to compensate
provinces for the loss of likin; (2) to pay the rebates mentioned in your
paragraph 2, section (h); and (3) for the Central Government’s administrative
expenses and the refunding of unsecured debts equally.
KELLOGG

[Document 715]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State79
PEKING, November 4, 1925.
Conference summary number 4. Committee on tariff autonomy held its second
[session] November 3d, all members being present.

The British delegate made the following statement:
“The British delegation, recognizing the inherent right of all independent and
sovereign states to tariff autonomy, and considering that the fulfilment of the
provisions of the treaty of Washington of February 6th, 1922, will constitute
a step towards the attainment by China of such autonomy, formally declare
that, in addition to the carrying out of the terms of that treaty, they are willing
to submit to the ratification of their Government such further measures as
may be devised and agreed upon at this conference, with a view to ensuring
within a reasonable period the full realization of China’s claim to complete
liberty of action in matters relating to her tariff.”
The Swedish delegate declared himself in accord with the British delegate’s statement.
Mr. Hioki, the Japanese delegate, presented the following proposal on behalf of the
Japanese delegation:
“1. The contracting powers, other than China, hereby solemnly declare their
recognition of the principle that, as an inherent right of a sovereign state,
China is to enjoy full autonomy with respect to customs tariff.
2. China shall recover the exercise of her tariff autonomy in the manner
indicated in the following paragraphs.
3. China shall establish immediately a national tariff law with a schedule
appertaining thereto, to be put into force within a period of three years and
upon the abolition of likin by China, as declared by her.

4. During the interim period mentioned in the preceding paragraph, China
may levy on articles of import a surtax as authorized in paragraph 2 of article
3 of the Washington treaty.
5. During the same interim period, China, on the one hand, and the other
contracting powers, on the other, shall conclude severally treaties, which may
incorporate reciprocal conventional tariffs to be applied on certain special
articles if so desired by both parties. The new treaties so concluded shall
continue in force for a certain definite period.
6. The national tariff law mentioned in paragraph 3 shall become operative,
so far as the treaty powers are concerned, simultaneously with the
enforcement of the treaties above mentioned.
7. The new treaties to be concluded shall supersede the existing treaties
between China and the other contracting powers in matters relating to
customs tariff.”
Following this presentation Mr. MacMurray, on behalf of the American delegation,
proposed the following plan:
“The Chinese delegation have asked, in Dr. Wang’s speech at the opening
session of this conference, on October 26, that the powers declare their
respect for the principle of China’s tariff autonomy and agree to the removal
of tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties. They have affirmed that it
is the intention of the Chinese Government to abolish likin. They have asked
that interim surtaxes be levied and that agreements which may be concluded
at this conference shall be made effective at an early date.
Desiring to follow out as closely and as far as possible the programme which
has been proposed by the Chinese delegation, and hoping that this conference
may arrive at agreements which will make possible the realization of China’s
aspirations and at the same time properly safeguard the legitimate interests of
all powers and people who will be affected:
We are prepared, in accordance with the provisions of the Washington treaty,
to authorize at once the levying of the surtax of 2½% and, as soon as the
requisite schedules can be prepared, to authorize the levying of a surtax of
5% on luxuries.
We are prepared to proceed at once with the negotiation of such an agreement
or agreements as may be necessary for making effective other provisions of
the Washington treaties of February 6, 1922.

We affirm the principle of respect for China’s tariff autonomy and are
prepared to negotiate a new treaty that shall give effect to that principle and
which shall make provision for the abolition of likin, for the removal of tariff
restrictions contained in treaties and for putting into effect of the Chinese
national tariff law.
To carry out the provisions of the Washington treaty and at the same time
proceed with the larger programme contemplated, we suggest:
I. That the powers, other than China, authorize the levying of a
and that there be prepared immediately a schedule of luxuries upon
which a rate of 5% shall be authorized to be effective not later than
July 1, 1926. The increased revenues thus derived shall be held by
the Customs Administration subject to such disposition as may be
agreed upon by this conference.
II. That provision shall be made for the levying of the full amount
of these surtaxes at the land frontiers.
III. That a new treaty be made which shall provide:
1. Three months after the treaty here concluded shall
come into force the Chinese shall be at liberty, as an
interim measure, and until tariff autonomy shall become
effective, to impose a new and uniformly enforced
schedule of duties at rates from 5% (the present rate) to
on exports.
2. That from the same date, the rates of duty levied at all
land frontiers shall be the same as those levied at the
maritime frontiers.
3. That the increase of the customs revenues derived
from putting into effect these provisions shall be
accumulated by the Customs Administration and applied
for the purposes hereinafter specified.
4. That likin and related internal taxes which may be
agreed upon shall be abolished.
5. That for the purpose of abolishing likin, funds from the
customs revenues’ shall be apportioned among the

provinces in lieu of likin.
6. That if likin be collected anywhere in violation of
agreements entered into for its abolition, the taxpayer
shall be entitled to a refund from the Customs
Administration of the full amount which he paid as likin.
7. That the increase in the customs revenues derived from
the increase in rates of duty shall be devoted to the
following purposes:
(a) Compensation to the provinces in lieu of
likin;
(b) Payment of rebate charges;
(c) Refunding of the unsecured debts;
(d) Administrative expenses of the Central
Government.
8. That, subject to the fulfillment of the provisions of
on the Chinese tariff shall cease to be effective and the
Chinese national tariff law shall come into force January
1, 1929, as suggested by the Chinese delegation.
9. That an effort be made to devise a plan whereby it may
be reasonably expected that this treaty will go into force
at an early date after signature.
10. If requested by a majority of the contracting powers
1928, a conference of representatives of the contracting
powers, for the purpose of declaring whether likin has
been abolished and of negotiating any further agreements
that may need to be arrived at with regard to the subject
matter of this treaty.”
[Apparent omission. The quotation which follows is the declaration of the Chinese
Government regarding the abolition of the likin system read by the chairman of the
committee:]

“There is no greater detriment to the economic development of China than
the likin system, since it constitutes a great obstacle to the wide distribution
of goods and the expansion of commerce, and results in diminishing the
productive power of the country and impoverishing the people. The sources
of revenue and the purchasing power of a nation are both dependent upon the
productiveness of its people. In China, this productiveness is now so
seriously affected by this obnoxious likin tax that her sources of revenue are
exhausted, her revenue decreased, her purchasing power weakened, and her
international trade crippled.
In the history of economics, development began with the family and passed
on to the community; then it extended to the nation and thence to the entire
world. Today this development has reached the national stage and it is
gradually approaching the international phase. Unfortunately in China, owing
to the existence of this obnoxious tax, the output of raw materials and
manufactured articles is insufficient to meet the demands of the nation and of
the world—a state of things which is much to be deplored.
The Chinese people have for years been clamouring for the abolition of this
tax, and the Central Government has created a Financial Rehabilitation
Commission composed of representatives of the military and civil authorities
of the whole country. It is fully recognized that no half-way measures would
meet the situation and that, if the problem is not thoroughly dealt with, there
would be no possibility of improving the welfare of the nation.
After mature consideration it has been decided to abolish the likin system, so
that the economic welfare of the people as well as foreign commerce may
alike be benefited, the foundations of national finance firmly established, and
the international relations of the country likewise strengthened.
The Chinese Government hereby declares that the abolition of likin will be
completely carried out not later than the first day of the first month of the
18th year of the Republic (1929).”
The committee then adjourned subject to the call of the chairman. The committee on
provincial [provisional] measures will meet on Friday, November 6.
MACMURRAY
79 This telegram was received badly garbled. The quotations as here printed have been
corrected, without indicating changes, on the basis of the minutes of the committee as
published in The Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff, pp. 87 ff.
80 Telegram in four sections.

[Document 716]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
[Received 3:15 p.m.]
Conference 10. Chinese delegates this morning presented the following resolution:81
“The contracting powers other than China hereby declare their recognition of
China’s right to enjoy tariff autonomy.
China hereby declares her intention to abolish likin and further declares [that]
the Chinese national tariff law will come into force upon the abolition of
likin.”
We objected because we have no power to commit our Government. British delegation
proposed the following for incorporation in the preamble of the instrument bringing
into effect the 2½ and 5 percent surtaxes contemplated by the Washington treaty.
“The delegations of the contracting powers, other than China, having
declared their intention to recommend to their respective Governments the
immediate adoption of a treaty which shall recognize the principle of China’s
right to enjoy tariff autonomy, and China having declared her intention to
abolish likin, it is agreed that the treaty [treaties] shall provide that the
Chinese national tariff law shall come into effect upon the abolition of likin.”
We indicated our approval but the Chinese considered it unsatisfactory.
In the end the drafting of a formula embodying the sense of the conference with regard
to tariff autonomy and the abolition of likin was referred to a subcommittee consisting
of C. T. Wang, Strawn, Hioki, Macleay and Oudendijk.82
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]
81 In meeting of committee on provisional measures.
82 Chinese, American, Japanese, British, and Netherlands delegates.

[Document 717]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Conference 11. 1. The Chinese have apparently begun a propaganda campaign of
which the following interview given by C. T. Wang to a local news agency and
appearing in this morning’s press is an example. I have confirmed fact that Wang’s
statements were substantially as herein quoted:
“There are two precedents for China to follow in her fights for the recovery
of the custom autonomy, namely, the Japanese and the Turkish example.
China is now following the Japanese example, as she chooses to regain her
tariff autonomy by negotiation with the powers at the Special Customs
Conference but if our friendly powers are unable to accept our demands the
only alternative for China will be to follow the Turkish example by making a
declaration abrogating all her customs treaties with them. And when this
eventuality should come to pass I hope that liberal leaders in various
countries will realize the necessity of this step.”
Dr. Wang went on to say that he and his colleagues were determined to put [up] a
vigorous fight for the restoration of full tariff autonomy at the Special Tariff
Conference in accordance with the expressed will of the people and the instructions of
the Government. What the Government and people demanded was not an increase of
custom receipts but the recovery of lost sovereign rights and for this reason no mere
promises except a clear and definite declaration on the part of the powers that they
recognize the right of China to enjoy full tariff autonomy would satisfy the Chinese
people and delegates.
“All such expressions from foreigners as that we recognize the right of China to tariff
autonomy in principle, or that we recommend to our home Governments that tariff
autonomy be conceded to China, we do not want to hear,” continued Dr. Wang. “If we
cannot recover our tariff autonomy we had better close the conference and resort to
other means to attain our object.” Turning to the question of the abolition of likin Dr.
Wang said that China was firmly determined to effect the abolition of this tax within
the stipulated period, however this was an internal problem of China and while the
Chinese Government was ready to abolish it on its own initiative it would never agree

to the demand of the foreign powers that restoration of tariff autonomy be made
conditional on the ability of China to abolish likin.
2. [Paraphrase.] It is likely that the Chinese delegation will insist that granting of tariff
autonomy will not be dependent upon the abolition of likin, that the powers must not
insist upon any conditions with respect thereto as indicated in our plan but must accept
China’s word for it that likin will be abolished. The Chinese may also insist upon their
proposal that in the event of the abolition of the present Customs Administration a tariff
commission shall take over the custody of the customs funds. We do not feel that we
can accept such a plan, as virtually it would amount to our consenting to the
denunciation of all China’s tariff treaties. We feel that if China should really be
determined upon repudiating treaty obligations we should not acquiesce but should
allow the entire responsibility for such action to rest clearly upon China. We think that
with the possible exception of the Japanese all the powers agree with us. The Japanese
believe that the abolition of likin is impossible and the indications are that they will
take their chances on likin and insist upon their plan for a conventional tariff. We do
not believe the Chinese will accept the Japanese proposal. [End paraphrase.]
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]

[Document 718]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 19, 1925.
[Received November 19.]
Conference summary number 6. Following is the press communiqué issued by the
conference today:
“Committee two of the Special Conference on Chinese Customs held its
Dr. C. T. Wang was in the chair and all the members were present.
The committee, sitting jointly as committees one and two, adopted the
resolution on tariff autonomy unanimously recommended by the
subcommittee, which reads as follows:
‘The delegates of the powers assembled at this conference resolve
to adopt the following proposed article relating to tariff autonomy
with a view to incorporating it together with other matters to be
hereafter agreed upon in the treaty which is to be signed at this
conference:
The contracting powers other than China hereby recognize China’s
right to enjoy tariff autonomy, agree to remove the tariff
restrictions which are contained in existing treaties between
themselves respectively and China, and consent to the going into
effect of the Chinese national tariff law January 1st, 1929.
The Govt, of the Republic of China declares that likin shall be
abolished simultaneously with the enforcement of the Chinese
national tariff law and further declares that the abolition of likin
shall be effectively carried out by the first day of the first month of
the eighteenth year of the Republic of China (January 1st, 1929).’
A general discussion took place on the subjects of the purposes for which the
proceeds of the surtaxes were to be devoted and the rates of the surtaxes. It
was decided to appoint two subcommittees: one on purposes and another on
rates.

Subsequently the committee resolved itself into the subcommittee on
purposes and it was decided to appoint two technical committees: one on
likin and another on other purposes.
The meeting adjourned at 12:15 subject to the call of the Chair.”
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]

[Document 719]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
likin met morning of November 21st, when discussion centered on definition of likin.
Chinese agreed to give a careful consideration to this question and to produce a
formula at the next meeting.
2. Technical committee on other purposes met afternoon November 21st, when Chinese
produced statement setting forth external obligations Ministry of Finance. Foreign
delegations took position that a complete statement of the Chinese Government was
necessary before the matter of refunding the unsecured debts in connection with
increased customs charges could be intelligently dealt with.
3. Subcommittee on rates met morning November 23; when foreign delegations took
firm position that definite information concerning the proposed financial requirements
of the Chinese Government with regard to likin abolition, debt refunding, et cetera, was
condition precedent to discussion of what rates were to be applied to meet these
requirements.
4. Further meetings of committees are adjourned pending the production by Chinese
delegation of information on matters above referred to.
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]

[Document 720]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
[Paraphrase—Extract]
5. The French Ambassador called on November 27 …
He told me that apparently his Government thought that the Chinese were getting rather
the better of the other delegates, that in granting tariff autonomy to the Chinese without
making the abolition of likin a correlate we were too easy with them, and that there
should be an agreement of some sort that no other kind of tax should be imposed in
place of likin.
I informed the Ambassador that the American delegates had been given no specific
instructions as to the form of declaration with respect to tariff autonomy and likin, that
as I understood it the delegations were agreed in principle on the granting of tariff
autonomy on January 1, 1929, the Chinese to abolish likin in the meantime, that a
committee had been appointed to consider likin and that doubtless it would define likin
in a manner to prevent the Chinese from replacing it with a tax substantially identical. I
informed the Ambassador also that I did not think the American delegates had taken
any special lead in granting concessions to the Chinese.
KELLOGG

[Document 721]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 3:05 p.m.]
is not fully understood by the French Ambassador. He indicates we are making all the
concessions to the Chinese, while the Chinese delegates say we are taking the lead in
driving too hard bargains. Our attitude is shown by the reports you have. As China is in
a state of revolution it is obvious that we cannot treat with her as we would with a
nation. Our view is that we must get the very best offer the Chinese can be persuaded
to give us and then decide which we prefer, their offer or the denunciation of all the
treaties and the chaos that would result. Now we are waiting for China’s statement on
her unsecured debts and for her definition of likin. If the Chinese will give a
satisfactory definition of likin so that double burdens will not be placed on foreign
goods, we think that the tariff rates proposed for tobacco and other commodities would
not be prohibitive and that it would be better for us to accept the schedule than to risk
the results if we take too controversial a stand. We shall continue to insist that likin be
abolished as a prior condition to conceding effective tariff autonomy, but the chance of
likin being effectually abolished by China is small and we might be unable to enforce
the carrying out of her agreement to do so. For that reason if the definition of likin is
satisfactory and if China will agree to deposit a portion of the customs revenue
allocated to the liquidation of unsecured debts with some foreign custodian we might
waive the precedent condition regarding likin.
We had a visit yesterday from Admiral Tsai Ting-kan who maintains liaison between
the American and Chinese delegations. He called to inquire as to the truth of reports
that some delegations were beginning to consider the advisability of withdrawing from
the conference or suggesting its postponement because of the existing disturbed
political conditions. He was informed that we had heard nothing of this kind and that
our delegation did not have in mind any such move. This statement seemed to relieve
him. He observed that for the foreign delegations to make any move toward adjourning
the conference would be playing directly into the hands of the radical element in China
who would like to see the conference broken off. He added that it was the plan of the
Chinese delegation to convene the committees from time to time so as to keep the
conference going and enable it to survive the present period of uncertainty in political

affairs until the present Cabinet should be re-formed,83 when greater progress could be
made.
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]
portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465].

[Document 722]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
Department has received a letter dated November 30 from the Secretary of the
Committee of the American Material Creditors of the Chinese Government,84 stating
among other matters that “members of the Committee have been advised by their
Peking representatives that the Chinese delegates will demand the exclusion of all
material debts of the Ministry of Communications not only from payment from the
proceeds of the increase in Customs revenues but even from payments from the
proceeds of the bonds which are to be issued under the general plan for the
consolidation of the unsecured debts of China which is under discussion.” The
Department would appreciate receiving information in regard to the matters referred to
above in order to enable it to reply to the Committee’s letter.
KELLOGG
84 Not printed.

[Document 723]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 7, 1925—noon.
well as of all other creditors are kept constantly and fully advised of our strenuous and
persistent efforts to obtain payment or adjustment of their claims on best possible
terms. We have not been told by China delegates that they intended to repudiate claims
of material creditors or to exclude them from any plan for consolidation or refunding
unsecured debts.
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]

[Document 724]
Mr. Silas H. Strawn, of the American Delegation, to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
PEKING, December 30, 1925.
[Received January 28, 1926.]
DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I may summarize what has transpired since my letter of December
9th,85 as follows:
1. On account of the war along the right of way, no train service between
Tientsin and Peking from December 8th until December 24th, since then
trains daily but requiring almost 24 hours to make the distance of 100 miles.
This due to troop movement and war conditions.
2. No meetings of the Conference except two called by the Chinese to
demonstrate to the people that the Conference was still functioning.
With renewed assurances [etc.]
SILAS H. STRAWN
85 Not found in Department files.

Convening
of
the
Commission
on
Extraterritoriality in China, provided for by
resolution
V
of
the
Washington
Conference86
86 For previous correspondence regarding the meeting of the Commission on
Extraterritoriality in China, see Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 521 ff.
[725] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[726] The Secretary of State to Mr. Silas H. Strawn
Washington, September 10, 1925.
[727] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Neville)
[728] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[729] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, November 18, 1925.

[730] The Norwegian Minister (Bryn) to the Secretary of State
Washington, November 20, 1925.
[731] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[732] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[Document 725]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
With reference to MacMurray’s88 informal conversation with Shidehara. Department
notes MacMurray’s opinion that it would be better if the extraterritorial commission
were convened at a fixed date after the completion of the work of the economic
conference. The Department does not agree that this commission should wait upon the
completion of the work of the economic conference. This Government is ready to
proceed with that commission at the earliest date that can be fixed. You will bring this
to the attention of MacMurray.
KELLOGG
88 John V. A. MacMurray, newly appointed Minister to China, in Japan en route to his
new post.

[Document 726]
The Secretary of State to Mr. Silas H. Strawn
[Extract]
WASHINGTON, September 10, 1925.
SIR: There is transmitted herewith your commission, signed by the President, as the
American member of the Commission to inquire into the present practice of
extraterritorial jurisdiction in China, established in accordance with the Resolutions
Regarding Extraterritoriality in China adopted by the Washington Conference on the
believed that the language employed in these resolutions is sufficiently clear and
precise to indicate the nature and scope of the work of the Commission, and that no
further instructions are therefore needed with respect to your duties as a member of it.
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 727]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Neville)90
You will communicate the following to the Foreign Office of the Japanese
Government.
“Resolution V adopted by the Washington Conference on December 10,
1921, provided ‘That the Governments of the Powers above named shall
establish a Commission (to which each of such Governments shall appoint
one member) to inquire into the present practice of extraterritorial
jurisdiction in China, and into the laws and the judicial system and the
methods of judicial administration of China, with a view to reporting to the
Governments of the several Powers above named their findings of fact in
regard to these matters, and their recommendations as to such means as they
may find suitable to improve the existing conditions of the administration of
justice in China, and to assist and further the efforts of the Chinese
Government to effect such legislation and judicial reforms as would warrant
the several Powers in relinquishing, either progressively or otherwise, their
respective rights of extraterritoriality.’
On September 4, 1925, the Governments of the nine Powers that participated
in the Washington Conference addressed identic notes to the Chinese
Government91 in reply to its identic note to the same Powers of June 24,
1925,92 with reference to the question of treaty revision. Referring to the
question of the relinquishment by the Powers of their extraterritorial rights
the Powers stated, ‘My Government is now ready to appoint its
Commissioner to sit with the Commissioners of the other interested
Governments in accordance with that Resolution. It hopes that that
Commission may be able to begin at an early date its investigation of the
existing conditions of the administration of justice in China and to make a
report which will serve as a basis for recommendations to be made, in
pursuance of the resolution, for the purpose of enabling the Governments
concerned to consider what if any steps may be taken with a view to the
relinquishment of the extraterritorial rights.’
The Government of the United States desires most earnestly to have before it
in the near future for consideration, the report of that Commission and to that

end has named as its Commissioner an eminent American lawyer, Mr. Silas
H. Strawn of Chicago. In order that the Commission may begin its work with
as little delay as possible, the Government of the United States suggests that
December 18, 1925, be accepted by the interested Powers as the date upon
which it will commence its functions at Peking. As regards the manner in
which the Commission will perform its work, the Government of the United
States believes that this should be left to the Commission which should be
guided [as?] to its duties and the intentions of the Governments by the letter
and spirit of Resolution V and the Powers’ note to China of September 4th.”
You will express the hope of this Government that the Government of Japan will find
itself able to accept the date mentioned and that it will inform you so that this
information can be communicated to the Chinese Government.
KELLOGG
90 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in Peru, and also to the Ambassador
in France with instructions to repeat to the diplomatic representatives in Belgium,
Denmark, Great Britain, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden.
powers who in addition to China participated in the Washington Conference.
portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637].

[Document 728]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Governments have accepted December 18, as the day, and Peking as the place, for the
commencement of the sessions of the Commission on Extraterritoriality provided for
Great Britain, Belgium, The Netherlands, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Denmark, Sweden,
Peru, Japan, France and the United States. Norway, although invited to adhere to the
Resolution, appears never to have filed notification of its adherence and therefore was
not asked to accept this day. You will state that, in performing its work, the
Commission is to be guided as to its duties and intentions by the letter and spirit of
Resolution 5 and the Powers’ note to China of September 4.
KELLOGG
93 Neither printed.

[Document 729]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, November 18, 1925.
No. 103
SIR: Adverting to previous correspondence with regard to conversations at the
Department with the Chinese Minister on the subject of the situation in China, there is
summarized below, for your confidential information, the substance of a conversation
between myself and Doctor Sze on November 10, 1925.
The Chinese Minister discussed with me the Extraterritoriality Commission and stated
that he thought the powers of the Commission should be enlarged to authorize it to
make a report on which extraterritoriality could be abolished or substantially the same
thing. I informed him that such was the object of the identic note94 and that the identic
note and Resolution V gave the Commission full authority to make any
recommendations it saw fit.
Dr. Sze then stated that he wanted the Commissioners to be given plenipotentiary
powers to negotiate a treaty for abolition. I told him I did not think that wise; it would
make it necessary for me to start negotiations all over again with all the Governments
concerned and it would be better to wait until the report of the Commission was
received, after which there would either be a new conference with appointees having
full power to negotiate or each country would have to negotiate separately. The Chinese
Minister then cabled his Government as follows:
“Saw Kellogg today. While he is sympathetic he opines it would be useless to
approach other Powers again reference Extraterritorial Commission.
Commission will have power to consider any plan which China may propose
and recommend to their several governments one identic plan, or if not
unanimous, each Commissioner report his own findings and conclusions.
Basing upon such results the governments either separately or jointly
negotiate with China for relinquishment of extraterritoriality.”
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 730]
The Norwegian Minister (Bryn) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, November 20, 1925.
SIR: With reference to the provisions in the first Additional Resolution95 to the
Resolution regarding Extraterritoriality in China, adopted by the Conference on the
Limitation of Armament at Washington on December 10, 1921, I have the honor, acting
under instructions from my Government, to inform Your Excellency that the
Norwegian Government, by an Order in Council of October 23, 1925, has acceded to
the said Resolution regarding Extraterritoriality in China, with two Additional
Resolutions.
Accept [etc.]
H. BRYN

[Document 731]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
532. Opening of Extraterritoriality Commission which should take place tomorrow will
be delayed until arrival of Belgian, British, French and Italian Commissioners who are
detained at Tientsin by the interruption of all means of communication in consequence
of factional fighting now in progress. In spite of Chief Executive’s orders to both
parties to facilitate arrangements for the operation of an international train it has not yet
been possible to effectuate such an arrangement with Marshall Feng’s commander here.
Repeated to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

[Document 732]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
the Extraterritoriality Commission will convene on January 8.97
MACMURRAY
96 Not printed.

Continued support by the United States to
the Federal Telegraph Company in efforts to
obtain execution of its contract with the
Chinese Government98
[733] The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State
Washington , December 24, 1924.
[734] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
[735] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[736] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
[737] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[738] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
[739] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[740] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[741] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Sehurman)
[742] The Department of State to the Japanese Embassy
Washington , February 28, 1925.
[743] Mr. Manton Davis to the Radio Corporation of America
Peking, March 12, 1925.
[744] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[745] The Department of State to the Japanese Embassy
Washington , April 8, 1925.
[746] The Department of State to the Chinese Legation
Washington , April 8, 1925.
[747] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[748] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[749] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
Washington, May 28, 1925.
[750] The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State
Washington , June 1, 1925.
[751] The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State

[752] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[753] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[754] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[755] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[756] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[757] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[758] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)

[759] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[760] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[761] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[762] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[763] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[764] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[765] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[766] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[767] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[768] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[769] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[770] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[771] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[772] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[773] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[774] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[775] The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State

undated

[776] The Japanese Embas

sy_to the Department of State

undated
[777] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[Document 733]
The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
In February and March 1918, the Mitsui Bussan Kaisha Ltd. entered into contracts with
the Chinese Ministry of the Navy for the establishment of a high power wireless station
in China and these contracts were duly approved and accepted by the Chinese
Government. Subsequently, in January and September, 1921, the Federal Telegraph
Company signed with the Chinese Ministry of Communications contracts of a similar
nature conflicting in many ways with China’s prior commitments to the Mitsui
Company.99 The anomalous situation thus created gave rise to protracted discussions
between the Governments of Japan and of the United States, without, however, any
appreciable result. Attempts were made at the Washington Conference to find a more
comprehensive plan of settlement, with the participation of other Powers interested in
China. Once more these efforts proved unavailing.
2. The points at issue between Japan and the United States on the subject may be
summarized as follows:
(a) In the judgment of the Japanese Government, the exclusive right granted
in 1918 to the Mitsui Company by the Chinese Ministry of the Navy
respecting external wireless communications of China cannot be abridged or
revoked by any arrangement which the Chinese Ministry of Communications
may have made subsequently with the Federal Telegraph Company. On the
other hand, it is contended by the American Government that the Mitsui’s
monopoly is inconsistent with the treaty provisions between the United States
and China respecting the principle of equal opportunity, and that the
conventional obligations of China preclude her from creating such a
monopoly in favour of any foreign nationals. Without entering into a detailed
examination of the treaty provisions in question, it will be conceded that
international precedents are not wanting in support of an exclusive right of
the nature now under review, which, in the conduct of certain undertakings,
and more particularly in the case of radio enterprise, is necessary to ensure,
for a definite period of time, a reasonable profit on the investment. The
contract of September 1921 of the Federal Telegraph Company seems to
afford in itself an example of such right, since under Article 14 of that
contract the Company is to be exclusively authorized to handle radio
communications between the United States and China during twenty years.

(b) It is further held by the American Government that the claim of the Mitsui
Company in question is incompatible with the basic principle of equal
opportunity laid down in Article 3 of the Nine-Power Treaty of Washington.1
It should, however, be observed that the Mitsui contracts had been concluded
long before an agreed definition of the principle of equal opportunity was
adopted at the Washington Conference. Moreover, the prohibition of
monopoly or of preference contained in the first paragraph of the cited
Article of the Nine-Power Treaty is qualified by the provisions in the second
paragraph of the same Article, which permit the acquisition of such
properties or rights as may be necessary to the conduct of a particular
commercial, industrial or financial undertaking, and which, in the opinion of
the Japanese Government, properly cover the case of wireless enterprise.
(c) The Japanese Government are not unmindful of the needs of the United
States to secure an efficient radio service across the Pacific, to supplement
the present inadequate cable service. The plan of the Mitsui Company is
intended exactly to supply such needs, and if any exclusive authorization to
the nationals of one foreign country to work a wireless station in China
should appear objectionable to the United States, the Japanese Government
have already manifested their readiness to see the abandonment of the system
of such exclusive operation by Japanese of the station constructed by the
Mitsui Company. With this feature of exclusive operation definitely
eliminated, there should remain no grounds for apprehension of
discriminatory treatment, as among nationalities, in the working of the
station.
3. It is reported that the cost of construction fixed at U. S. $5,417,500 in the original
contract of the Federal Telegraph Company was, under the supplementary agreement,
raised to U. S. $13,000,000, one-half of which is to be charged to the liability of China.
She has already incurred obligations to the Mitsui and the Chinese National Radio
Telegraph Company to an amount of approximately $7,000,000 Silver. Upon the
completion of the undertaking now contemplated by the Federal Telegraph Company,
the whole indebtedness of China on account of wireless installations will thus reach the
substantial figure of some $20,000,000 Silver. This would surely aggravate the
financial difficulties of the Chinese Government, which are already assuming serious
proportions. It is also believed that the general conditions in China do not require or
justify the immediate establishment of two high power wireless stations in that country.
The unwisdom of such an extensive program will be evident when it is considered that
even in the whole region of the highly commercialized Pacific Coast of the United
States, there is only one trans-oceanic wireless station open for public use.
4. The Japanese Government are unable to bring themselves to the conclusion that they
are in any way precluded from extending support to the present claim of the Mitsui

Company. It has, however, now become manifest that any longer delay in the
adjustment of the controversy will serve no useful purpose, either for the contending
parties themselves or for China which is primarily responsible for this situation.
Holding to the principle of international co-operation instead of international
competition, and desiring to help China out of her present difficulty, the Japanese
Government are willing to approach the question from a new angle that may lead to a
speedy and practical settlement of the dispute.
5. Accordingly, without prejudice to the legal merits of the case, the Japanese
Government now desire to propose that the principles governing the Consortium be
applied to the contracts secured by the Mitsui Company and the Federal Telegraph
Company.
These contracts are thus to be pooled and superseded by a loan agreement for wireless
enterprise in China of the same nature as ordinary railway loans that may be
undertaken by the Consortium.

The parties to the proposed loan agreement shall be, on the one side, the Chinese
Government and, on the other, a financial group representing American, British, French
and Japanese interests. The financial group is to consist of the Federal Telegraph
Company, the Marconi Company, the French General Wireless Telegraph Company
and the Mitsui Company, and is to be constituted upon full communication and
understanding with the Consortium.
The operation of wireless telegraphy in question shall be placed under the exclusive
control of the Chinese Government, while the financial group is to supply the services
of engineers and accountants, in order to assist China in the enterprise.
6. The proposed solution is believed to be in line with the known policy of the
American Government to promote international co-operation, and with all basic
principles embodied in the Nine-Power Treaty of Washington. It provides, at the same
time, for a lightening of China’s indebtedness, as much desirable for herself as for all
nations interested in the stabilization of that country. If, as is confidently hoped, the
plan outlined is found acceptable, the Japanese Government will be happy to suggest
further particulars of the measures for making it effective. They are also prepared to
give serious and friendly consideration to any counter proposals that may be advanced
by the American Government in order to compose the pending differences. In any case,
they attach great importance to an early settlement of the question, which so long as it
remains unadjusted, tends to disturb the relations of solidarity and mutual confidence
among all the Powers concerned.
WASHINGTON , December 24, 1924.

99 For texts of the contracts, see List of Contracts of American Nationals With the
Chinese Government, etc., annex viii (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1925).

[Document 734]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
General Attorney, Radio Corporation, will sail for China at an early date to assist
Barnes Moss in negotiations. It is; understood Moss has sailed, or is about to sail, for
China.
HUGHES

[Document 735]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
Telegraphs, has held several long discussions with the Legation regarding Federal
contract from which it appears that the Ministry will take up with Moss and Davis
question of changing type of apparatus and size and location of stations to correspond
with radio development and acquisition of new stations by the Chinese Government
since signing original Federal contract. Consequently they desire company to send
representative possessed of extensive powers and accompanied by fully qualified
expert. They desire completion Shanghai station earliest possible date.
Japanese opposition to Federal contract continues strong. Compagnie Générate de
Télégraphie Sans Fil has an agent here who is pressing Ministry of Communication[s]
to grant concession for developing complete system of radio telegraphy and telephony
with broadcasting throughout China. Company to advance capital and have temporary
exclusive rights until cost repaid. Additional security to be postal revenue.
SCHURMAN

[Document 736]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
[Paraphrase]
Corporation3 which informs the Department that Colonel Davis will be accompanied
by an electrical expert, sailing within a few days for China.
It is suggested by the corporation that no action be taken on the matter of a concession
for the French wireless company until after the fullest opportunity to lay the matter
before the Government of China has been given Davis and Moss. This suggestion has
the Department’s concurrence and the Chinese Government may be so informed.
You will be forwarded by the American Embassy at Tokyo a copy of the Japanese
Embassy’s memorandum of December 24, 1924,4 which proposed adjusting the
controversy in regard to the Federal contract on a basis which in general is analogous
with the consortium arrangement. Your comment on the proposal of the Japanese is
desired by the Department.
HUGHES
3 For the interest of the Radio Corporation of America in the Federal Telegraph Co.
contract, see Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, pp. 844 ff.

[Document 737]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Received 7:10 p.m.]
1. Copy of the Japanese Government’s proposal received from Tokyo January
13th and after careful consideration I offer the following comments:
2. The Federal contract constitutes a joint partnership between the American
company and the Chinese Government in which the Government enjoys full
reversionary rights. Consequently any proposal to pool the contract in a
consortium or otherwise admit other interests to participation in its terms
would require consent of the Government, which I am inclined to think could
3. To recognize that there are any difficulties to compose between the
Japanese and American Governments in the matter of the radio contracts
concluded with the Chinese Government is to admit that some validity
attaches to the monopolistic claim advanced by Mitsui. This has been so
often denied by the American Government on the following [sic] open-door
principle that any apparent compromise based upon a withdrawal of this
claim would be construed in China as a diplomatic defeat for the United
States and its contempt and victory for Japan. Moreover if the Mitsui and
Federal contracts were to be pooled in the proposed four-nation consortium,
the Marconi contracts would presumably demand the same treatment. Hence
the consortium would begin operations with approximately 12 million silver
dollars of noncollectible indebtedness of the Chinese Government invested in
commercially profitless undertakings. See enclosure No. 3, Legation’s
desperately fighting the Federal contract on the basis of the Mitsui
monopolistic clause the Japanese Government had three principal aims: 1st,
secure reimbursement of the millions comparatively speaking wasted by
Mitsui and the Japanese Government on the Peking station; 2d, secure
prestige of diplomatic victory over the American Government; 3d, frustrate
independent radio communication between China and America concerning

which Japan appears insanely jealous. In consequence of the Department’s
stand as expressed in section 2 of the experts’ recommendations7 and
rejecting consortium idea, this Legation has categorically stated that
independent radio communication was insisted upon by the American
Government.
4. Proposed wireless consortium appears to be substantially the same as the
combination contemplated in the Viviani resolution9 and experts’ Heads of
Arrangements10 with which the Department refused to associate itself.
Legation was informed by Schwerin February 12th, 1923, of telegram from
the Radio Corporation reporting formation of combination of British, French,
Japanese radio interests endorsed by Danish and British cable companies
with Telefuhken Company invited to join for wireless operations in China. I
suggest present Japanese proposal thinly veiled attempt on behalf of this
group to induce the American Government to withdraw objection to
American participation.
5. While the Japanese Government’s proposal provides for exclusive control
of the contemplated facilities by the Chinese Government it is evident that as
a financial safeguard control the stations until paid for would of necessity
have to vest in the associated lenders. Under those circumstances I am of the
opinion that terms satisfactory to the lenders would never be accepted by the
Chinese Government and the sole result of the consortium plan would be to
prevent creation of the Federal stations and leave the Mitsui Peking station in
sole possession. Japanese allusion to the banking consortium is significant in
view of its failure to accomplish anything constructive in four years’
existence.
6. Even if satisfactory consortium arrangement were made it would seem
possible for Japan to evade consortium restrictions through stations in South
Manchuria Railway Zone or Leased Territory. I believe that by reason of
contiguity of territory she would somehow manage to secure independent
communication.
7. The Federal Telegraph Company has vested rights as to its contract which
the Department probably desires to consult and possibly decision as to the
Japanese proposal should be left to the company. From the standpoint of
Chinese-American relations I consider acceptance of this proposal would
mean advantage for Japan but loss of prestige for the United States in the
Orient and in loss also [of] much [of] the closer union with China anticipated
from the Federal plan. It would be difficult to explain abandonment of the
independent execution of the Federal contract after the unprecedented

support hitherto given it by the American Government. In any event I
earnestly advise the Department to defer action until Davis and Moss have
arrived in Peking, for I still believe the Chinese Government desires purely
Chinese-American control trans-Pacific radio even though Federal contract
may require modification.
8. Repeated to Tokyo.
SCHURMAN
6 Not printed.

[Document 738]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
[Paraphrase]
inclined to reconsider its attitude with respect to the Federal contract save for the fact
that a situation has arisen within the Federal Telegraph Company of Delaware which
gives rise to the danger that the Radio Corporation may be unable to continue with the
project on the original plan. There is some reason to fear, therefore, that in fact the
Japanese proposal may prove to be the only available alternative.
Pending the arrival of Moss and Davis the Department will be glad to have further
comment from you in view of these possibilities.
HUGHES

[Document 739]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 10:54 p.m.]
(1) Your information prompts me to propose for the difficulty a second best
solution.
(2) The financial consortium suffers unpopularity in this country and so far
has to its credit no positive accomplishment. For a long time I have believed
that the one hope of the Consortium’s success rests upon the inclusion of a
native group of bankers. The term “radio consortium” would in itself arouse
the Chinese to oppose bitterly any combination for developing radio similar
to a consortium. Therefore the initial step to be taken in adjusting the
wireless dispute is necessarily to constitute China, instead of a helpless
subject of the discussion, a party coequal with the others.
certain of the obstacles with which the execution of the Japanese proposal
would be confronted, and also to the fact that it would be necessary to secure
the approval of the Chinese Government to any proposed alteration of the
method of carrying out the Federal agreement. Obviously, the exact nature of
the plan which the Japanese Government suggests would be determined by
the details, which so far still remain vague, of its execution. However, there
has been formally stated one definite principle, viz., that the Chinese
Government shall have exclusive control of the existing and proposed radio
facilities. Inasmuch as this is accepted as a guiding principle by the Japanese
Government, I make the suggestion that, whether or not the principle in
question is practicable, a conference be convoked in this city in which are
represented all the companies with which the Chinese Government has radio
(and perhaps those having cable) agreements or which reliably evidence that
they will be willing investors of capital in enterprises of that kind, the
representatives of these companies to consult with Chinese Government
representatives and among themselves how best to coordinate the contracts
which they respectively possess in order to obtain the most desirable results

for everyone having concern in the foreign and domestic wireless field
including telephony and broadcasting. Seemingly it would be desirable that
an official observer represent the Legation of the nationality of each
participating company.
(4) The submission by the Government of China of a comprehensive
proposal could advantageously initiate the discussion at this conference. The
Chinese Government, I think, would itself be willing to issue to the
companies which are concerned invitations to be represented at the
conference, should the plan for a conference be brought to the Chinese
Government’s attention as a solution of the existing complications between
the nations which are obstructing wireless communications development.
Regarding this consideration, it is my respectful proposal that a suggestion be
made to the Chinese Minister in Washington that if invitations were issued by
the Chinese Government to such a round-table conference, the Department
would give no opposition to American interests participating but, on the other
hand, would have hope of an outcome of success. It is my opinion that
approach by this method is superior to offering such proposals in Peking.
(5) I see the several following advantages in the convoking of such a
conference: When centered on a common object the combined business
acumen of the several representatives should be able to work an adjustment
of their various interests so that that object would be achieved. The American
representatives would, with their present attitude toward the Federal
agreement, be so placed with regard to making concessions as to set a
commendable example. The respective Governments, through their official
observers, would be in a position to make provision that there would be no
violation of international policies such as open door, elimination of spheres
of interest, etc.
(6) It is my belief that there would be embodied in an understanding arrived
at in this way the most satisfactory feature of the proposal made by the
Japanese, that the prestige of each participant would be conserved, the
dignity of China would be enhanced, and that the most for the actual
development of radio would be promised thereby.
SCHURMAN

[Document 740]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
72. Davis and Moss arrived evening February 19th and are conducting negotiations
with Director General of Telegraph on basis of terms of the original contract. It would
seem according to Moss that the Chinese Government, having learned on reliable
authority of the Japanese proposals and confronted with the possibility of having to
accept a radio consortium of four powers, may be willing to accept the Federal contract
with a few minor changes. In any case Moss quotes Director General as stating in his
first interview that there is no question of cancelation of the contract by Chinese
Government.
It appears that Davis and Moss are ignorant of the contents of your telegram No. 16,
January 28, 3 p.m., and, in case they are not informed thereof by their own principals,
have I authority to communicate to them the substance thereof as well as my No. 61,
February 5, 9 p.m.? In view of the contingency of the withdrawal of the American
parties to the Federal contract, although the Chinese Government may possibly be
willing to execute it, I request the Department’s explicit instructions as to the support I
should give Davis and Moss lest I be drawn into extremely embarrassing situation.
SCHURMAN

[Document 741]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Sehurman)
[Paraphrase]
24. Davis is fully aware of the internal dissensions among the American interests
concerned with the Federal wireless contract, and, in fact, information which he
provided to the Department formed the basis for the Department’s telegram of January
28, No. 16. Accordingly you may employ complete frankness in discussing with him
how far those interests will be able and willing to go ahead.
I am, of the opinion that the radio conference proposal which you suggest in your
telegram of February 5, No. 61, might have a tendency to cause the Federal Company’s
valid legal position under the agreements now in existence to be compromised without
adequately assuring, from a conference held under present conditions in China, any
effective results.
Appropriate support may be continued by you to try to secure the fulfillment by the
Chinese Government of the obligations which the Federal contract imposes upon it.
In reply to the Japanese memorandum of December 24, 1924, I propose to say: [Here
follows, in substance, the second paragraph of the note to the Japanese Embassy,
February 28, 1925, printed infra.]
HUGHES

[Document 742]
The Department of State to the Japanese Embassy
The Secretary of State has received from the Japanese Embassy a memorandum dated
December 24, 1924, making certain suggestions with regard to wireless telegraphy in
China.
While sympathetic with the purpose of effecting a reconcilement of the conflicting
radio interests in China, the Government of the United States is not disposed to
consider the relinquishment of the independent position of its nationals in this matter
unless and until it may have reasonable assurance of the practicability of any
adjustment proposed. In view of a doubt whether the arrangement which has been
suggested by the Japanese Government would be acceptable to the Chinese
Government, the Government of the United States would desire to be reassured on that
point before giving further consideration to the proposal.
A reply from the Japanese Government in this respect is awaited.
WASHINGTON , February 28, 1925.

[Document 743]
Mr. Manton Davis to the Radio Corporation of America11
[Extract]
PEKING, March 12, 1925.
Number 3. …
Subject: Communications. Official negotiations delayed on account of serious illness
Yeh Kung-ch’o, Minister of Communications, China. Unofficially we are making
satisfactory progress. Clarification agreement probably will not be very difficult after
Chinese decide question to proceed or not with our projects. Opposition Japanese
powerful. They have very great influence with Tuan Chi-jui, Acting President, China,
and are making strong effort to have our contract cancelled. All Chinese technical
services, including Yeh Kung-ch’o, Minister of Communications, China, and Tsiang
Tsing-yi, Director General of Telegraphs, China, are working for us hard. We have
agreed our stations will accept traffic for Japan and transmit all of the same to Mitsui-
Peking Radio Station, it to accept traffic for America and transmit all of the same to
nearest Federal stations, division all charges in each case in proportion to services, free
competition remainder of world. Tsiang Tsing-yi, Director General of Telegraphs,
China, strongly of opinion controversies can be settled this basis …
MANTON DAVIS
attorney for the Radio Corporation of America. In a letter of Mar. 31, 1925, to Assistant
arrangement suggested by Mr. Davis had the approval of the Radio Corporation of
America, the Federal Telegraph Company of Delaware, and of the president of the
Federal Telegraph Company of California.

[Document 744]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
that after one month’s negotiations with the Ministry of Communications they have
made no progress toward execution of contract. They believe the Ministry of
Communications favorable and ascribe deadlock to Japanese influence in the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and with the Chief Executive. At their request I called on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs on March 23, 11 a.m., and presented strong demand for
execution of the Federal contract so far as possible before my departure. I quoted
treaties and open-door principle as canceling Japanese monopolistic clause which
appeared to be only obstacle. The Minister for Foreign Affairs replied that Japanese
opposition was cause of obstruction and that if this were obviated American contract
would be executed. He promised to consult the Minister of Communications. While
Japanese influence is extremely strong with the present Government there are signs
latter is growing weaker and I feel that receipt in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
strong representation from the American Government telegraphed by the Chinese
Minister in Washington might have great effect at this juncture. I respectfully suggest
this course.
Repeated to Tokyo.
SCHURMAN
12 Not printed.

[Document 745]
The Department of State to the Japanese Embassy
MEMORANDUM
The Government of the United States has given further consideration to the suggestions
contained in the memorandum of the Japanese Embassy dated December 24, 1924,
concerning overseas radio facilities in, China. With a view to the reconcilement of the
divergent views entertained by the Governments of the United States and of Japan on
this subject, and in the hope of bringing about an amicable adjustment of virtually the
only remaining question of controversy between the two countries, the Government of
the United States ventures to propose that the following plan of operation of the
Federal and Mitsui radio stations in China should be adopted as a means of affording
adequate overseas radio facilities for that country in a manner providing a fair division
of the radio business between China and the United States and China and Japan: The
Federal Telegraph Company agrees to accept at any of its stations in China traffic for
Japan and to transmit all such traffic to the Mitsui station at Peking for retransmission
to Japan; the Mitsui station agrees to accept traffic for the United States and transmit all
such traffic to the nearest Federal station in China for retransmission to the United
States, the division of all charges in each case to be in proportion to the services
performed by the several companies. It is understood that for the remainder of the
world free competition will exist.
It is believed by the Government of the United States that an arrangement for the
interchange of traffic as above described would prove profitable to the companies
concerned and economical for the Chinese Government. It is hoped that the suggestion
which is offered as an alternative to the proposal made in the Japanese Embassy’s
memorandum of December 24, 1924, and in a spirit of accommodation to the expressed
desire of the Japanese Government that the uncertainty that has existed for several
years should be definitely removed, will meet with the approval of the Japanese
Government and that the Chinese Government, which would profit equally by the
arrangement, will interpose no objection. It is believed by the Government of the
United States that the plan as herein suggested is more feasible than that suggested in
the Japanese Embassy’s memorandum of December 24, 1924, in that it simplifies
operating arrangements, brings into accord the views of the several national radio
interests, whose contentions until now have seemed irreconcilable, and conforms with
the principle of equality of opportunity in commercial enterprises in China.
WASHINGTON , April 8, 1925.

[Document 746]
The Department of State to the Chinese Legation
MEMORANDUM
The Government of the United States, having been informed that the Chinese
Government is finding itself increasingly embarrassed by the divergent views of certain
American and Japanese radio interests in China, and being disposed to facilitate a fair
and reasonable adjustment of the situation, has proposed to the Japanese Government a
practical plan of cooperation by means of which an interchange of certain business
between the Mitsui station at Peking and the proposed Federal stations might be
effected. A copy of a memorandum on the subject addressed to the Japanese Embassy
at Washington today is enclosed herewith13 for your information and in the hope that
the proposal will have the approval of the Chinese Government in so far as it may be
concerned with the matter. It is believed by the Government of the United States that
the proposed plan would promote the early establishment of direct and adequate radio
communication between the United States and China and that the present facilities
between China and Japan would be improved and substantially augmented by the
adoption of the suggestion, and at a great saving to the Chinese Government. It is
hoped that the Chinese-Minister will at once recommend to his Government the
acceptance of the arrangement and that the Japanese Government likewise will give its
approval in order that the long-standing differences which have retarded radio
development in China may now be quickly reconciled. It would seem that the plan
proposed would resolve a situation which has been both discouraging and annoying to
the parties in interest and that if an operating plan such as has been suggested offers a
basis of an amicable settlement it behooves the three governments concerned to remove
further cause of friction by accepting the proposal.
WASHINGTON , April 8, 1925.
13 Supra.

[Document 747]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. At urgent request Federal representatives I pressed Minister for Foreign
Affairs yesterday at Foreign Office day [sic] to authorize Minister of
Communications to conclude negotiations immediately with Federal
Company for execution of contract. I pointed out that American
Government’s proposal to Japanese Government fulfilled all reasonable
demands of latter and left Chinese Government free to act. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs replied that Sze had had negotiations with the Department of
State and that it was now absolutely necessary to await Japanese
Government’s reply to memorandum before executing contract. The Minister
for Foreign, Affairs asked if Japanese Government had made reply.
2. While Federal representatives state negotiations with Ministry of
Communications regarding execution of contract proceeding favorably, I fear
traffic arrangement proposal being utilized by Japanese further to delay,
through diplomatic means, execution of contract.
3. From recent conversations with Davis, I gather Radio Corporation by no
means averse to, if not entirely in favor of, an arrangement with Mitsui
whereby latter’s Peking station will be used by both parties thus avoiding
building Federal Peking station. Such an eventuality I consider would be very
unfortunate from political considerations of need for direct Sino-American
communications between American and Chinese Governments and between
them and their respective Legations.
Repeated to Tokio.
MAYER
14 Not printed.

[Document 748]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
are no negotiations pending with the Chinese Minister here. In handing to him the
requested to give his support to the proposal but it is understood that he has taken no
action in this direction.
KELLOGG
15 Memoranda to the Japanese Embassy and to the Chinese Legation, dated April 8, pp.
16 Not printed.

[Document 749]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 28, 1925.
No. 566
SIR: I have the honour to refer to the Department of State’s note verbale of February
26th last16 on the subject of wireless telegraphy in China, and to inform you that the
memorandum of December 24th, 1924, from the Japanese Embassy here to the United
States Government, a copy of which was communicated to me by my Japanese
colleague, seems, in the opinion of His Majesty’s Government, to indicate a genuine
desire on the part of the Imperial Government to put an end to the lamentable and
dangerous confusion into which the question of wireless telegraphy in China has fallen.
I have therefore been instructed to state that, subject to the safeguarding of the prior
rights of the Marconi Company, His Majesty’s Government would welcome in
principle the formation of such a consortium as that suggested in the fifth paragraph of
the Japanese memorandum.
In order that there may be no misunderstanding in regard to the reservation outlined
above, my Government have directed me to invite the attention of the United States
Government once again to the nature and extent of the prior rights of the Marconi
Company. You will be aware that negotiations between the Chinese Government and
the Marconi Company for the erection of wireless stations in China began in September
preliminary agreement with the Company.17 The Marconi Company also hold
additional rights through the Chinese National Wireless Telegraph Company, which
was created by special charter on May 24th, 1919, and is jointly owned by the Chinese
Government and the Marconi Company. The contract of this company provides that the
Chinese Government shall purchase exclusively from the Chinese National Wireless
Telegraph Company all its present and future requirements in wireless telegraph and
telephone apparatus, material and supplies, and that, if the Government suffer no loss
by giving such work to the Chinese Company, then this Company shall be exclusively
entrusted with the repair and maintenance of all wireless telegraph and telephone
apparatus and equipment in China. These conditions have, in the opinion of His
Majesty’s Government, been constantly violated by the Chinese Government in many
ways as for instance by the contract signed by the Chinese Government in 1921 with
the American Federal Company.

In furnishing you with the above exposition of the situation as it is seen by my
Government, I would add that a similar communication is being addressed to the
Japanese Government by His Majesty’s Ambassador at Tokio.
I have [etc.]
ESME HOWARD
16 Not printed.

[Document 750]
The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
The Japanese Government have given a careful consideration to the two memoranda of
the question of wireless telegraphy in China. They are gratified to note in these
communications the full sympathy and readiness with which the United States responds
to their invitation to seek reconcilement of the divergent radio interests in China, and to
bring about an amicable settlement of this question of controversy between the two
countries.
2. It is doubtless known to the American Government that the Mitsui
Company, according to the contracts of February and March, 1918, has
completed the radio station at Peking. Regarding these contracts, the only
point in dispute between Japan and the United States is the right of monopoly
created in favour of the Mitsui Company to establish and operate all overseas
radio service in China, to the exclusion of other nationals interested in such
enterprise. The establishment and operation by the Mitsui Company of the
Peking station have never been questioned by the American Government or
the Federal Company.
3. The question, however, of the proposed stations of the Federal Company at
Shanghai and elsewhere, stands on an entirely different footing. It is to the
establishment of these stations by the Federal Company that the Japanese
Government felt constrained to take exception as an infringement of the
contractual right already acquired by the Mitsui Company from the Chinese
Government. As a question of law, the Japanese Government still hold to the
belief expressed in their previous communication that such contractual right
of the Mitsui Company as opposed to the claim of the Federal Company, is
not inconsistent, either with treaty provisions between the United States and
China, or with the principle of equal opportunity, and finds ample support in
a series of international precedents.
4. It seems that this distinction of legal status, between the Mitsui station at
Peking and the proposed Federal stations, has not been taken into account in
the plan of adjustment suggested in the Memorandum of April 8, 1925, as a
substitute for that which is embodied in the Japanese Embassy’s

Memorandum of December 24, 1924. Maintaining the claim of the Federal
Company to establish radio stations in China in disregard of the exclusive
right previously granted by the Chinese Government to the Mitsui Company,
the American counter-project proceeds to divide radio business between the
two companies. The plan formulated by the American Government is simply
an operating arrangement and it assumes the complete abandonment by the
Mitsui Company of its legal position relative to the establishment of radio
stations in China, without any corresponding concession on the part of the
Federal Company.
5. It would appear further that the American counter-project is intended to
secure for the Federal Company the exclusive control of all radio stations to
be constructed by the company as well as a monopoly of the radio service
between the United States and China. Upon careful review of the whole
question, the Japanese Government have now reached the conclusion that
such an arrangement would not make for the maintenance of China’s
administrative integrity or for the extension of fair and impartial treatment of
the other Powers equally interested in the question. On the contrary, it seems
likely to revive the international rivalry and misunderstanding that in the past
have proved so harmful to the stabilization of China.
6. Again, the Japanese Government are not convinced of the immediate need
for China, in the present state of her economic and financial conditions, for
two or more high power radio stations for external communications. The
expenditure to be charged to China under the Federal contract can not fail to
intensify the strain on her already overburdened treasury. Experience in many
countries has shown that, as purely commercial undertaking, radio
communication is not financially profitable, at least for a number of years
after its initiation.
American Government reserved discussion on the arrangement proposed by
the Japanese Government, unless and until its acceptability to China shall
have been reasonably assured. It will be recalled that the Japanese project is a
measure of mutual promise [compromise] calculated to remove from the field
of radio communication all features of foreign control and of monopoly, and
also to relieve China of what seems to be an unnecessary addition to her
financial burden. Considering that these terms are more favourable to China
and in fuller accord with her true interests than are those of the American
counter-project, the Japanese Government have indulged the confident hope
that their proposal will eventually be found acceptable to the Chinese
Government.

8. The Japanese Government, however, do not feel themselves at liberty to
make any overtures to China for the settlement of the question, without the
full understanding and cooperation of the United States. They fear that if they
took such independent action at Peking, it would place the Chinese
Government in an embarrassing position, and would, moreover, be a fruitful
source of popular misgiving. It seems to the Japanese Government only
natural and more likely to attain the desired result, that the parties having
conflicting claims to the radio enterprise in China should first agree between
themselves, at least upon the general principles governing the adjustment of
these claims, subject to the approval of the Chinese Government.
9. Doubt is expressed by the American Government as to the feasibility of the
Japanese proposals. The Japanese Government will welcome any suggestion
for the modification of such terms of their proposals as may appear
unworkable to the American Government. But, they place great importance
upon the elimination from any radio arrangements in China of such features
of foreign control or of monopoly as the counter-proposals of the American
Government would appear to involve. They further re-emphasize the point
that they deem it highly desirable, for China and for all Powers interested in
that country, to adopt such a solution as will lighten her financial liability.
10. The question of radio facilities in China formed a subject of discussion at
the Washington Conference, and the British and French Governments, which
took active part in that discussion, are no doubt keenly interested in the
outcome of the present exchange of views between Tokio and Washington.
Accordingly, it has occurred to the Japanese Government that if it is more
essentially the matter of feasibility than any question of principle, which
seems unconvincing to the American Government in the consideration of the
Japanese proposals submitted on December 24, 1924, it might be useful to
call a meeting of representatives of the American, British, French and
Japanese radio interests, with instructions to examine in common accord the
feasibility of the Japanese proposals, and to work out detailed terms of
adjustment for recommendation to their respective Governments.
In making this suggestion, the Japanese Government have no other desire than to reach
a practical solution of the difficulty that will best serve the lasting interests of China
and will at the same time secure friendly cooperation among the Powers interested in
radio enterprise in that country.
WASHINGTON , June 1, 1925.

[Document 751]
The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
TOKYO, July 1, 1925—noon.
117. Yesterday the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dr. Dan of Mitsui, and MacMurray,19
discussed the Federal wireless situation. I was present with Neville.20 MacMurray
explained that the Japanese memoranda of December 24th and June 1st last assumed
that the Mitsui monopoly is valid and exclusive, that the Federal contract is a monopoly
of traffic between China and the United States and finally proposed an adjustment on
the basis of a monopoly of China’s radio communications being shared among the
British, French, Japanese and American companies.
The American Government does not admit or support the Federal contract as a
monopoly. Its position was set forth in the memorandum of July 19, 1923, to the British
Government.21 The American Government does not wish to disturb vested interests but
cannot acquiesce in any arrangement which would have the effect of allowing French,
British and Japanese interests to maintain radio communication with China while
preventing the United States from so doing.
Shidehara replied that the Japanese objection to the American attitude was three fold: it
created a monopoly, it affected vested rights, and caused unnecessary expense to China.
The proposed American radio would be expensive and there is no prospect that it
would make enough money to repay the 13,000,000 Mexican dollars that it would cost
China. The Japanese wish to put all facilities of communication in the hands of China,
putting wireless on the same basis as the post offices and the Shantung Railway, for
example.
MacMurray stated that the United States desired earnestly to come to some settlement
that would protect vested interests and would injure no one but which must place the
United States on terms of equality with every other nation having radio interests in
China. He was not suggesting a program but placing our case before the Japanese and
assuring them of our wish to cooperate.
Shidehara said that he realized the necessity of cooperation and desired it. Japan
however is committed to a certain extent to the British and French through an
agreement made in London in February 1924, a copy of which he understood had been
given to the Radio Corporation; the situation is further complicated on account of the

Northern and Eastern Extension cable lines.
Copy to Peking.
BANCROFT
19 John V. A. MacMurray, newly appointed Minister to China, en route to his post.
20 Edwin L. Neville, first secretary of Embassy in Japan.

[Document 752]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., July 22, 1925.
[Received July 23.]
No. 704
SIR: In his note No. 566 of May 28th last, Sir Esme Howard drew your attention to the
prior rights of the Marconi Company as regards the working of wireless telegraphy in
China and informed you that, provided these rights were safeguarded, His Majesty’s
Government would welcome in principle the suggestion of the Japanese Government
that a consortium should be formed to liquidate the difficulties arising out of the
conflicting interests of the various concessionaires.
His Majesty’s Government are in full sympathy with the view expressed by my
Japanese colleague in the memorandum which he addressed to the United States
Government on December 24th last that this controversy should be adjusted along the
lines of international co-operation. In order, therefore, that there may be no
misconception as to the construction to be placed on the above mentioned proviso
regarding the prior rights of the Marconi Company, I am instructed to explain that His
Majesty’s Government will consider the interests of this Company to be sufficiently
safeguarded if they are enabled to participate on equal terms in the consortium
contemplated by the Japanese Government.
In determining their attitude in this matter, His Majesty’s Government have been
impressed by the fact that the difficulties now handicapping the development of
wireless communications with China afford a striking illustration of the soundness of
the general principles so ably championed by the United States Government in other
spheres of foreign relations with that country. The essence of these principles consists
in the eradication of international competition in China and the abstension of the
foreign powers concerned from any attempt to seek special privileges for themselves
and their nationals. His Majesty’s Government do not doubt that these considerations
will also animate the policy of the United States Government in the present instance. At
the same time, however, they view with a certain apprehension the possibility of
practical application being given to the suggestion put forward by the United States
representatives at the time of the Washington Conference that the conduct of wireless
between the United States and China ought to be solely in the hands of a Sino-
American enterprise. Whilst His Majesty’s Government for their part were prepared to

accept the recommendations of the wireless experts when taken as a whole, they cannot
but feel, in the light of the present difficulties, that the suggestion of the American
representatives on this particular point would in practice militate against the above
mentioned principle of equality of opportunity and encourage the powers to claim from
the Chinese Government a monopoly of the wireless traffic between themselves and
China. Such action on the part of the powers would materially increase the difficulties
of the situation and result in the infliction of a considerable injustice on China.
His Majesty’s Government are confident that this aspect of the matter will not have
escaped the notice of the United States Government, and in drawing your attention to
the standpoint of His Majesty’s Government as regards the interests of the Marconi
Company, I have the honour to request that I may be informed at an early date of the
attitude of the United States Government towards the question of the future
development of wireless telegraphy in China and to express the hope that their views
on the subject may coincide with those of His Majesty’s Government, who are prepared
to give their whole-hearted support to the proposals submitted in the above mentioned
Japanese memorandum of December 24th last, for the solution of the complicated and
far-reaching political issues which this problem involves.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 753]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
299. Federal wireless.
1. At a recent interview with the Minister for Foreign Affairs I asked for
special appointment to discuss wireless question and he expressed a desire to
know the purpose of my conversation with Japanese Minister for Foreign
Affairs of which he had obviously been informed.
2. Afternoon July 27th I recounted to him frankly the substance of that
conversation which was reported in Tokyo’s 117 July 1, noon and in my
comment laid emphasis upon the following points: (a) Japanese contract has
been extended whereas ours has not although entered into in good faith by
both American and Chinese parties with full knowledge of Japanese
pretensions of monopoly; (b) American interests thus placed at strategic
disadvantage in upholding principles which both we and Chinese
Government had in view; (c) American Government and radio interests not
antagonistic to legitimate rights of Japanese or other interests but anxious
only to obtain direct and unstraddled [untrammelled?] means of
communication and consequent better understanding between two peoples;
(d) though Japanese perhaps willing to come to eventual accommodation of
conflicting interests, it would be expecting too much of human nature to
suppose that they will seek or go very far to meet us in an accommodation
giving us what we desire so long as they are in possession of a station and we
have nothing but a bare paper standing; (e) we cannot meet the Japanese on
equal terms in this matter until the Chinese have given effect to our contract
rights as they have to those of the Japanese; (f) once the Chinese have
enabled the American contract to proceed, our radio interests have assured
me of their readiness to meet the Japanese in negotiations designed to
reconcile the conserved [sic] interests of Radio Corporation and Mitsui
Company by traffic arrangements subject to the approval of the Chinese
Government which would assure the latter company of profits at least equal
to those desirable from their Peking station under existing conditions.

3. Minister for Foreign Affairs first proposed we should adjust our
differences with the Japanese before asking further attention to the matter on
the part of the Chinese. I told him I saw no prospect of a satisfactory
adjustment until the Chinese gave our interests the locus standi to which they
were entitled by the terms of their contracts.
4. He then suggested that the Chinese might propose to the two conflicting
national interests some basis of accommodation. I pointed out that no such
proposal could well be fair to us so long as we occupied a merely theoretical
position while the Japanese had a station actually functioning.
[Paraphrase]
5. Information from a source considered reliable has come to representatives
of the Federal Telegraph Company that this matter was taken up today by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs with Tuan Chi-jui, emphasizing that we are not
at present negotiating with the Japanese and under existing conditions do not
foresee possibility of reaching a satisfactory understanding with them. It is
reported that Tuan has said that the Chinese Government would take up the
question with the Japanese if the Americans and Japanese could not come to
an agreement.
6. If this proves to be true we will be confronted by a clear disregard of our
contract rights and there will be little if any likelihood of obtaining a
reconsideration … It may be necessary in that case to decide whether to
induce the Chinese to submit proposals to the Radio Corporation and Mitsui
Company for the accommodation of their conflicting interests or to authorize
the Radio Corporation to negotiate directly with the Mitsui Company for
arrangements on a business basis. Arrangements of this nature would not
recognize any monopoly and would include the setting up of an independent
American-Chinese circuit.
7. Possibly the Chinese Minister at Washington might be persuaded to
telegraph his Government and to point out the seriousness of subordinating
valid American rights to the veto of Japan.
8. Repeated as No. 72 to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

[Document 754]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
conversation with the Chinese Minister on August 5, during the course of which he
brought to his attention the substance of your interview with the Chinese Minister for
Foreign Affairs on July 27, and pointed out to him that, for the Chinese Government to
ask the American company to adjust its differences with the Japanese before asking
further consideration of the matter of its contract on the part of the Chinese was to lead
this Government to see in this repudiation by the Chinese Government of the principles
of the policy of the open door. The Chinese Minister promised to see what he could do
by way of taking up the matter with his Government.
KELLOGG

[Document 755]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. On the 13th instant I called on the Minister for Foreign Affairs to ask for
an appointment to discuss with the Chief Executive the Federal wireless
question. He urged that the matter be left to the instructions of ministerial
committee to which it has been referred for the purpose of finding some way
to remove the obstacles placed by Japanese interests in the way of the
Chinese Government’s giving effect to the American contract. Being
convinced that this is a merely dilatory procedure since after several weeks
the committee has not taken up the proposal, I insisted that I saw no purpose
which the committee would serve unless it were to remove Japanese
opposition by devising terms under which third parties might permit the
Chinese Government to carry out its obligations to our nationals. I then read
him the substance of the statement to the Chinese Minister quoted in your
2. I recalled the notes exchanged between the Secretary of State and the
Chinese Minister in June-July, 1921,23 by which we pledged ourselves and
considered the Chinese Government likewise pledged to cooperation in this
matter as a practical application and test of the open-door principle; and I
pointed out that for four years we had loyally stood by this understanding
whereas the Chinese Government was still wavering in the face of
opposition. I said my Government attached the utmost importance to this
matter because of the principle involved and because it constituted a test of
the disposition of the Chinese Government not only towards its obligation to
our nationals but also towards the policy of the open door which it had
agreed with us to uphold: the time had come when we felt entitled to know
where the Chinese Government stands; would it or would it not live up to its
obligations and cooperate loyally with us in maintaining the open door. This
was a moment when we must be taking stock of our own position and of the
actualities of the situation in China, and we should be in a position to know
definitely whether or not the Chinese Government is faithful to its

cooperation with us in giving practical effect to the open door; a failure to
proceed with respect to the contract would now create a doubt.
3. The Minister for Foreign Affairs protested that there was no matter of
principle involved but only a practical question of finding a way around the
obstacle interposed by the Japanese; and he at first said he saw no necessity
for my seeing the Chief Executive.
4. I told him that we could not accept that view and that it was in order to
make clear to the Chief Executive our conviction as to the political
importance of the matter that I asked for an interview. The Minister with
manifest displeasure consented to arrange for it to take place in about a week.
5. I am hopeful that this interview may have made some impression upon the
Minister for Foreign Affairs who has hitherto been wholly indifferent to the
matter.
MACMURRAY
22 Neither printed.

[Document 756]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
[Received 5:50 p.m.]
1. From a source hitherto found reliable and believed to be so in this instance,
representatives of the Federal wireless interests have learned that in
consequence of the unremitting pressure from the Japanese Legation,
Provisional Chief Executive has directed that the interministerial committee
must report in favor of the cancellation of the Federal contract.
2. Minister of Communications who originally concluded and is favorable to
the American contracts is helpless in the matter but is reported to intend
saving face by recommending that the Mitsui contract be simultaneously
canceled. Such cancellation of the Japanese contract would not of course
eliminate the station actually built thereunder or relieve Chinese Government
from its financial obligation which might well prove actually heavier on a
quantum meruit basis than under the terms of the contract.
3. The result would be that the American interests would be left with a bare
claim against the Chinese Government; whereas Japanese interests would
have not only a claim but a station in being and capable of actual though
inefficient commercial operation and would then be in a position to demand
that arrangements be made to enable their station to be so used as to make it
reliable security for the debt incurred in its construction.
4. This fits in with a plan which the Japanese Minister has for some time
been persistently urging upon the Chief Executive in behalf of Mitsui
Company, whereby the Chinese Government would authorize that company
to operate station in its behalf under a nominally provisional arrangement
pending settlement of the question of Mitsui’s claim to a monopoly; in the
meanwhile station should “start operations for transmission of all commercial
messages for Japan, Europe, America and other overseas points” and the
Chinese Government would permit station to connect with the Chinese
telegraph system and would direct that all messages routed by wireless to

foreign countries should be transmitted by the Japanese station, this
“provisional arrangement” to be subject to modification only upon 6 months’
notice and upon agreement by both (repeat both) parties as to the cancellation
of any of the terms of the agreement. This seems clearly to mean a monopoly
of Chinese overseas wireless in favor of Japanese interests for so long as they
care to maintain that predominance.
5. The situation would of course lead to the result that in the event of the
formation of “wireless consortium” Japan would enter the field as the
possessor of all ostensible rights, whereas we would be in a position to show
no more than a grievance against the bad faith of the present administration
of the Chinese Government.
MACMURRAY

[Document 757]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. Chief Executive yesterday gave me the assurance that Federal contract was
recognized as valid and that effect would be given to it. …
2. I am frankly doubtful however whether any positive result was achieved as
I am unable to get him to give any definite assurance as to the time and
manner of giving effect to the contract. He confined himself to saying that he
would instruct Ministries of Communications and Foreign Affairs to seek a
solution satisfactory to all interested nationalities and remarked that this was
a matter in which the Japanese had an interest that entitled them to be heard.
3. I concluded the conversation by saying that while I did not expect of him
an immediate answer as to the intentions of his administration I intended
shortly to address to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs a request for an early
and definite statement on the subject and had consulted him in order that the
reply might represent his considerations.
4. In order not to lose what impetus has been given to the matter my
proposed note to the Minister of Foreign Affairs should be in his hands in
time for consideration at the Cabinet meeting Saturday morning.
Considerable weight would be added to it if I could quote you directly as
instructing me to make such a request for information as to the intentions of
the present regime here; but if it is not possible to receive your authorization
by Friday morning I shall send a note in the sense indicated below on my
own responsibility and omitting the reference to instructions from you.
5. The Department [proposed?] note, after recalling the conversations I have
had with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and with the Chief Executive and
reciting that the desire and readiness of the American interests concerned
with the contract have been thus far defeated by the action of the Chinese
Government, would go on as follows.

6. So recently [as] the 24th instant His Excellency the Chief Executive
assured me that contract in question was recognized as valid and would be
put into effect. While welcoming this renewed assurance in view of the
importance that attaches to this matter not only as one involving a contractual
obligation to American nationals but also as affording a test of the principle
of the equality of opportunity in China, I must repeat that it is now necessary
to know definitely whether early effect will be given to the contract. As I
have explained both to you and to His Excellency the Chief Executive, time
is important to the American companies concerned; and a further reason for
making clear the position of the Chinese Government in this matter had now
arisen in consequence of the fact that the American Government is at the
present time under the necessity of taking stock of international situation in
China and formulating policies for its own guidance in dealing with the
records [sic] to be discussed at the Special Conference.24
7. With a view to assuring itself whether or not it can count upon the
continued support and cooperation of the Chinese Government in
maintaining the principle of equality of opportunity which is the basis of
Washington Conference treaties and of the forthcoming Special Conference
to be held thereunder, my Government has instructed me to ask for an early
and definite statement whether the Chinese Government will without
hesitation give effect to the Federal contract, and, if so, on what date may it
expect such action to be taken.
8. I earnestly request your express authorization to present the matter in this
way.
9. Copy by mail to Tokyo for information.
10. I suggest informing Radio Corporation of the substance of the above.
MACMURRAY
683] ff.

[Document 758]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
State to present question of Federal Telegraph contract to Minister for Foreign Affairs
in manner set forth in Paragraph[s] 6 and 7 of your telegram.
GREW

[Document 759]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. I have just received on credible authority the information that at a secret
meeting with interested Cabinet Ministers, the Chief Executive yesterday
adopted definitely the decision to cancel the Federal and Mitsui contracts as
2. With a view to forestalling action upon this decision which would confront
us with an unalterable fait accompli it seems imperative that I should
immediately address to the Minister for Foreign Affairs the note referred to in
instructions from the Department. I am therefore sending this afternoon a
note of the tenor suggested in that telegram.
3. Copy by mail to Tokio for information.
MACMURRAY

[Document 760]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Received 7 p.m.]
1. The Foreign Office yesterday evening sent me an aide-mémoire stating that:
“The question concerning the American and Japanese wireless stations has
long been pending and has not been settled. As the three parties are without
benefit, it becomes urgently necessary to plan a fundamental means of
decision.”
and transmitting a proposal of the Ministry of Communications looking to replacement
of both contracts by an arrangement whereby the American and Japanese parties would
jointly make the Chinese Government a loan for the development by it of a wireless
system. The text of the proposal is given in a telegram which I am sending for Davis.25
2. Identic aide-mémoire was to be delivered to Japanese Legation.
3. Davis informs me that earlier in the day he had been sounded as to this proposal by a
representative of the Minister of Communications and had absolutely refused to
entertain it since he considers it not only beyond the scope of his authority to negotiate,
but wholly unacceptable from a business standpoint. He furthermore feels that this
proposal which there is reason to believe was originated by Mitsui is designed merely
to detach the American interests from their position of reliance upon vested contract
rights and bring them into negotiations in which they would be at a disadvantage. In
this opinion I concur.
4. I am therefore addressing the Foreign Office today a note of which the substance is
as follows:
“Lest there be any misunderstanding let me make it clear that the interested
American companies desire to proceed under that contract; and let me recall
that on August 26th under special instructions from the Secretary of State I
had the honor to address to Your Excellency a request for an early and
definite statement whether the Chinese Government will without further

delay give effect to the Federal contract, and, if so, what date may such
action be expected. I beg now to reiterate that request.”
5. I suggest substance of above be conveyed to Radio Corporation.
6. Copy mailed to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY
25 Infra.

[Document 761]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
transmitted to Radio Corporation:
“Energetic action by the American Minister doubtless has prevented, at least
temporarily, cancellation of our contracts. The Minister received, August
28th, from the Chinese Government, a proposal as follows:
Wireless stations to be erected by China itself for direct
communication abroad, the funds to be borrowed from two
countries, the United States and Japan, and to be devoted to the
exclusive use of erecting wireless stations and may not be
transferred for other use; the principal and interest of such loans to
be secured by the receipts of wireless station and to be repaid in
annual installments.
During the period of construction [of] the wireless station the
creditors to have the right to supervise the expenditure of the funds;
during operation the creditors to have the right of auditing the
receipts and expenditures. As to the selection of employees, the
administration, and the operation of the stations, the management
of each to be considered as lying within the sphere of the
Government’s jurisdiction, and to be entirely managed by China
itself, the two countries, the United States and Japan, in compliance
with the provisions of the first clause of the first article of the treaty
ratified by the nine Washington Conference powers, respecting the
spirit of China’s sovereignty and independence,26 and both parties
refraining from interference.
As to the detailed articles, these are to await the settlement of the
general agreement, China with the approval of American and
Japanese companies to make appropriate revision of the principal
and subdivision of contracts and annexes regarding the Hsuang
Chiao wireless station concluded between the Ministry of the Navy

wireless matters, and of the principal and subordinate contracts and
annexes concluded between the Ministry of Communications and
You will perhaps believe that a proposal for us to lend China money to build
wireless stations which Chinese are to manage pending payment of the debt
does not furnish an acceptable basis to a revision of our existing contracts.
The “probable purpose of the proposal is to draw us into negotiations which
will apparently justify China[’s] executing the so-called provisional
arrangement with the Japanese, referred to in the American Minister’s cable
August 22nd.
Should we accept the principles of the proposals, negotiations for revision of
our existing contracts probably would never be satisfactorily concluded,
meanwhile the Japanese monopoly under the so called provisional
arrangement would continue indefinitely. We are continuing to press the
Chinese Government for answer whether it intends to carry out our contracts.
May we ask the American Minister on behalf of the Federal Company to
reject this proposal, but in manner not to permit demagogues to assert we are
trying to infringe China’s sovereignty.”
MACMURRAY
27 See List of Contracts of American Nationals With the Chinese Government, etc,
annex VIII.

[Document 762]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
1. [Paraphrase.] I learn on what I consider reliable authority that my note was
considered yesterday at an informal meeting of the interested Ministers with
the Chief Executive. The Minister of Communications inquired whether he
could go ahead with the American companies irrespective of the Japanese.
The Chief Executive wavered and said that he would take the question under
advisement. [End paraphrase.]
2. Japanese interests, presumably in view of our unwillingness to consider the
Chinese proposal, have taken a lukewarm attitude towards it and have
represented to the Ministry that the whole matter will in any case depend
upon the result of discussions which the Japanese Government is about to
open with the American Government.
3. The present danger is that the effect of our pressure upon the Chinese
Government in the direct issue now joined with it will be dissipated by even
an appearance that we have undertaken other negotiations with the Japanese.
I therefore recommend that you take occasion to inform the Chinese Minister
that notes which I presented by your direction to his Government on August
26th and 29th, call for a definite reply and corresponding action on the part of
the Chinese Government; and that not until effect has been given to the
Federal contract would you be willing to entertain any suggestions for the
purpose of bringing about amicable accommodations of the several interests
involved. Should you adopt this recommendation I should appreciate early
notification of the action taken in pursuance thereof.
4. Copy mailed to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

[Document 763]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
1 and stated that he had received a message from his Government outlining proposal
Government had received a communication from you which it interpreted as meaning
that the American Government would govern its interest in the forthcoming Special
Conference on October 26, by the attitude which the Chinese Government would adopt
toward the Federal Wireless contract. In the presence of the Chief of the Far Eastern
Division the Secretary of State informed the Chinese Minister that the Chinese
Government could hardly expect the American Government to take an active interest in
the policy of the open door in China if the Chinese Government itself was not
interested in that policy. The Chief of the Far Eastern Division in a subsequent
conversation with the Chinese Minister on the same day under instructions from the
Secretary, informed the Chinese Minister that he should not leave his Government in
any doubt that you had the Secretary’s full support in the attitude which you have taken
with regard to the Federal Wireless contract. As regards proposal mentioned in your
360, he informed the Chinese Minister that the communication to the Chinese Foreign
Office mentioned in paragraph 4 was approved by the Department. The Chief of the
Far Eastern Division saw the Chinese Minister again on the afternoon of September 2
and again stated to him that he must not leave his Government in any doubt in this
matter and that the communications which you have addressed to the Chinese
Government require a definite reply. The Minister stated that he reported by telegraph
to his Government on September 1 that the Secretary had informed him that he was
very much disappointed with the attitude adopted by the Chinese Government
particularly as China’s action had a direct bearing upon the policy of the open door, as
it indicated that China was failing to support this policy at the very time that it was
appealing to the world for a release from conventional tariffs and the extraterritorial
provisions of the treaties. As regards proposal, he stated that he had informed his
Government that you had addressed a communication to the Chinese Foreign Office on
August 29 which was supported by the Secretary of State.
GREW

[Document 764]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
incorrectly the relations of the Radio Corporation of America to the Federal Company’s
project and the general question of radio in China. Among other things Harbord writes
in substance as follows: In correspondence submitted to the Department and to the
American delegation at the Washington Conference, Owen D. Young explained that the
British, French, and Japanese radio interests were solicitous to have the Radio
Corporation participate in a plan for wireless communication between China and
foreign countries, including the United States; that it was the opinion of the Radio
Corporation, based upon the success of a similar arrangement with respect to South
America, that radio communication between China and this country would be served
best by participation in some arrangement of that kind; but that because of the decision
by the Department that radio communication between China and this country should be
provided on the basis of the existing Federal project, the Radio Corporation informed
its British, French, and Japanese associates that it could not go any further in an
international arrangement.
Harbord’s letter recounts such delays as expenses of the Radio Corporation in
connection with the Federal project, the failure to deliver bonds, etc., as evidence that
the corporation has not been lacking in loyalty to the position of our Government. In
conclusion, either in anticipation that the reply of the Chinese Government to your
latest representations will be definitely unfavorable or merely a promise that possibly
there will be further negotiations, Harbord requests the Department to consider the
desirability of giving the Radio Corporation liberty to make such arrangements with
foreign associates as it can to assure American participation in the wireless
communications of China, with the understanding that the Department will be kept
fully informed of the progress of any negotiations and that the Radio Corporation will
not enter into any arrangement which will involve unfair discrimination against other
American interests.

In his letter Harbord does not mention the request of Davis, transmitted in your 356,
August 27, 4 p.m., that Young communicate with the Mitsui Company. The first part of
the letter indicates that the Radio Corporation objects to the Chinese proposal of
August 28.
The Department is waiting for a report as to the results of your representations to the
Chinese Foreign Office and Chief Executive before answering Harbord’s letter.
KELLOGG
28 Gen. James G. Harbord, president of the Radio Corporation of America.
29 Telegram No. 356 not printed.

[Document 765]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
and categorical answer; greatly regret to report that if I were compelled to give a final
answer at this moment it would have to be unfavorable.
2. Since early in August, I have been endeavoring, as my reports have indicated, to get
serious consideration of this matter by the Chinese Government presenting clear issue
whether or not the present administration is prepared to abide by its contractual
obligations to American citizens and to cooperate loyally with the American
Government in maintaining the principle of open door. My first conversations were
with the Minister for Foreign Affairs who apparently does not understand what is
involved and has consistently sought to put me off with meaningless assurances
amounting to what is termed in your telegram “a promise of possibility of further
negotiations.” On August 24th I saw the Chief Executive who assured me that the
contract was recognized as valid and would be put into effect but in view of “obstacles”
to which he referred would make no commitment as to when that would be done. In
notes addressed to the Foreign Office August 26th and 29th under your instructions I
urged the importance of this Government’s informing me definitely whether it would
give effect to the contract and if so when. In a supplementary note September 7th I
pointed out that my Government regards these questions as urgent; and on September
11th I again emphasized urgency of a decision. I have thus far received no reply to my
notes and no indication whatsoever from any responsible source as to what attitude this
administration may be prepared to take regarding its obligations towards our citizens
and towards our Government and its policies.

3. In the hope that the administration may even yet be made conscious of its
responsibilities and of its interest in this matter, I shall nevertheless continue my efforts
and trust that you may be able allow some few days longer before accepting as
definitive and conclusive the failure of the Chinese Government to deal with this matter
in good faith.
4. Copy by mail to Tokio.

MacMurray

[Document 766]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Corporation with statement that request is receiving careful consideration: meanwhile,
Department is most anxious that you continue to impress upon the Chinese
Government with all means at your disposal the growing importance the Government
of the United States attaches to this opportunity, which culminating circumstances have
now created, for the Chinese Government to demonstrate, unequivocally, its good faith
both specifically and as a matter of principle in the larger (and at the present time
peculiarly significant) question involved.
KELLOGG

[Document 767]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 18, 1925—noon.
[Received 2:50 p.m.]
1. I have arranged for a further interview Monday morning with the Chief
Executive with a view to urging not so much a decision favorable to the
Federal project as a prompt answer in either sense that will enable you to
judge whether in the forthcoming Special Conference we have to deal with a
China that is with us or against us on the fundamental question of the open-
door policy. This is become necessary because, although the pressure upon
the Chief Executive and his advisers had apparently induced them to decide
that the Federal contract must be carried out, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
has been able to persuade his colleagues of his belief that insistence of our
Government is a mere bluff, and that the issue may be indefinitely evaded.
2. The Chinese are prone to discount, out of the abundance of their
experience with various foreign diplomatic representatives, the reality of
representations made to them in the name of the several governments. I feel
the present matter is too vital to be left to chance of such misapprehension …
3. [Paraphrase.] I should like to suggest, if I may, that a message from
President Coolidge to Chief Executive Tuan be drafted and cabled to me for
delivery September 21 asking whether it is not the intention of the
Government of China to fulfill the obligations of its contracts with American
interests and to give loyal cooperation to the American Government in
realizing in practice the open-door policy for which purpose the Chinese
Government sought our cooperation in 1921, and that the Chinese Minister at
Washington be handed a copy of the message for communication to his
Government. [End paraphrase.]
4. There is a tendency on the part of the Chinese to make it appear that we
are trying to profit by the Special Conference to extort from them particular
advantages. I have taken occasion to explain to such officials as have hinted
this to me that we are not seeking any concession but merely applying a test
of the good faith of the Chinese Government in carrying out obligations to
American commercial interests and to our Government assumed more than

four years ago; and that the question presents itself to us not as a matter of
bargaining but as a means of determining whether and to what extent the
facts of the situation would warrant us in adopting policy more favorable to
Chinese aspirations than the actual terms of the treaty obligations that we
have undertaken and which we will, of course, fulfill.
5. Copy by mail to Tokio.
MACMURRAY

[Document 768]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Executive and urge him to recognize the contract with the Federal Wireless. I cannot
understand why the United States, which has been and is today the friend of China,
should be discriminated against in favor of all other countries. If the Chief Executive
does not intend to maintain the open-door policy for which we contend, let us have an
answer at the earliest date possible. We shall then know where we stand on this matter.
KELLOGG

[Document 769]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
telegram regarding Federal Telegraph Company’s contract. I do not believe it would be
wise to have the President send a personal message on this matter to the Chinese Chief
Executive. It is not my desire to have our general policy in China depend upon the
fulfillment by China of this particular contract. Our position might be very seriously
prejudiced should Tuan publish such a telegram from President Coolidge. I want to
have a free hand at the conference in dealing with China and not to be bound by any
bargain depending upon concessions. I am sending today for the Chinese Minister and
telling him that you are to call upon the Chief Executive with my approval in an effort
to obtain a definite answer regarding the contract.
KELLOGG

[Document 770]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
1. The Chief Executive assured me this morning in an interview that the
Federal Telegraph Company’s contract will be carried out and that whole-
hearted support will be given by China to the opendoor policy which China
considers necessary to its own interests. Tuan also stated that his Government
is most anxious not to have any one nationality control its wireless
communication.
2. Tuan was surprisingly frank in speaking of China’s weakness and of the
difficulties which could be created by Japan, especially in Manchuria, if
China should antagonize the Japanese on a question which he said they had
presented to him as a life and death matter because of fear that the more
powerful wireless station to be built at Shanghai would be able through
interference to dominate Japan’s system of naval radio communications.
3. Tuan requested earnestly that we allay the apprehensions of the Japanese
by agreeing to tripartite discussions. I insisted that we would not be in a
position to take part on a satisfactory basis in any discussions with Japan
until our interests had been placed on an equal footing with Japanese interests
and until the Chinese Government had proven its willingness to act according
to its obligations in this matter. Tuan then inquired whether I would be
willing to give assurance that after the Federal contract had been put into
effect we would be ready to discuss a mutual accommodation of interests
between the Federal and Mitsui Companies. I had conveyed this very
assurance to him in a conversation a month ago and I told him at once that I
was ready to renew the assurance on behalf of both our Government and the
American interests concerned and that we would be prepared at that time to
deal with the question on a most generous and friendly basis.
4. Tuan took this as a concession by us which would remove to a great extent
his difficulties in dealing with the Japanese. He intimated that if I would

agree to put it in writing he would consult with the Ministers of
Communications and Foreign Affairs tomorrow morning with a view to
having the Federal wireless contract put into effect.
5. I told Tuan that I would be quite prepared to arrange an exchange of notes
with the Minister of Foreign Affairs by which he would give a favorable
reply to my repeated inquiries as to whether the Federal contract is to be put
into effect; and in acknowledgment I would write that the American interests,
with the sympathetic approval of our Government, would be ready, after the
necessary steps had been taken to make the contract effective, to enter into
discussions with Mitsui Company representatives and the Chinese Ministry
of Communications in order to reach an accommodation of their respective
interests in the hope that effective business arrangements would be made
which would be fair and profitable to all interested parties.
6. Tuan urged that for the time being the matter should be treated as
absolutely confidential save for the discussions which would be necessary
with the local representatives of the Federal wireless interests. His reason for
keeping the matter confidential was evidently the desire to avoid antagonisms
which premature publicity might arouse.
7. I shall inform you at once of any definite developments resulting from the
assurances which Tuan gave me.
8. I am mailing to Tokyo copy of this telegram.
MACMURRAY

[Document 771]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
Tokyo dated September 22, stated that the Japanese Ambassador at Washington had
been instructed to enter into conversations with the Secretary of State with respect to
the Chinese wireless situation with the expectation that a compromise between the
United States and Japan will be reached which will satisfy all parties. As the
Department understands it the arrangements referred to in your 405, September 21,
paragraph 3, are not to be begun until the contract with the Radio Corporation has been
confirmed and put into effect. The Department has heard nothing as yet from the
Japanese Embassy, but if the Japanese Ambassador makes inquiries it is my intention to
inform him that I am waiting to learn the results of the negotiations which you are now
conducting at Peking. Department wishes that question of traffic arrangements be a
matter for negotiation not between the American and Japanese Governments but
between the companies concerned.
KELLOGG

[Document 772]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
422. Following for Radio Corporation for [from] Davis: “Modified agreement
containing clarification paragraphs will possibly be signed soon, the American
Government agreeing that when our contracts are in course of performance we will
meet Chinese and Japanese to discuss an arrangement for cooperation. Contracts will
be deemed in course of performance when modified agreement is signed and delivered,
when orders are issued to Chinese Minister at Washington to sign and when necessary
orders are issued to enable us to come into possession of lands for Shanghai stations.
Sze’s absence may delay actual delivery, hence Chinese request that we do not refuse to
meet Japanese until bonds actually in hand. Cooperation should be possible by
applying following principles: separate managements, division of gross receipts on fair
basis, apportionment of wireless stations of world as correspondents, and periodic
correction of apportionment. Have informed Lucas. I am without authority to enter
such negotiations and could not conclude them without assistance of engineering and
traffic expert. Will Federal Company be prepared, on short notice, to authorize me to
enter such negotiations, or to select another purpose [person?], and to send Reoch or
another expert? These negotiations may help us through by giving face to both
Japanese and Chinese.”
MACMURRAY

[Document 773]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Received 3:10 p.m.]
1. After two weeks of discussion with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, …
during which the representatives of the interested American companies have
made what they consider the utmost possible concessions, it has now been
agreed that subject to possible verbal alterations, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs will address to me a note informing me that “the Chinese
Government has the intention to carry (Federal contract) into effect at the
earliest moment,” and at the same time expressing the earnest hope that the
representatives of the American companies concerned will discuss with the
Chinese and Japanese “a fundamentally fair and achieving solution.” I am to
reply taking note of the intention of the Chinese Government to carry the
contract into effect at the earliest moment and continuing: “I note also the
expression of the earnest hope on the part of the Chinese Government that
discussions may be had among the several parties in interest. In this
connection I am happy to confirm in behalf of the American companies
concerned, and with the sympathetic approbation of the American
Government, the assurance which I have hitherto given to His Excellency the
Chief Executive, in response to his views, that when the first steps in carrying
out the contract have been taken, the representatives of the American
companies will hold discussions forthwith in the most friendly and generous
spirit with the appropriate authorities of the Chinese Government, and with
the representatives of the Japanese interests involved in wireless
communications in China, in order to arrive at an [apparent omission] of their
several business interests on a basis fundamentally fair and beneficial to all
parties concerned.” This interchange of notes is to be accompanied by a
procès-verbal, to be initialed by the Chinese Secretary and the Secretary of
the Foreign Office, recording that I interpreted the phrase “first steps in
carrying out the contract” as implying, first, the execution and delivery of the
revised contract; second, the issuance of instructions to the Chinese Legation
at Washington to execute and deliver the bonds to the American company at
the earliest moment; and third, the issuance of instructions to the local
authorities (at Shanghai) “to take steps at the earliest moment in order that

the company may take possession of the land necessary for the construction
of the main station” and that the Foreign Minister concurred in this
explanation.
2. As soon as we had reached an agreement in principle on these documents
the Minister for Foreign Affairs said that in consideration of his having done
this much for our interests he felt warranted in asking me for a definite
statement of our Government’s attitude in regard to the forthcoming
conference. I told him that the exchange of these documents did not in itself
place us under any obligations and that I wished to make this clear to him in
order that he might if necessary reconsider the matter before making the
exchange. I recalled that the proposed documents call upon Chinese
Government to do nothing new—in fact placed some conditions and
qualifications upon what the Chinese Government was already definitely
obligated to do; and that it was simply a matter of bringing about the
fulfillment by that Government of obligations whose nonfulfillment had led
us to doubt the willingness or ability of the Chinese Government to live up to
the further duties which it would naturally have to assume in connection with
aspirations which it is seeking to realize at the conference. I added that in this
aspect of matter the making of a new promise was a hopeful indication of
desire of the Chinese to keep faith with us, but that of course their
performance of the obligations thus newly undertaken would afford a
measure of the confidence with which we may feel warranted in dealing with
them in the conference.
[3?] He then urged that this new evidence of Chinese good will ought at least
to be a basis for our discussing and considering frankly with the Chinese
authorities the program of the conference, and he outlined in very general
terms the program in view. Upon his asking for my comment on it I stated
that it was impossible for me to form an opinion of a general program
without any details making possible judgment as to the practicability of its
various items and said that I would of course be glad to receive from the
Chinese experts detailed explanations of their proposals but that until such
details had been considered by my Government and by the delegation it
would manifestly be impossible to give more than a general assurance of our
good will and desire to be of help to China.
4. He indicated some disappointment that unwillingness to make a more
definite commitment as to our attitude on the general program or on the
particular item of “tariff autonomy.”
It is entirely possible that failing to receive from us some new consideration
for the observance of our existing rights the Chinese Government may even

yet refuse to proceed with the proposed interchange of notes.
5. Not repeated to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY
30 Not printed.

[Document 774]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase—Extract]
1. This evening notes were exchanged and the procès-verbal was initialed. These were
outlined in telegram under reference. The Chinese note is dated October 6.
MACMURRAY

[Document 775]

The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State24

undated
(1) The Japanese Government are gratified to note that the proposals
contained in the memorandum of the Waichiaopu dated August 28, 192532
for the adjustment of the question of wireless telegraphy in China are in
substantial agreement with the plan suggested in the Memoranda of the
copies of which have been communicated to the Chinese Government. The
memorandum of the Waichiaopu under examination contemplates the
naturalization of all high power radio stations in China. It intimates that such
stations are to be established with proceeds of foreign loans to be raised for
that purpose, but that, upon completion, they shall be placed under the
exclusive control and administration of the Chinese Government. It is
precisely in support of this line of policy that the Japanese Government have
suggested to the American Government that the two sets of contracts now
held respectively by the Mitsui Bussan Kaisha and the Federal Telegraph
Company be amalgamated into a new and comprehensive loan agreement
with the participation of American, British, French and Japanese radio
interests, and that all features of foreign control or monopoly be excluded
from such a loan agreement.
(2) By the terms of the Waichiaopu’s memorandum it appears that China has
in view the construction of certain new stations for external communication,
in addition to the one recently constructed by the Mitsui Company near
Peking and it is proposed that a loan to be raised to cover the cost of
construction of these stations shall be secured on the revenue of such
establishments and redeemed in annual instalments. The memorandum does
not specify when and where these additional stations are to be set up. In any
case, it seems quite obvious that any further station which may be established
at present or in the near future can not reasonably be expected to yield a
sufficient amount of revenue to meet China’s indebtedness under the
proposed loan. Nor is such an extensive programme believed to be
reconcilable with the avowed policy of the Chinese Government to effect the
financial retrenchment urgently called for in the best interests of the nation.
Its unwisdom will appear all the more striking, when it is considered that on
the whole Pacific Coast of the United States, with its immense volume of
trade, there is only one trans-oceanic radio station open for public use.
Accordingly, it is presumed to be the intention of the Chinese Government to
reserve the plan of constructing any additional high power stations, until the
commercial and industrial condition of the country shall warrant such an
undertaking. The Japanese Government confidently hope that this
presumption will be confirmed by the Chinese Government.

(3) The only difference of any importance between the Japanese and Chinese
proposals is thus reduced to the question as to whether British and French
radio interests, besides Japanese and American, shall be invited to participate
in the new loan agreement in which the existing contracts of the Mitsui and
of the Federal are to be merged. The Japanese Government hold to the belief
that it is highly desirable, for the promotion of international good
understanding, no less than for the development of China’s own radio
enterprise, to enlist the friendly co-operation of British and French interests.
The fairness of the claim of these two nations to participate in the proposed
arrangement must be admitted, while their support is certainly required in
order to secure the satisfactory working of Chinese radio enterprise in its
relation with Europe. It need hardly be pointed out that the co-operation of
the four-Power radio interests on the lines indicated can not, in any sense, be
taken as a measure implying any degree of international control, or
international administration, of wireless telegraphy in China, which is as
strongly deprecated by the Japanese Government as by the Chinese
Government.
(4) Should the foregoing observations meet the approval of China, the
Japanese Government, on their part, will be happy to do whatever lies in their
power, in co-operation with the Chinese Government, to expedite a solution
of the long pending difficulty.
Being satisfied that it is not so much a question of principle as of detail which separates
the Japanese and Chinese proposals under review, the Japanese Government are
encouraged in the hope that a fair and speedy adjustment could be arrived at, if the
same basic principle now found acceptable to both Governments will commend itself
equally to a favourable reception on the part of the American Government.
the annotation: “English translation of the reply of the Japanese Government to the
Memorandum of the Wai-Chiao-Pu dated Aug. 28, 1925.”

[Document 776]

The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State22

undated
The American Government appears to be under the apprehension that the Japanese
proposal embodied in the memorandum of the Japanese Embassy, Washington, dated
December 24th, 1924, may not commend itself to the Chinese Government. An
examination, however, of the Chinese proposal recently made to the United States and
Japan shows that the Chinese Government has as its aim to manage and work on its
own account the Chinese radio stations to be established with foreign loans, and that
the main purpose of the Chinese proposal is in substantial agreement with that of the
Japanese proposal. It is thus believed to mark a step forward toward the adjustment of
the question of wireless telegraphy in China. In these circumstances, it is most
earnestly hoped that this long pending controversy may speedily be settled on the basis
of the Japanese proposal above alluded to.
With this hope in view, the Japanese Government ventures to suggest again that as set
forth in the last paragraph of the Memorandum of the Japanese Embassy, Washington,
dated June 1st, 1925, the Japanese proposal be submitted to a meeting of
representatives of the radio interests of the various countries concerned to be examined
and reported as to its feasibility.

[Document 777]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking on October 24th and Vice Minister Cheng on November 10th, and have not
returned. Minister of Interior Kung was appointed on November 28th concurrently
Acting Minister of Communication[s]; but because of the above circumstances and
political instability I have been unable to move the Ministry of Communications to
initiate negotiations with Davis for modification of contract. Davis has been in constant
touch with Director General of Telegraphs who advised against negotiating with the
Acting Minister, consequently there has been no progress since exchange of note[s] of
2. Appointment of a substantive Minister of Communications seems imminent and I
will seize early opportunity to reopen matter with him.
MACMURRAY
34 Not printed.

Executive order by President Coolidge
remitting further payments by China on the
Boxer indemnity35
35 For previous correspondence concerning the remission of the Boxer. Indemnity, see
Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 551 ff.
Further Payments of the Annual Installments of the Chinese Indemnity
The White House , July 16, 1925.

[Document 778]
Further Payments of the Annual Installments of the Chinese Indemnity
WHEREAS, a Joint Resolution of Congress, entitled a “Joint Resolution to provide for the
remission of further payments of the annual’ installments of the Chinese indemnity”,
approved May 21, 1924, provides as follows:
“Whereas by authority of a joint resolution of Congress approved May 25,
1908,36 the President of the United States was authorized to remit unto China
the sum of $11,961,121.76 of the Boxer indemnity fund accredited to the
United States, which sum the President on December 28, 1908, duly remitted
and which, at the request of China, was specified to be used for educational
purposes; and
Whereas it is deemed proper as a further act of friendship to remit the
balance of said indemnity fund amounting to $6,137,552.90 in order further
to develop the educational and other cultural activities of China: Now
therefore be it
Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
America in Congress assembled, That the President is hereby authorized, in
his discretion, to remit to China as an act of friendship any or all further
payments of the annual installments of the Chinese indemnity due under the
bond received from China pursuant to the protocol of September 7, 1901,37
as modified by Executive order on the 28th day of December, 1908,38
pursuant to the authority of the joint resolution of Congress approved May
25, 1908, for indemnity against losses and expenses incurred by reason of the
so-called Boxer disturbances in China during the year 1900, such remission
to begin as from October 1, 1917, and to be at such times and in such manner
as the President shall deem just.”; and
WHEREAS, the Minister of the Republic of China at Washington, to whom a copy of the
said Joint Resolution was transmitted by the Secretary of State, informed the Secretary
of State on June 14, 1924,39 that his Government proposed to devote the funds thus
made available to educational and cultural purposes, paying especial attention to
scientific requirements, and to entrust the administration of the funds to a Board which
should be composed of Chinese and American citizens as members; and WHEREAS, the
Minister of the Republic of China on September 16, 1924, forwarded to the Secretary

of State a copy of the constitution of the Board40 referred to in his communication of
June 14, 1924, above mentioned, which Board, he stated, had been designated “The
China Foundation for the Promotion of Education and Culture”; and WHEREAS, the
(1) that the Board of Trustees of the China Foundation for the Promotion of Education
and Culture was a corporate body instituted by a Mandate of the President of the
Republic of China on September 17, 1924, for the custody and control of the remitted
resolution reading textually as follows: “Resolved that the funds from the remitted
portion of the indemnity due the United States to be intrusted to the China Foundation
for the Promotion of Education and Culture be devoted to the development of scientific
knowledge and to the application of such knowledge to the conditions in China through
the promotion of technical training of scientific research, experimentation, and
demonstration, and training in science teaching, and to the advancement of cultural
enterprises of a permanent character such as libraries and the like”; and (3) that, in
order to carry out the intent of the Joint Resolution of Congress, the Board was ready to
receive the remitted funds from the United States Government.
Now, therefore, I, Calvin Coolidge, President of the United States of America, acting
under and by virtue of the authority conferred upon me by the said Joint Resolution of
Congress, do hereby make the following determination, order, rule and regulation: The
Secretary of the Treasury is hereby authorized and directed to remit to the said Board of
Trustees of the China Foundation for the Promotion of Education and Culture, as the
agent designated by the Chinese Government to receive the same, all payments of the
annual installments of the Chinese indemnity made subsequent to October 1, 1917,
under the bond received from China pursuant to the protocol of September 7, 1901, as
modified by Executive Order on the 28th day of December, 1908, pursuant to the
authority of the Joint Resolution of Congress, approved May 25, 1908, together with
such further payments as may be made from time to time under the said bond, the
remission of the payments to be for the purpose of further developing the educational
and other cultural activities of China.
CALVIN COOLIDGE
THE WHITE HOUSE ,
July 16, 1925.
40 Not printed.

Colombia:

Contents

Boundary dispute with Nicaragua
Boundary dispute with Peru
Costa Rica:
Contents
Boundary dispute with Panama

Boundary dispute with Panama
Index
Agreements. See Treaties, conventions, etc.
Albania:
Agreement with United States by exchange of notes signed June 23
and 25, 1922, for recognition of passports of U. S. citizens and for
most-favored-nation treatment: Approval by Albanian Parliament,
350]
Government of Ahmed Zogu: Attitude of European governments,
Most-favored-nation treatment, agreement with United States, 511–
Oil concessions:
Action of Albanian Assembly, 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of
Doc. 359, and Doc. 360]

Anglo-Persian Oil Co.: Activities and negotiations, 493
includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]; attitude of Italy and
and Italian negotiations with Great Britain regarding, 498
Standard Oil Co. concession: Negotiations, 494 [Pg. 494
360]
U. S. interests. See Standard Oil Co., supra, and U. S.
representations, infra.
U. S. representations for equitable treatment, 493 [Pg. 493

U. S.-Albanian relations (see also Agreement with United States,
supra), U. S. representations and Albanian attitude, 504–507 [Pgs.
U. S. citizens: Murder by bandits in 1924, question of prosecution
American states, international conferences of, U. S. opposition to
Anglo-Persian Oil Co. See under Albania: Oil concessions.
Arbitration:
San Andrés Archipelago. See Boundary disputes: Colombia–
Nicaragua.
Tacna-Arica controversy. See Tacna-Arica question.
Treaty, Poland–Switzerland (Mar. 7), assent by President Coolidge
to provisions for invoking the assistance of the President of the
Arica. See Tacna-Arica question.
Armanent limitation. See Disarmament conference; Washington Conference
on the Limitation of Armament.

Arms and munitions (see also under China), conference for the supervision
of international traffic in, May 4–June 17, U. S. participation:
Announcement by League Council of date and countries to
Convention for the control of traffic in arms, and related acts:
Draft of the Temporary Mixed Commission of the
is part of Doc. 31]
Negotiations, U. S. attitude in regard to—
Egyptian
proposal
in
connection
with
French proposal regarding exportation of war
Soviet adherence, U. S. attitude in event of, 48–50 [Pgs.

Military and Naval Committee, recommendation for separate
Soviet Russia, U. S. attitude in event of participation, 48–50 [Pgs.
U. S. delegation (see also Convention, supra): Instructions, 27–50
Arms traffic convention. See Arms and munitions: Convention.
Austria (see also U. S. customs attachés: Diplomatic status), informal
agreement with United States for continuation of reciprocal most-favored-
364 and Doc. 365]
Austro-Hungarian succession states. See Liberation bonds.
Belgium (see also China; U. S. customs attachés: Diplomatic status):
Convention with United States for prevention of liquor smuggling:
German reparation payments:
Belgian priority, desire for U. S. support against British
Belgian war debt to United States and other countries,
agreement for reimbursement from reparations:
Amount of debt to United States, U. S.

Discussion of tentative arrangement, 524–526
Exchange of letters between Belgium and
375, and Doc. 376]; text of Belgian letter, with
comments by U. S. unofficial representative on
War debts. See German reparation payments, supra; and under War
debts.
Bills of lading, international convention for the unification of certain rules
relating to principles and policies with respect to China, adherence, 762–763
Bonds. See Liberation bonds.
Boundary disputes (see also Tacna-Arica question):
Colombia–Nicaragua, question of ownership of San Andres
Archipelago:
Colombian proposal for settlement, U. S. representations
Nicaraguan proposals for—
Good offices of United States to recommend
arbitration, U. S. decision not to accede to,

267, and Doc. 268]
portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]
Colombia-Peru, boundary treaty of Mar. 24, 1922:
Brazilian objections to ratification, efforts to secure
withdrawal:
Colombian proposal, 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc.
and Doc. 273]
Brazilian attitude, and acceptance of
boundary line between Brazil and
462 is part of Doc. 302]
U. S. efforts on behalf of, 436–438
U. S. suggestion of procès-verbal. See Procès-
verbal, infra.
Ecuadoran protest and U. S. attitude, 469 [Pg. 469 includes
portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]
Procès-verbal suggested by United States to meet
Brazilian opposition to ratification:
Negotiations (see also Ratification, infra),

Peruvian inability to concur in alleged changes,
Doc. 306]
Ratification of treaty in accordance with section 2 of
representations to Peru, 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc.
Costa Rica-Panama, delimitation of boundary:
Proposals and counterproposals of Costa Rica and
U. S. representations to—
Doc. 313, and Doc. 314]
Boundary treaties:

Colombia–Peru. See under Boundary disputes.
portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]
Boxer indemnity, U. S. remittance of further payments by the Chinese
Brazil (see also Boundary disputes: Colombia–Peru), state of Sao Paulo,
disapproval by Department of State of proposed loans from American
382]
Bulgaria:
Attitude toward government of Ahmed Zogu in Albania, 491 [Pg. 491
Extradition treaty with United States (1924), possible relation to U.
Doc. 384]
Canada:
Great Lakes, proposed increase in diversion of waters by the
Sanitary District of Chicago:
Notice issued by Secretary of War of hearing on
Permit issued by War Department:
Canadian inquiries and comments, 563–564

396 and Doc. 397]
Notice of issuance, 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of
Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]
Protests of Canadian Government (see also Permit,
392, and Doc. 393]
MacMillan expedition (U. S.) to Canadian northern territories,
Sovereignty in islands of the North, intimation of claim to, 570–
Doc. 402]
Treaties with United States:
Extradition convention applying to offenses against laws
for the suppression of traffic in narcotics, text signed Jan.
Lake of the Woods, regulation of level of, convention,
protocol, and accompanying agreement, texts signed Feb.
Liquor-smuggling convention of June 6, 1924, U. S.
Executive order approving regulations to give effect to,
Doc. 402]
Capitulations (see also Bulgaria: Capitulatory rights), Egyptian proposal at
and Doc. 38]

Chile (see also Tacna-Arica question):
Revolutionary crisis:
Asylum, requests for extension by United States, 581–
Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]
U. S. relations with Alessandri, upon his resumption of
U. S. warships, question of dispatch to Chilean ports, 583
China:
Accrediting of Ministers by the United States and other powers to
the Provisional Government:
Negotiations among the powers regarding de jure
Presentation of letters of credence by Belgian and French
U. S. Minister: Appointment of John V. A. MacMurray,

presentation of credentials, 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of
Antiforeign disturbances (see also Shanghai and under Canton,
infra):
Attitude of Shanghai students, 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of
Doc. 587 and Doc. 588]
730 is part of Doc. 585]
Political and other influences, presence of, 722 [Pg. 722 is
Protection of lives and property of foreigners:
Chang Tso-lin and his son, offers to restore
594]; attitude of Heads of Legation and of
Chief Executive, assurances of, 731 [Pg. 731
includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587]
Naval forces, 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc.
portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596]
Representations of Heads of Legation, 731 [Pg.

Arms and munitions embargo, U. S.-British consideration of means
to make effective: French traffic in commercial aircraft, efforts to
645 is part of Doc. 489]; international cooperation, proposed placing of
tripartite agreement prohibiting export of aircraft to China,
Conference resolution (revised) with interpolation on aircraft,
Boxer indemnity, U. S. Executive order remitting further payments,
Canton:
Antiforeign disturbances:
Boycott and strike, 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of
622, and Doc. 623]
Firing at Shameen, June 23, and subsequent
situation: Evacuation of refugees, 750–751 [Pgs.
international commission of inquiry, proposed,

U. S. armed forces, question of utilization, 757
and Doc. 633]; U. S. volunteers in militia or police
631]
U. S. citizens, general attitude toward, 750 [Pg.
portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]
Kuomintang, hostilities between conservatives and
radicals: Alliances with opposing military groups, 740
and Doc. 608]; righting between groups, resulting in victory
protection of American lives and property, 741 [Pg. 741
Maritime customs at Swatow, reported desire of Canton
Government to take over, 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc.

Central Government. See Provisional Government, infra.
Chang Tso-lin (see also Civil war in North China, infra), 600–601
Doc. 593, and Doc. 594]
Civil war in North China, hostilities between Chang Tso-lin and
Feng Yu-hsiang:
Compromise between Chang and Feng, reported, 617 [Pg.
Diplomatic pressure to prevent outbreak of hostilities,
Opinions of U. S. Ambassador in Japan, 605–
and Doc. 435]; of U. S. Minister in China, 603–
and Doc. 434]
Doc. 437]

Doc. 463]
Protection of lives and property of foreigners: British
Shanghai, righting in vicinity of:
Asylum to Chinese military leaders, action of
consular body and diplomatic corps against,
Foreign intervention. See International military
force, infra.
International military force: Proposals for, 592–

Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]
Shanghai Arsenal, 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of
Troops
in
or
near
foreign
settlement,
Doc. 425, and Doc. 426]
U. S. and other naval and military forces, 592
Doc. 449, and Doc. 450]
Concessions, contracts, etc. See Radio communications, infra.
Customs tariff (see also Special Conference, infra): Remarks of U.
Doc. 681]; Washington Conference treaty relating to, adherence of
and Doc. 636]
Extraterritoriality:
Commission on Extraterritoriality provided for by
Washington Conference resolution (see also under Treaty

Germany and Soviet Russia to participate, 854 [Pg. 854
Doc. 727]
Norwegian
adherence
to
Washington
Conference
Doc. 731]
Remarks of U. S. Secretary of State concerning, 824–827
Federal Telegraph Co. See under Radio communications, infra.
Feng Yu-hsiang (see also Civil war in North China, supra), 665 [Pg.
Doc. 575]
Heads of Legation, establishment of informal organization of (see
of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]
Kuomintang. See under Canton and Civil war, supra.
Open-door policy. See Radio communications: Federal Telegraph
Co.: U. S. representations.
Provisional Government (see also Accrediting of Ministers and
Civil war in North China, supra): Demonstrations against, 619 [Pg.
mandates issued by Chief Executive, 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc.
Executive in negotiations regarding Federal Telegraph contract,

includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]
Radio communications:
Federal Telegraph Co. contract (see also U. S.-Japanese
controversy, infra):
Joint negotiations of Federal Telegraph Co. and
Radio Corporation of America with China,
U. S. instructions to Minister regarding
cooperation with American interests, 900 [Pg.
U. S. representations to Chinese Government

770]
Doc. 752 and Doc. 753]
Mitsui Co. See U. S.-Japanese controversy, infra.
Radio Corporation of America: Inquiry as to U. S.
opinion regarding possible international arrangement,
joint negotiations of Radio Corporation and Federal
Telegraph Co. with Chinese Government, 893–894 [Pgs.
U. S.-Japanese controversy regarding Federal Telegraph
and Mitsui contracts:
Compromise by means of U. S.-Japanese-
Chinese
discussions,
proposed:
Chinese
proposal and discussions regarding, 927–930
775]; negotiations, delay in initiating, 935 [Pg.

Japanese pressure on Chinese Government and
possible results, reports concerning, 894 [Pg. 894
758, and Doc. 759]
Japanese proposal for settlement on basis
analogous with consortium arrangement, 892–
776]
include portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc.
U. S. Minister, views and alternative
U. S. replies and counterproposal,
750, and Doc. 751]
Merger of contracts, Chinese proposal and
Résumé
of
points
at
issue,
Japanese
memorandum, 890–892
[Pgs.
include
Traffic
arrangement
proposed
by
Radio
Corporation representative, 901 [Pg. 901 includes

portions of Doc. 746 and Doc. 747]
Shameen. See Canton: Antiforeign disturbances: Firing at
Shameen, supra.
Shanghai (see also under Civil war in North China, supra),
disturbances in International Settlement, May 30:
Attitude of Chinese military leaders, 660 [Pg. 660 includes
502, and Doc. 503]
Delegation appointed by Heads of Legation to study
include portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]
International foreign mission to investigate actions of
Judicial inquiry:

Acquiescence of France, Japan, and
Italy, 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc.
part of Doc. 541]
Doc. 560 and Doc. 561]
Opinions of U. S. Minister in. China,
Doc. 541 and Doc. 542]
U. S. conditional acquiescence, 686
[Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc.
and Doc. 539]; British approval of U. S.
condition
regarding
Chinese
participation, 690
[Pg.
690
includes
portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537]
U.
S.
representations
to
other
countries, 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of
Judges, selection of, 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of
includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561]
Municipal Council of International Settlement:
Agreement to conform to conclusions of
judicial commission, 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc.
560]; measures taken subsequent to inquiry, 717

573]
Doc. 565]
Publication of documents relating to, 716–721
Reports:
Discussion and summary of British
and Japanese judges’ reports, 716 [Pg.
Doc. 569]; of U. S. judge’s report, 713–
and Doc. 569]
Publication, question of, 716–720
[Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc.
573]
Scope of inquiry (see also Reports, supra):
Draft terms of reference, British, 694
545]
Formula based on British draft:
Approval of United States, 705 [Pg.
Doc. 556]; attitude of representatives of
other powers, 705 [Pg. 705 includes

include portions of Doc. 559, Doc. 560, and Doc.
transmittal to Chinese Government,
Doc. 559 and Doc. 560]
Municipal Council of International Settlement. See
Recommendations, infra; also under Judicial inquiry,
supra, and Police Commissioner McEuen, infra.
Naval forces, U. S. and other, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of
Negotiations of powers with Chinese Government for
settlement (see also Judicial inquiry, supra, and
Recommendations, infra):
Chinese demands, including treaty revision,
attitude of Heads of Legation, 672–674 [Pgs.
and Doc. 522]
Committee appointed by Heads of Legation,
Doc. 516]; withdrawal of French Minister, 683–
Doc. 531, and Doc. 532]
Place for negotiations, question of Shanghai or

Plan of action suggested by U. S. Minister,
Doc. 542]
and Doc. 545]
U. S. approval, 696 [Pg. 696 includes
U. S. attitude, 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc.
523 and Doc. 524]
U. S.-British discussion, 695 [Pg. 695 includes
Doc. 558]
Permanent Court of International Justice, proposed
Police Commissioner McEuen, question of suspension or
resignation: Municipal Council, attitude and acceptance
recommendation of Heads of Legation concerning, 675
[Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 522]; U. S.-British negotiations

Press articles, U. S. assertion regarding, 664 [Pg. 664
includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]
Recommendations of Heads of Legation to be presented
to Municipal Council: Delay in presentation, 676–677
526]; difficulties between Heads of Legation and Council,
Reports concerning incident of May 30 and subsequent
587 and Doc. 588]
Settlement of affair, resignation of police officers and
payment of compensation to Chinese victims, 721 [Pg. 721
includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573]
Trial of Chinese in Mixed Court, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions

U. S. Chargé’s opinions regarding agitation in Shanghai,
Soviet Ambassador:
Acceptance as dean of diplomatic corps at Peking:
485, and Doc. 486]; social relations of U. S. Minister with
Doc. 482]
Attitude in connection with disturbances in International
Settlement of Shanghai, 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc.
Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff (see also under
Treaty relations, infra):
Addresses by officials and delegates, résumé, 861–866
Agenda:
690]
“Provisional Agenda” submitted by China:
Discussion, and acceptance by the
conference, 852–853
[Pgs.
include portions of Doc. 699 and Doc. 700],

Text, 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc.
698
and
Doc.
699];
modifications,
Doc. 706]
and Doc. 704]
Doc. 706]
Belgian request concerning deposits of customs funds,
Chinese delegation, personnel, 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of
Doc. 708]
Committees, meetings of: Program and procedure, 869–
includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719]
Customs
tariff
laws
promulgated
by
Chinese
Doc. 710 and Doc. 711]
Discussions and negotiations concerning—
Debt claims, question of adjustment, 836–838

Doc. 723, and Doc. 724]
Likin, abolition of, 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of
Doc. 721, and Doc. 722]
Surtax, question of levy and utilization, 836 [Pg.
Tariff autonomy, 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc.

719]
Trade discrimination, question of, 858–860 [Pgs.
708]
Full powers to delegates, question of, 841 [Pg. 841 includes
693, and Doc. 694]
Invitations: Chinese invitation and U. S. acceptance,
portions of Doc. 701 and Doc. 702]
Minutes, information concerning publication, 833–834
portions of Doc. 709 and Doc. 710]
Policy to be assumed by conference, opinions of U. S.
Minister and Japanese Foreign Minister, 836–838 [Pgs.
Termination of conference, 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of
Doc. 684 and Doc. 685]

Treaties relating to China. See under Washington Conference,
infra.
Treaty relations with the Washington Conference powers, question
of readjustment:
Analysis by U. S. Minister of situation in China, 799–802
Cooperation between United States, Great Britain, and
Japan, Japanese proposal and attitude of other powers,
Extraterritoriality, Commission on, obligations of the

Identic note of June 24 to the powers requesting
Reply of the powers to Chinese note of June 24:
Arrangements for dispatch, 830 [Pg. 830 includes
portions of Doc. 681 and Doc. 682]
Drafts. See Joint public declaration and U. S.
draft, infra.
Joint public declaration, proposed: British
Japanese amendments, suggested, 790–791 [Pgs.
Negotiations (see also Joint public declaration,
supra, and U. S. draft, infra): British position,

portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656]; Japanese position,
part of Doc. 658]
Opinions of U. S. Chargé and of U. S.
Doc. 648, and Doc. 649]
Request of the powers’ representatives in China
for instructions, 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc.
637 and Doc. 638]
U. S. draft: Belgian concurrence, 816 [Pg. 816
includes portions of Doc. 680 and Doc. 681]; British
includes portions of Doc. 680 and Doc. 681]; French
includes portions of Doc. 680 and Doc. 681]; Italian

includes portions of Doc. 680 and Doc. 681]; Netherlands
includes portions of Doc. 680 and Doc. 681]; text and
modifications, 795–799
[Pgs.
include
671]
Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff,
obligations of the powers with respect to, 765 [Pg. 765
828 is part of Doc. 681]
Tariff autonomy, discussions regarding, 769 [Pg. 769 is part

U. S. Secretary of State, speech concerning U. S. policy,
Doc. 682]
Tuan Chi-jui (Chief Executive). See Provisional Government,
supra.
Washington Conference:
Resolutions. See Extraterritoriality and under Arms and
munitions embargo, supra.
Treaties relating to China: Adherence of certain powers,
636, and Doc. 637]; question of adherence of Germany and
827 is part of Doc. 681]
Coleman, Robert Lewis (U. S. citizen), murdered in Albania in 1924, 489 [Pg.
Doc. 356]
Colombia. See Boundary disputes: Colombia-Nicaragua, Colombia-Peru.
portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Commission to revise rules of warfare, U. S. unsuccessful efforts to secure
adoption of rules drafted by:
Communications to U. S. representative in France and other
attitude of—
57]
Doc. 57, and Doc. 58]
and Doc. 55]
Doc. 55]
Commissions, committees, etc.:
Commission on Extraterritoriality in China. See under China:
Extraterritoriality.
Commission to revise rules of warfare. See Commission to revise
rules of warfare.
Plebiscitary Commission, Tacna-Arica controversy. See under
Tacna-Arica question.
Special Boundary Commission, Chile–Peru: U. S. member, 348n
portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]
World War Foreign Debt Commission. See War debts.
Concessions, contracts, etc. See Albania: Oil concessions; China: Radio
communications.

Conferences, international:
American states, international conferences of, U. S. opposition to
Arms and ammunition, conference for the supervision of the
international traffic in. See Arms and munitions.
Disarmament conference, proposed. See Disarmament conference.
Industrial property, conference for the protection of: International
Jurists, International Congress of, U. S. opposition to participation
Doc. 202, and Doc. 203]
Radiotelegraph
Conference,
Third
International.
See
Radiotelegraph Conference.
Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff. See under
China.
Telegraph Conference, Third International:
Subjects to be discussed, U. S. views and observations,
Congress. See U. S. Congress.
Coolidge, Calvin (see also Disarmament conference: Proposals): Arbitration
treaty, Poland–Switzerland (Mar. 7), assent to provisions for invoking the
assistance of the President of the United States under certain contingencies,
Executive order approving regulations to give effect to U. S.-Canadian

401, and Doc. 402]: Executive order remitting further payments by China on the
message to U. S. Congress, vii
Costa Rica. See Boundary disputes: Costa Rica-Panama.
Customs attachés. See U. S. customs attachés.
Customs tariff. See under China.
Czechoslovakia. See under War debts.
Denmark (see also U. S. customs attachés: Diplomatic status), adherence to
Diplomatic status for U. S. customs attachés, U. S. efforts to secure. See
under U. S. customs attaché’s.
Disarmament conference:
European conference, probable calling of, communication from U.
Proposals for calling of a conference in Washington by President
Coolidge:
Attitude of certain European countries and Japan, 3–5

Press reports and comments in various countries, 5 [Pg. 5
Ecuador, protest concerning Colombian- Peruvian boundary treaty, 469 [Pg.
Egypt, proposal at arms traffic conference in regard to capitulations, U. S.
Extradition. See under Treaties.
Extraterritoriality. See Bulgaria: Capitulatory rights; and under China.
Federal Telegraph Co. See under China: Radio communications.
Finland. See U. S. customs attachés: Diplomatic status.
France (see also Albania; Bulgaria: Capitulatory rights; China; Liberation
bonds; Spitzbergen Treaty; Telegraph Conference; U. S. customs attachés;
and under War debts): Arms traffic convention, proposal for insertion
disarmament conference, proposed, French attitude and press comments, 4
18]; German reparation payments, tentative agreement regarding distribution
371, and Doc. 372]; rules drafted by the international commission to revise rules
portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]; security pact, French attitude toward German

Germany (see also Belgium: German reparation payments; U. S. customs
attachés: Diplomatic status): Commission on Extraterritoriality in China,
Conference on Chinese Customs Tariff, desire for invitation, 851–852 [Pgs.
Washington; Conference treaties relating to China, question of German
portions of Doc. 701 and Doc. 702]
Good offices of United States: Colombian-Peruvian boundary dispute, U. S.
Archipelago dispute, U. S. decision regarding Nicaraguan request, 431–434
Doc. 257, and Doc. 258]
Great Britain (see also Albania; Bulgaria: Capitulatory rights; Canada:
Treaties; China; Liberation bonds; U. S. customs attachés):
Disarmament conference, proposed, British attitude and press
German reparation payments: Belgian priority, attitude of British
368, and Doc. 369]; distribution of Dawes annuities, tentative
371, and Doc. 372]
Rules drafted by the international commission to revise rules of
Security pacts, European: Geneva Protocol, discussions with

28]
Treaty for the limitation of naval armament, scrapping of ships in
Great Lakes. See under Canada.
Greece (see also U. S. customs attachés: Diplomatic status; and under War
debts), attitude toward government of Ahmed Zogu in Albania, 489 [Pg. 489
and Doc. 329]
Hongkong, Colonial Government of, withdrawal of provisional recognition
183]
Hungary. See U. S. customs attachés: Diplomatic status.
Industrial property, international conference for the protection of:
Italy (see also Albania; Bulgaria: Capitulatory rights; China; Liberation
bonds; U. S. customs attachés; and under War debts), attitude regarding
adoption of rules drafted by the international commission to revise rules, of
Japan (see also China): Disarmament conference, proposed, Japanese attitude
treaty for the limitation of naval armament, scrapping of ships in accordance
Latvia, decision to open negotiations for settlement of war debt to United
Doc. 108]
League of Nations: Arms traffic conference, announcement of date and

Doc. 28]; international conferences of American states, U. S. opposition to
Doc. 203]
Liberation bonds of Austro-Hungarian succession states, proposed:
Distribution, question of:
Ambassadors Conference, consideration:
146, and Doc. 147]
Draft resolution of British, French, and Italian
Governments, 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc.
C bonds, discussion regarding, 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of
Doc. 142]
U. S. interest in. See Ambassadors Conference, supra.
Issuance, British and French communications to Reparation
Liquor control under U. S. prohibition laws, conventions for prevention of
smuggling:
portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]; U. S. transmittal of draft to Belgium,

U. S.–Canada, convention of June 6, 1924, U. S. Executive order
Loans:
Belgium. See under War debts.
Brazil, State of São Paulo, disapproval by Department of State of
Locarno agreement, German proposal to other governments leading to
MacMillan expedition to Canadian northern territories, proposed, 570–573
752 and Doc. 753]
Mexico, adherence to Washington Conference treaty relating to principles
Mitsui Co. See China: Radio communications: U. S.-Japanese controversy.
Morgan & Co., J. P., proposed loan to Belgium. See under War debts:
Belgium.
Most-favored-nation treatment: Agreement between United States and
Munitions. See Arms and munitions.
Narcotics, extradition convention between United States and Canada
of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

Naval armament limitation (see also Disarmament conference), scrapping of
Netherlands (see also China; Conferences: Industrial property; U. S. customs
attachés: Diplomatic status), attitude regarding adoption of rules drafted by
include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]
Nicaragua. See Boundary disputes: Colombia–Nicaragua.
Norway (see also U. S. customs attachés: Diplomatic status), adherence to
Oil concessions. See under Albania.
Panama. See Boundary disputes: Costa Rica–Panama.
Pershing, Gen. John J. See Tacna-Arica question.
Peru. See Boundary disputes: Colombia–Peru; Tacna-Arica question.
Poland (see also U. S. customs attachés: Diplomatic status): Arbitration
treaty with Switzerland (Mar. 7), assent by President Coolidge to provisions
for invoking the assistance of the President of the United States under certain
Portugal. See China; U. S. customs attachés: Diplomatic status.
Property. See Industrial property.
Protocols. See Treaties, agreements, etc.
Radio communications. See under China.
Radio Corporation of America. See under China: Radio communications.
Radiotelegraph Conference, Third International:

Subjects to be taken up: List suggested by United States, 298 [Pg.
298 is part of Doc. 197]; proposals from other governments, question of,
and Doc. 201]
Radiotelegraph Convention, International: Articles incorporated from
Reparations. See Belgium: German reparation payments.
Rumania (see also U. S. customs attachés: Diplomatic status; and under War
debts), proposed negotiations with Standard Oil Co., U. S. attitude, 174 [Pg.
Russia:
Ambassador to China. See China: Soviet Ambassador.
Arms traffic conference, U. S. attitude in event of Soviet
Commission on Extraterritoriality in China, ineligibility to
Conference on Chinese Customs Tariff, desire for invitation, 851–
Spitzbergen Treaty, question of adherence. See Spitzbergen Treaty.
Washington Conference treaties relating to China, U. S. policy with
Doc. 702]
Samoa, American. See Swain’s Island.

São Paulo, Brazil, State of, disapproval by Department of State of proposed
Security pacts, European, U. S. disinclination to be associated with:
Locarno agreement: German proposal to other governments leading
Doc. 28]
Polish memorandum regarding Poland’s rights to certain parts of
Seligman Co., J. & W., proposed loan to State of São Paulo, Brazil, 533–534
Spain (see also China; U. S. customs attachés: Diplomatic status), adherence
Spitzbergen Treaty of Feb. 9, 1920, question of adherence of the Soviet
Union: Draft agreement to provide for, U. S.-French negotiations as to
156, and Doc. 157]
Standard Oil Co. (see also under Albania: Oil concessions), proposed
and Doc. 117]

Strawn, Silas H., appointment as U. S. member of Commission on
[Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 727]
Swain’s Island, extension of U. S. sovereignty over: Joint resolution of
Sweden (see also U. S. customs attachés): Disarmament conference,
include portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]; Washington Conference treaties relating to
and Doc. 637]
Switzerland (see also U. S. customs attachés), arbitration treaty with Poland
(Mar. 7), assent by President Coolidge to provisions for invoking the
assistance of the President of the United States under certain contingencies,
Tacna-Arica question, arbitration of controversy between Chile and Peru over
unfulfilled provisions of Treaty of Ancón:
Arbitrator’s award, Mar. 4 (see also Plebiscite, infra):
ruling and observations of the Arbitrator, 355–360 [Pgs.
Doc. 258]

Plebiscitary Commission:
Chilean attitude: Press campaign against Commission,
259, and Doc. 260]; refusal to recognize Commission’s
249, and Doc. 250]; statement of Chilean Commissioner,
Doc. 214]; U. S., appointment of Gen. John J. Pershing as
Doc. 207]
Resolutions:
Certification to Arbitrator of Chile’s appeal
from action fixing date of plebiscite, 428–431
Date of plebiscite, resolutions concerning, 429n
[Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 264]
Prerequisites for fair plebiscite. See under
Plebiscite, infra.
Plebiscite to be held in accordance with Arbitrator’s award:

Americans in Chile and Peru, U. S. admonition to, 377
Chilean administration of Tacna and Arica pending
plebiscite. See Efforts of General Pershing and of United
States and Prerequisites, infra.
Efforts of General Pershing and of United States to bring
about conditions favorable to plebiscite (see also
Prerequisites, infra):
Discussions regarding conditions in Tacna and
Doc. 249, and Doc. 250]
U. S. representations to Chile, 389 [Pg. 389 is part
246]; Chilean attitude, discussions regarding,
247, and Doc. 248]
Election regulations and dates:

of United States and of General Pershing, 416–
Resolutions fixing dates, 429n [Pg. 429 is part of
Doc. 264]
Doc. 248]
Prerequisites for fair plebiscite, resolution proposed by
General Pershing:
Pershing’s proposal and comments, 379–382
includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]
Position of Chile, and counterproposal, 391 [Pg.
237]
Doc. 229]

Troops in Tacna and Arica, 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of
241]
U. S. attitude of impartiality, 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of
Special Boundary Commission: American member, 348n [Pg. 348
Doc. 232]
Telegraph Conference, Third International:
Subjects to be discussed, U. S. views and observations, 287–295
197]
Telegraph Convention, International: Articles incorporated in International
Treaties, conventions, etc.:
Arbitration treaty, Poland–Switzerland (Mar. 7), assent by
President Coolidge to provisions for invoking assistance of the
President of the United States under certain contingencies, 209–211
Arms traffic convention, international. See Arms and munitions:
Convention.
Berlin, Treaty of (1878), relation to capitulations in Bulgaria, 538

Bills of lading, international convention for the unification of
certain rules relating to: Text, with protocol of signature and
189 and Doc. 190]
Boundary treaties:
Colombia–Peru. See under Boundary disputes.
include portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]
Extradition: U. S.–Bulgaria, 1924, possible relation to U. S.
include portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]
Gases, protocol for the prohibition of use in warfare, text signed
Industrial property, international convention for the protection of,
193, and Doc. 194]
Liquor smuggling into United States, conventions for prevention
of:
include portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]; U. S. transmittal of
U. S.–Canada, convention of June 6, 1924, U. S.
Executive order approving regulations to give effect to,

Doc. 402]
Locarno agreement, German proposal to other governments leading
Doc. 28]
Naval armament limitation, scrapping of ships in accordance with
3, and Doc. 4]
Neuilly, Treaty of, capitulatory rights under, 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc.
Nine-power treaties relating to China. See under China:
Washington Conference.
Radiotelegraph Convention, International, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc.
Security pacts, European. See Security pacts.
Spitzbergen Treaty. See Spitzbergen Treaty.
is part of Doc. 29]
U. S.–Albania, agreement by exchange of notes signed June 23 and
U. S.–Austria, informal agreement for continuation of reciprocal
most-favored-nation treatment in customs matters pending
of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]
U. S.–Belgium, liquor-smuggling convention: Text signed Dec. 9,

U. S.–Bulgaria, extradition treaty, 1924, possible relation to U. S.
Doc. 384]
U. S.–Canada. See under Canada.
Versailles Treaty, provisions regarding Poland, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc.
Washington Conference treaties relating to China. See under China:
Washington Conference.
Washington naval treaty, scrapping of ships in accordance with, 1–
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. See Russia.
U. S. bankers, proposed loans to State of São Paulo, Brazil, disapproval by
381, and Doc. 382]
U. S. citizens. See China; and under Albania.
U. S. Congress:
Act of Jan. 13, regarding customs attachés. See under U. S.
customs attaches: Diplomatic status.
Joint resolution, Mar. 4. extending U. S. sovereignty over Swain’s
Tariff Act of 1922, provisions regarding duties of customs
part of Doc. 188]
U. S. customs attachés (see also U. S. Tariff Commission):
Activities abroad (see also Diplomatic status, infra):

Objections of Great Britain, France, Sweden, and
Position of Italy regarding, 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc.
180]
Diplomatic status for, U. S. efforts to secure:
Act of Congress, Jan. 13, providing for diplomatic status:
188]
Representations to foreign governments:
Acquiescence of Hungary, 241 [Pg. 241 includes
Doc. 167, and Doc. 168]
Hongkong, Colonial Government of, 248 [Pg.

includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]; Great
portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]
164 and Doc. 165]
Doc. 188]
Personnel, notification to foreign governments, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of
U. S. Tariff Act of 1922, provisions regarding duties of customs
U. S. Treasury Department, customs representatives. See U. S. customs
attachés.
U. S. War Department. See Canada: Great Lakes.

U. S. warships (see also China), question of dispatch to Chilean ports, 583
Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]
War debts, U. S. negotiations on behalf of World War Foreign Debt
Commission for settlement of debts owed the United States by foreign
governments:
Belgium:
Commission to be sent to United States to negotiate
refunding of indebtedness: Negotiations concerning, 115
Loan to Belgium by J. P. Morgan & Co., proposed,
65, and Doc. 66]
U. S. representations for payments proportionate to those
Czechoslovakia:
Commission to be sent to United States: Composition,
and Doc. 78]
Relation of indebtedness to that of other governments,

France:
Balance sheet issued by Finance Minister Clémentel:
Comments and discussions in United States, 134–137
[Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 81]
Commission to be sent to United States, 146 [Pg. 146 is part
Proposals:
Memorandum by Finance Minister containing
unofficial suggestions:
Publication, question of, 139 [Pg. 139
includes portions of Doc. 81, Doc. 82, and Doc.
and Doc. 85]
Reports concerning, 133–134 [Pgs.
and Doc. 80]

Suggestions and opinions of U. S.
include portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90];
Clémentel’s attitude, modification of
U. S. attitude, 143 [Pg. 143 includes
portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]
Text and modifications, 140–142 [Pg.
U. S.-French negotiations leading to official
Statement for press correspondents by U. S. Secretary of
95]
Greece:
Mission to United States, change in designation of
Italy: Intention to delay negotiations pending French settlement,

Rumania:
Commission of experts to arrange funding of debt, 174–
121, and Doc. 122]
U. S. efforts to bring about definite action by Rumania,
of Rumanian Government, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc.
Doc. 117]
Yugoslavia:
Inquiry as to U. S. attitude in connection with British
Missions sent to United States, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of
includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]
Washington Conference on the Limitation of Armament:
Resolutions. See China: Extraterritoriality; also under China: Arms
and munitions embargo.

Treaties relating to China. See under China: Washington
Conference.
Treaty for the limitation of naval armament, scrapping of ships in
Doc. 4]
World War Foreign Debt Commission. See War debts.
Yugoslavia. See Servia; U. S. customs attachés: Diplomatic status; and under
War debts.
