PAPERS RELATING TO THE FOREIGN RELATIONS OF THE UNITED STATES

1 Pte:

VOLUME I

(IN TWO VOLUMES)

DEPARTMENT OF STATE WASHINGTON

Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1925,

Volume I United States Government Printing Office Washington U.S. Department of State Office of the Historian Bureau of Public Affairs This ebook was generated on May 26, 2018. Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity. In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it. The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback. To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage , and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState . Office of the Historian Bureau of Public Affairs U.S. Department of State May 2018

Contents Message of the President of the United States to Congress, December 8, 1925 List of Papers General: Scrapping of ships by the United States, Great Britain, and Japan in accordance with the treaty for the limitation of naval armament,

Rumania (Documents 107-121) Yugoslavia (Documents 122-131) Interest of the United States in the disposition of the proposed liberation bonds of the Austro-Hungarian succession states (Documents 132-148) Refusal by the United States to consent to the adherence of the Soviet Union to the Spitzbergen treaty of February 9, 1920 (Documents 149-156) Assent by President Coolidge to provisions in the Polish-Swiss arbitration treaty for invoking the assistance of the President of the United States under certain contingencies (Documents 157-158) Unsuccessful efforts to have American customs attachés accorded diplomatic status (Documents 159-189) International convention for the unification of certain rules relating to bills of lading (Documents 190-190) Convention between the United States and other powers for the protection of industrial property, signed November 6, 1925 (Documents 191-193) Acceptance by the United States of invitation to attend the Third International Telegraph Conference at Paris in 1925 (Documents

Colombia and Peru (Documents 270-309) Costa Rica and Panama (Documents 310-322) Extension of the sovereignty of the United States over Swain’s Island by joint resolution of Congress, approved March 4, 1925 (Documents 323-323) Albania: Recognition by the United States of the government of Ahmed Zogu (Documents 324-332) Renewed representations by the United States for equitable treatment of American oil interests in Albania (Documents 333- 360) Approval by the Parliament of Albania of the American-Albanian

Canada: Extradition convention between the United States and Canada applying to offenses against laws for the suppression of traffic in narcotics (Documents 386-386) Boundary treaty between the United States and Canada (Documents 387-387) Convention and protocol between the United States and Canada to regulate the level of the Lake of the Woods (Documents 388-390) Continued protests by the Canadian Government against increased diversion of the waters of the Great Lakes (Documents 391-397) Intimation by the Canadian Government of its claim to sovereignty in the islands of the North (Documents 398-401) Regulations to give effect to the convention of June 6, 1924, between the United States and Canada for the suppression of smuggling (Documents 402-402) Chile: Disinclination of the United States to grant asylum during revolutionary crisis in Chile (Documents 403-412) The Tacna-Arica question China: Renewal of civil war in North China and refusal by the United States to lend itself to a policy of intervention (Documents 413- 464) Decision by the United States and other powers to accredit Ministers to the Provisional Government of China (Documents

Further consideration by the American and British Governments of means for effectively preventing the traffic in arms with China (Documents 486-490) Participation by the United States in efforts to solve problems arising from the disturbances at Shanghai, May 30, 1925 (Documents 491-573) Spread of antiforeign disturbances in China (Documents 574-597) Victory of the radical wing of the Kuomintang in Canton (Documents 598-619) Intensification of antiforeign feeling in Canton after the firing at Shameen (Documents 620-634) Adherence of certain powers to treaties concerning China signed at

——uudary dis

mule with Panama Index

Message of the President of the United States to Congress, December 8, 1925 MEMBERS OF THE CONGRESS: In meeting the constitutional requirement of informing the Congress upon the state of the Union, it is exceedingly gratifying to report that the general condition is one of progress and prosperity. Here and there are comparatively small and apparently temporary difficulties needing adjustment and improved administrative methods, such as are always to be expected, but in the fundamentals of government and business the results demonstrate that we are going in the right direction. The country does not appear to require radical departures from the policies already adopted so much as it needs a further extension of these policies and the improvement of details. The age of perfection is still in the somewhat distant future, but it is more in danger of being retarded by mistaken Government activity than it is from lack of legislation. We are by far the most likely to accomplish permanent good if we proceed with moderation. In our country the people are sovereign and independent, and must accept the resulting responsibilities. It is their duty to support themselves and support the Government. That is the business of the Nation, whatever the charity of the Nation may require. The functions which the Congress are to discharge are not those of local government but of National Government. The greatest solicitude should be exercised to prevent any encroachment upon the rights of the States or their various political subdivisions. Local self-government is one of our most precious possessions. It is the greatest contributing factor to the stability, strength, liberty, and progress of the Nation. It ought not to be infringed by assault or undermined by purchase. It ought not to abdicate its power through weakness or resign its authority through favor. It does not at all follow that because abuses exist it is the concern of the Federal Government to attempt their reform. Society is in much more danger from encumbering the National Government beyond its wisdom to comprehend, or its ability to administer, than from leaving the local communities to bear their own burdens and remedy their own evils. Our local habit and custom is so strong, our variety of race and creed is so great, the Federal authority is so tenuous, that the area within which it can function successfully is very limited. The wiser policy is to leave the localities, so far as we can, possessed of their own sources of revenue and charged with their own obligations. GOVERNMENT ECONOMY It is a fundamental principle of our country that the people are sovereign. While they recognize the undeniable authority of the state, they have established as its instrument a Government of limited powers. They hold inviolate in their own hands the jurisdiction

over their own freedom and the ownership of their own property. Neither of these can be impaired except by due process of law. The wealth of our country is not public wealth, but private wealth. It does not belong to the Government, it belongs to the people. The Government has no justification in taking private property except for a public purpose. It is always necessary to keep these principles in mind in the laying of taxes and in the making of appropriations. No right exists to levy on a dollar, or to order the expenditure of a dollar, of the money of the people, except for a necessary public purpose duly authorized by the Constitution. The power over the purse is the power over liberty. That is the legal limitation within which the Congress can act. How it will proceed within this limitation is always a question of policy. When the country is prosperous and free from debt, when the rate of taxation is low, opportunity exists for assuming new burdens and undertaking new enterprises. Such a condition now prevails only to a limited extent. All proposals for assuming new obligations ought to be postponed, unless they are reproductive capital investments or are such as are absolutely necessary at this time. We still have an enormous debt of over $20,000,000,000, on which the interest and sinking-fund requirements are $1,320,000,000. Our appropriations for the Pension Office and the Veterans’ Bureau are $600,000,000. The War and Navy Departments call for $642,000,000. Other requirements, exclusive of the Post Office, which is virtually self-sustaining, brought the appropriations for the current year up to almost $3,100,000,000. This shows an expenditure of close to $30 for every inhabitant of our country. For the average family of five it means a tax, directly or indirectly paid, of about $150 for national purposes alone. The local tax adds much more. These enormous expenditures ought not to be increased, but through every possible effort they ought to be reduced. Only one of these great items can be ultimately extinguished. That is the item of our war debt. Already this has been reduced by about $6,000,000,000, which means an annual saving in interest of close to $250,000,000. The present interest charge is about $820,000,000 yearly. It would seem to be obvious that the sooner this debt can be retired the more the taxpayers will save in interest and the easier it will be to secure funds with which to prosecute needed running expenses, constructions, and improvements. This item of $820,000,000 for interest is a heavy charge on all the people of the country, and it seems to me that we might well consider whether it is not greatly worth while to dispense with it as early as possible by retiring the principal debt which it is required to serve. It has always been our policy to retire our debts. That of the Revolutionary War period, notwithstanding the additions made in 1812, was paid by 1835, and the Civil War debt within 23 years. Of the amount already paid, over $1,000,000,000 is a reduction in cash balances. That source is exhausted. Over one and two-thirds billions of dollars was derived from excess receipts. Tax reduction eliminates that. The sale of surplus war

materials has been another element of our income. That is practically finished. With these eliminated, the reduction of the debt has been only about $500,000,000 each year, not an excessive sum on so large a debt. Proposals have been made to extend the payment over a period of 62 years. If $1,000,000,000 is paid at the end of 20 years, the cost to the taxpayers is the principal and, if the interest is 4¼ per cent, a total of $1,850,000,000. If the same sum is paid at the end of 62 years, the cost is $3,635,000,000, or almost double. Here is another consideration: Compared with its purchasing power in 1913, the dollar we borrowed represented but 52 cents. As the value of our dollar increases, due to the falling prices of commodities, the burden of our debt increases. It has now risen to 63½ cents. The taxpayer will be required to produce nearly twice the amount of commodities to pay his debt if the dollar returns to the 1913 value. The more we pay while prices are high, the easier it will be. Deflation of government after a war period is slower than deflation of business, where curtailment is either prompt and effective or disaster follows. There is room for further economy in the cost of the Federal Government, but a comparison of current expenditures with pre-war expenditures is not unfavorable to the efficiency with which Government business is now being done. The expenditures of 1916, the last pre-war

constantly engage in scientific studies of our future requirements and adopt an orderly program for their service. Economy is the method by which we prepare to-day to afford the improvements of to-morrow. BUDGET A mere policy of economy without any instrumentalities for putting it into operation would be very ineffective. The Congress has wisely set up the Bureau of the Budget to investigate and inform the President what recommendations he ought to make for current appropriations. This gives a centralized authority where a general and comprehensive understanding can be reached of the sources of income and the most equitable distribution of expenditures. How well it has worked is indicated by the fact that the departmental estimates for 1922, before the budget law, were $4,068,000,000 while the Budget estimates for 1927 are $3,156,000,000. This latter figure shows the reductions in departmental estimates for the coming year made possible by the operation of the Budget system that the Congress has provided. But it is evidently not enough to have care in making appropriations without any restraint upon expenditure. The Congress has provided that check by establishing the office of Comptroller General. The purpose of maintaining the Budget Director and the Comptroller General is to secure economy and efficiency in Government expenditure. No better method has been devised for the accomplishment of that end. These offices can not be administered in all the various details without making some errors both of fact and of judgment. But the important consideration remains that these are the instrumentalities of the Congress and that no other plan has ever been adopted which was so successful in promoting economy and efficiency. The Congress has absolute authority over the appropriations and is free to exercise its judgment, as the evidence may warrant, in increasing or decreasing budget recommendations. But it ought to resist every effort to weaken or break down this most beneficial system of supervising appropriations and expenditures. Without it all the claim of economy would be a mere pretense. TAXATION The purpose of reducing expenditures is to secure a reduction in taxes. That purpose is about to be realized. With commendable promptness the Ways and Means Committee of the House has undertaken in advance of the meeting of the Congress to frame a revenue act. As the bill has proceeded through the committee it has taken on a nonpartisan character, and both Republicans and Democrats have joined in a measure which embodies many sound principles of tax reform. The bill will correct substantially the economic defects injected into the revenue act of 1924, as well as many which have

remained as war-time legacies. In its present form it should provide sufficient revenue for the Government. The excessive surtaxes have been reduced, estate tax rates are restored to more reasonable figures, with every prospect of withdrawing from the field when the States have had the opportunity to correct the abuses in their own inheritance tax laws, the gift tax and publicity section are to be repealed, many miscellaneous taxes are lowered or abandoned, and the Board of Tax Appeals and the administrative features of the law are improved and strengthened. I approve of the bill in principle. In so far as income-tax exemptions are concerned, it seems to me the committee has gone as far as it is safe to go and somewhat further than I should have gone. Any further extension along these lines would, in my opinion, impair the integrity of our income-tax system. I am advised that the bill will be through the House by Christmas. For this prompt action the country can thank the good sense of the Ways and Means Committee in framing an economic measure upon economic considerations. If this attitude continues to be reflected through the Congress, the taxpayer will have his relief by the time his March 15th installment of income taxes is due. Nonpartisan effort means certain, quick action. Determination of a revenue law definitely, promptly and solely as a revenue law, is one of the greatest gifts a legislature can bestow upon its constituents. I commend the example of the Ways and Means Committee. If followed, it will place sound legislation upon the books in time to give the taxpayers the full benefit of tax reduction next year. This means that the bill should reach me prior to March 15. All these economic results are being sought not to benefit the rich, but to benefit the people. They are for the purpose of encouraging industry in order that employment may be plentiful. They seek to make business good in order that wages may be good. They encourage prosperity in order that poverty may be banished from the home. They seek to lay the foundation which, through increased production, may give the people a more bountiful supply of the necessaries of life, afford more leisure for the improvement of the mind, the appreciation of the arts of music and literature, sculpture and painting, and the beneficial enjoyment of outdoor sports and recreation, enlarge the resources which minister to charity and by all these means attempting to strengthen the spiritual life of the Nation. FOREIGN RELATIONS The policy of our foreign relations, casting aside any suggestion of force, rests solely on the foundation of peace, good will, and good works. We have sought, in our intercourse with other nations, better understandings through conference and exchange of views as befits beings endowed with reason. The results have been the gradual elimination of disputes, the settlement of controversies, and the establishment of a

firmer friendship between America and the rest of the world than has ever existed at any previous time. The example of this attitude has not been without its influence upon other countries. Acting upon it, an adjustment was made of the difficult problem of reparations. This was the second step toward peace in Europe. It paved the way for the agreements which were drawn up at the Locarno Conference. When ratified, these will represent the third step toward peace. While they do not of themselves provide an economic rehabilitation, which is necessary for the progress of Europe, by strengthening the guaranties of peace they diminish the need for great armaments. If the energy which now goes into military effort is transferred to productive endeavor, it will greatly assist economic progress. The Locarno agreements were made by the European countries directly interested without any formal intervention of America, although on July 3 I publicly advocated such agreements in an address made in Massachusetts. We have consistently refrained from intervening except when our help has been sought and we have felt it could be effectively given, as in the settlement of reparations and the London Conference. These recent Locarno agreements represent the success of this policy which we have been insisting ought to be adopted, of having European countries settle their own political problems without involving this country. This beginning seems to demonstrate that this policy is sound. It is exceedingly gratifying to observe this progress, which both in its method and in its result promises so much that is beneficial to the world. When these agreements are finally adopted, they will provide guaranties of peace that make the present prime reliance upon force in some parts of Europe very much less necessary. The natural corollary to these treaties should be further international contracts for the limitation of armaments. This work was successfully begun at the Washington Conference. Nothing was done at that time concerning land forces because of European objection. Our standing army has been reduced to around 118,000, about the necessary police force for 115,000,000 people. We are not proposing to increase it, nor is it supposable that any foreign country looks with the slightest misapprehension upon our land forces. They do not menace anybody. They are rather a protection to everybody. The question of disarming upon land is so peculiarly European in its practical aspects that our country would look with particular gratitude upon any action which those countries might take to reduce their own military forces. This is in accordance with our policy of not intervening unless the European powers are unable to agree and make request for our assistance. Whenever they are able to agree of their own accord it is especially gratifying to us, and such agreements may be sure of our sympathetic support.

It seems clear that it is the reduction of armies rather than of navies that is of the first importance to the world at the present time. We shall look with great satisfaction upon that effort and give it our approbation and encouragement. If that can be settled, we may more easily consider further reduction and limitation of naval armaments. For that purpose our country has constantly through its Executive, and through repeated acts of Congress, indicated its willingness to call such a conference. Under congressional sanction it would seem to be wise to participate in any conference of the great powers for naval limitation of armament proposed upon such conditions that it would hold a fair promise of being effective. The general policy of our country is for disarmament, and it ought not to hesitate to adopt any practical plan that might reasonably be expected to succeed. But it would not care to attend a conference which from its location on constituency would in all probability prove futile. In the further pursuit of strengthening the bonds of peace and good will we have joined with other nations in an international conference held at Geneva and signed an agreement which will be laid before the Senate for ratification providing suitable measures for control and for publicity in international trade in arms, ammunition, and implements of war, and also executed a protocol providing for a prohibition of the use of poison gas in war, in accordance with the principals of Article 5 of the treaty relating thereto signed at the Washington Conference. We are supporting the Pan American efforts that are being made toward the codification of international law, and looking with sympathy on the investigations being conducted under philanthropic auspices of the proposal to make agreements outlawing war. In accordance with promises made at the Washington Conference, we have urged the calling of and are now represented at the Chinese Customs Conference and on the Commission on Extraterritoriality, where it will be our policy so far as possible to meet the aspirations of China in all ways consistent with the interests of the countries involved. COURT OF INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE Pending before the Senate for nearly three years is the proposal to adhere to the protocol establishing the Permanent Court of International Justice. A well-established line of precedents mark America’s effort to effect the establishment of a court of this nature. We took a leading part in laying the foundation on which it rests in the establishment of The Hague Court of Arbitration. It is that tribunal which nominates the judges who are elected by the Council and Assembly of the League of Nations. The proposal submitted to the Senate was made dependent upon four conditions, the first of which is that by supporting the court we do not assume any obligations under the league; second, that we may participate upon an equality with other States in the election of judges; third, that the Congress shall determine what part of the expenses we shall bear; fourth, that the statute creating the court shall not be amended without

our consent; and to these I have proposed an additional condition to the effect that we are not to be bound by advisory opinions rendered without our consent. The court appears to be independent of the league. It is true the judges are elected by the Assembly and Council, but they are nominated by the Court of Arbitration, which we assisted to create and of which we are a part. The court was created by a statute, socalled, which is really a treaty made among some forty-eight different countries, that might properly be called a constitution of the court. This statute provides a method by which the judges are chosen, so that when the Court of Arbitration nominates them and the Assembly and Council of the League elect them, they are not acting as instruments of the Court of Arbitration or instruments of the league, but as instruments of the statute.

This will be even more apparent if our representatives sit with the members of the council and assembly in electing the judges. It is true they are paid through the league though not by the league, but by the countries which are members of the league and by our country if we accept the protocol. The judges are paid by the league only in the same sense that it could be said United States judges are paid by the Congress. The court derives all its authority from the statute and is so completely independent of the league that it could go on functioning if the league were disbanded, at least until the terms of the judges expired. The most careful provisions are made in the statute as to the qualifications of judges. Those who make the nominations are recommended to consult with their highest court of justice, their law schools and academies. The judges must be persons of high moral character, qualified to hold the highest judicial offices in that country, or be jurisconsults of recognized competence in international law. It must be assumed that these requirements will continue to be carefully met, and with America joining the countries already concerned it is difficult to comprehend how human ingenuity could better provide for the establishment of a court which would maintain its independence. It has to be recognized that independence is to a considerable extent a matter of ability, character, and personality. Some effort was made in the early beginnings to interfere with the independence of our Supreme Court. It did not succeed because of the quality of the men who made up that tribunal. It does not seem that the authority to give advisory opinions interferes with the independence of the court. Advisory opinions in and of themselves are not harmful, but may be used in such a way as to be very beneficial because they undertake to prevent injury rather than merely afford a remedy after the injury has been done. As a principle that only implies that the court shall function when proper application is made to it. Deciding the question involved upon issues submitted for an advisory opinion does not

differ materially from deciding the question involved upon issues submitted by contending parties. Up to the present time the court has given an advisory opinion when it judged it had jurisdiction, and refused to give one when it judged it did not have jurisdiction. Nothing in the work of the court has yet been an indication that this is an impairment of its independence or that its practice differs materially from the giving of like opinions under the authority of the constitutions of several of our States. No provision of the statute seems to me to give this court any authority to be a political rather than a judicial court. We have brought cases in this country before our courts which, when they have been adjudged to be political, have been thereby dismissed. It is not probable that political questions will be submitted to this court, but again up to the present time the court has refused to pass on political questions and our support would undoubtedly have a tendency to strengthen it in that refusal. We are not proposing to subject ourselves to any compulsory jurisdiction. If we support the court, we can never be obliged to submit any case which involves our interests for its decision. Our appearance before it would always be voluntary, for the purpose of presenting a case which we had agreed might be presented. There is no more danger that others might bring cases before the court involving our interests which we did not wish to have brought, after we have adhered, and probably not so much, than there would be of bringing such cases if we do not adhere. I think that we would have the same legal or moral right to disregard such a finding in the one case that we would in the other. If we are going to support any court, it will not be one that we have set up alone or which reflects only our ideals. Other nations have their customs and their institutions, their thoughts and their methods of life. If a court is going to be international, its composition will have to yield to what is good in all these various elements. Neither will it be possible to support a court which is exactly perfect, or under which we assume absolutely no obligations. If we are seeking that opportunity, we might as well declare that we are opposed to supporting any court. If any agreement is made, it will be because it undertakes to set up a tribunal which can do some of the things that other nations wish to have done. We shall not find ourselves bearing a disproportionate share of the world’s burdens by our adherence, and we may as well remember that there is absolutely no escape for our country from bearing its share of the world’s burdens in any case. We shall do far better service to ourselves and to others if we admit this and discharge our duties voluntarily, than if we deny it and are forced to meet the same obligations unwillingly. It is difficult to imagine anything that would be more helpful to the world than stability, tranquillity and international justice. We may say that we are contributing to these factors independently, but others less fortunately located do not and can not make a like contribution except through mutual cooperation. The old balance of power, mutual

alliances, and great military forces were not brought about by any mutual dislike for independence, but resulted from the domination of circumstances. Ultimately they were forced on us. Like all others engaged in the war whatever we said as a matter of fact we joined an alliance, we became a military power, we impaired our independence. We have more at stake than any one else in avoiding a repetition of that calamity. Wars do not spring into existence. They arise from small incidents and trifling irritations which can be adjusted by an international court. We can contribute greatly to the advancement of our ideals by joining with other nations in maintaining such a tribunal. FOREIGN DEBTS Gradually, settlements have been made which provide for the liquidation of debts due to our Government from foreign governments. Those made with Great Britain, Finland, Hungary, Lithuania, and Poland have already been approved by the Congress. Since the adjournment, further agreements have been entered into with Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Latvia, Esthonia, Italy, and Rumania. These 11 nations, which have already made settlements, represent $6,419,528,641 of the original principal of the loans. The principal sums without interest, still pending, are the debt of France, of

returned in better understanding and friendship, while in so far as these adjustments will contribute to the financial stability of the debtor countries, to their good order, prosperity, and progress, they represent hope of improved trade relations and mutual contributions to the civilization of the world. ALIEN PROPERTY Negotiations are progressing among the interested parties in relation to the final distribution of the assets in the hands of the Alien Property Custodian. Our Government and people are interested as creditors; the German Government and people are interested as debtors and owners of the seized property. Pending the outcome of these negotiations, I do not recommend any affirmative legislation. For the present we should continue in possession of this property which we hold as security for the settlement of claims due to our people and our Government. IMMIGRATION While not enough time has elapsed to afford a conclusive demonstration, such results as have been secured indicate that our immigration law is on the whole beneficial. It is undoubtedly a protection to the wage earners of this country. The situation should, however, be carefully surveyed, in order to ascertain whether it is working a needless hardship upon our own inhabitants. If it deprives them of the comfort and society of those bound to them by close family ties, such modifications should be adopted as will afford relief, always in accordance with the principle that our Government owes its first duty to our own people and that no alien, inhabitant of another country, has any legal rights whatever under our Constitution and laws. It is only through treaty, or through residence here, that such rights accrue. But we should not, however, be forgetful of the obligations of a common humanity. While our country numbers among its best citizens many of those of foreign birth, yet those who now enter in violation of our laws by that very act thereby place themselves in a class of undesirables. If investigation reveals that any considerable number are coming here in defiance of our immigration restrictions, it will undoubtedly create the necessity for the registration of all aliens. We ought to have no prejudice against an alien because he is an alien. The standard which we apply to our inhabitants is that of manhood, not place of birth. Restrictive immigration is to a large degree for economic purposes. It is applied in order that we may not have a larger annual increment of good people within our borders than we can weave into our economic fabric in such a way as to supply their needs without undue injury to ourselves. NATIONAL DEFENSE Never before in time of peace has our country maintained so large and effective a military force as it now has. The Army, Navy, Marine Corps, National Guard, and

Organized Reserves represent a strength of about 558,400 men. These forces are well trained, well equipped, and high in morale. A sound selective service act giving broad authority for the mobilization in time of peril of all the resources of the country, both persons and materials, is needed to perfect our defensive policy in accordance with our ideals of equality. The provision for more suitable housing to be paid for out of funds derived from the sale of excess lands, pending before the last Congress, ought to be brought forward and passed. Reasonable replacements ought to be made to maintain a sufficient ammunition reserve. The Navy has the full treaty tonnage of capital ships. Work is going forward in modernizing the older ones, building aircraft carriers, additional fleet submarines, and fast scout cruisers, but we are carefully avoiding anything that might be construed as a competition in armaments with other nations. The joint Army and Navy maneuvers at Hawaii, followed by the cruise of a full Battle Fleet to Australia and New Zealand, were successfully carried out. These demonstrations revealed a most satisfactory condition of the ships and the men engaged. Last year at my suggestion the General Board of the Navy made an investigation and report on the relation of aircraft to warships. As a result authorizations and appropriations were made for more scout cruisers and fleet submarines and for completing aircraft carriers and equipping them with necessary planes. Additional training in aviation was begun at the Military and Naval Academies. A method of coordination and cooperation of the Army and Navy and the principal aircraft builders is being perfected. At the suggestion of the Secretaries of War and Navy I appointed a special board to make a further study of the problem of aircraft. The report of the Air Board ought to be reassuring to the country, gratifying to the service and satisfactory to the Congress. It is thoroughly complete and represents the mature thought of the best talent in the country. No radical change in organization of the service seems necessary. The Departments of War, Navy, and Commerce should each be provided with an additional assistant secretary, not necessarily with statutory duties but who would be available under the direction of the Secretary to give especial attention to air navigation. We must have an air strength worthy of America. Provision should be made for two additional brigadier generals for the Army Air Service. Temporary rank corresponding to their duties should be awarded to active flying officers in both Army and Navy. Aviation is of great importance both for national defense and commercial development. We ought to proceed in its improvement by the necessary experiment and investigation. Our country is not behind in this art. It has made records for speed and for the excellence of its planes. It ought to go on maintaining its manufacturing plants capable of rapid production, giving national assistance to the laying out of airways, equipping

itself with a moderate number of planes, and keeping an air force trained to the highest efficiency. While I am a thorough believer in national defense and entirely committed to the policy of adequate preparation, I am just as thoroughly opposed to instigating or participating in a policy of competitive armaments. Nor does preparation mean a policy of militarizing. Our people and industries are solicitous for the cause of our country, and have great respect for the Army and Navy and for the uniform worn by the men who stand ready at all times for our protection to encounter the dangers and perils necessary to military service, but all of these activities are to be taken not in behalf of aggression but in behalf of peace. They are the instruments by which we undertake to do our part to promote good will and support stability among all peoples. VETERANS If any one desires to estimate the esteem in which the veterans of America are held by their fellow citizens, it is but necessary to remember that the current budget calls for an expenditure of about $650,000,000 in their behalf. This is nearly the amount of the total cost of the National Government, exclusive of the post office, before we entered the last war. At the two previous sessions of Congress legislation affecting veterans’ relief was enacted and the law liberalized. This legislation brought into being a number of new provisions tending more nearly to meet the needs of our veterans, as well as afford the necessary authority to perfect the administration of these laws. Experience with the new legislation so far has clearly demonstrated its constructive nature. It has increased the benefits received by many and has made eligible for benefits many others. Direct disbursements to the veteran or his dependents exceeding $21,000,000 have resulted, which otherwise would not have been made. The degree of utilization of our hospitals has increased through making facilities available to the incapacitated veteran regardless of service origin of the disability. This new legislation also has brought about a marked improvement of service to the veteran. The organizations of ex-service men have proposed additional legislative changes which you will consider, but until the new law and the modifications made at the last session of Congress are given a more thorough test further changes in the basic law should be few and made only after careful though sympathetic consideration. The principal work now before the Veterans’ Bureau is the perfection of its organization and further improvements in service. Some minor legislative changes are deemed necessary to enable the bureau to retain that high grade of professional talent essential in handling the problems of the bureau. Such changes as tend toward the improvement of service and the carrying forward to completion of the hospital

construction program are recommended for the consideration of the proper committees of Congress. With the enormous outlay that is now being made in behalf of the veterans and their dependents, with a tremendous war debt still requiring great annual expenditure, with the still high rate of taxation, while every provision should be made for the relief of the disabled and the necessary care of dependents, the Congress may well consider whether the financial condition of the Government is not such that further bounty through the enlargement of general pensions and other emoluments ought not to be postponed. AGRICULTURE No doubt the position of agriculture as a whole has very much improved since the depression of three and four years ago. But there are many localities and many groups of individuals, apparently through no fault of their own, sometimes due to climatic conditions and sometimes to the prevailing price of a certain crop, still in a distressing condition. This is probably temporary, but it is none the less acute. National Government agencies, the Departments of Agriculture and Commerce, the Farm Loan Board, the intermediate credit banks, and the Federal Reserve Board are all cooperating to be of assistance and relief. On the other hand, there are localities and individuals who have had one of their most prosperous years. The general price level is fair, but here again there are exceptions both ways, some items being poor while others are excellent. In spite of a lessened production the farm income for this year will be about the same as last year and much above the three preceding years. Agriculture is a very complex industry. It does not consist of one problem, but of several. They can not be solved at one stroke. They have to be met in different ways, and small gains are not to be despised.

It has appeared from all the investigations that I have been able to make that the farmers as a whole are determined to maintain the independence of their business. They do not wish to have meddling on the part of the Government or to be placed under the inevitable restrictions involved in any system of direct or indirect price-fixing, which would result from permitting the Government to operate in the agricultural markets. They are showing a very commendable skill in organizing themselves to transact their own business through cooperative marketing, which will this year turn over about $2,500,000,000, or nearly one-fifth of the total agricultural business. In this they are receiving help from the Government. The Department of Agriculture should be strengthened in this facility, in order to be able to respond when these marketing associations want help. While it ought not to undertake undue regulation, it should be

equipped to give prompt information on crop prospects, supply, demand, current receipts, imports, exports, and prices. A bill embodying these principles, which has been drafted under the advice and with the approval of substantially all the leaders and managers in the cooperative movement, will be presented to the Congress for its enactment. Legislation should also be considered to provide for leasing the unappropriated public domain for grazing purposes and adopting a uniform policy relative to grazing on the public lands and in the national forests. A more intimate relation should be established between agriculture and the other business activities of the Nation. They are mutually dependent and can each advance their own prosperity most by advancing the prosperity of the other. Meantime the Government will continue those activities which have resulted in an unprecedented amount of legislation and the pouring out of great sums of money during the last five years. The work for good roads, better land and water transportation, increased support for agricultural education, extension of credit facilities through the Farm Loan Boards and the intermediate credit banks, the encouragement of orderly marketing and a repression of wasteful speculation, will all be continued. Following every other depression, after a short period the price of farm produce has taken and maintained the lead in the advance. This advance had reached a climax before the war. Everyone will recall the discussion that went on for four or five years prior to 1914 concerning the high cost of living. This history is apparently beginning to repeat itself. While wholesale prices of other commodities have been declining, farm prices have been increasing. There is every reason to suppose that a new era in agricultural prosperity lies just before us, which will probably be unprecedented.

MUSCLE SHOALS The problem of Muscle Shoals seems to me to have assumed a place all out of proportion with its real importance. It probably does not represent in market value much more than a first-class battleship, yet it has been discussed in the Congress over a period of years and for months at a time. It ought to be developed for the production of nitrates primarily, and incidentally for power purposes. This would serve defensive, agricultural, and industrial purposes. I am in favor of disposing of this property to meet these purposes. The findings of the special commission will be transmitted to the Congress for their information. I am convinced that the best possible disposition can be made by direct authorization of the Congress. As a means of negotiation I recommend the immediate appointment of a small joint special committee chosen from the appropriate general standing committees of the House and Senate to receive bids,

which when made should be reported with recommendations as to acceptance, upon which a law should be enacted, effecting a sale to the highest bidder who will agree to carry out these purposes. If anything were needed to demonstrate the almost utter incapacity of the National Government to deal directly with an industrial and commercial problem, it has been provided by our experience with this property. We have expended vast fortunes, we have taxed everybody, but we are unable to secure results which benefit anybody. This property ought to be transferred to private management under conditions which will dedicate it to the public purpose for which it was conceived. RECLAMATION The National Government is committed to a policy of reclamation and irrigation which it desires to establish on a sound basis and continue in the interest of the localities concerned. Exhaustive studies have recently been made of Federal reclamation, which have resulted in improving the projects and adjusting many difficulties. About one third of the projects is in good financial condition, another third can probably be made profitable, while the other third is under unfavorable conditions. The Congress has already provided for a survey which will soon be embodied in a report. That ought to suggest a method of relief which will make unnecessary further appeals to the Congress. Unless this can be done, Federal reclamation will be considerably retarded. With the greatly increased cost of construction and operation, it has become necessary to plan in advance, by community organization and selective agriculture, methods sufficient to repay these increasing outlays.

The human and economic interests of the farmer citizens suggest that the States should be required to exert some effort and assume some responsibility, especially in the intimate, detailed, and difficult work of securing settlers and developing farms which directly profit them, but only indirectly and remotely can reimburse the Nation. It is believed that the Federal Government should continue to be the agency for planning and constructing the great undertakings needed to regulate and bring into use the rivers of the West, many of which are interstate in character, but the detailed work of creating agricultural communities and a rural civilization on the land made ready for reclamation ought to be either transferred to the. State in its entirety or made a cooperative effort of the State and Federal Government. SHIPPING The maintenance of a merchant marine is of the utmost importance for national defense and the service of our commerce. We have a large number of ships engaged in that service. We also have a surplus supply, costly to care for, which ought to be sold. All

the investigations that have been made under my direction, and those which have been prosecuted independently, have reached the conclusion that the fleet should be under the direct control of a single executive head, while the Shipping Board should exercise its judicial and regulatory functions in accordance with its original conception. The report of Henry G. Dalton, a business man of broad experience, with a knowledge of shipping, made to me after careful investigation, will be transmitted for the information of the Congress, the studies pursued under the direction of the United States Chamber of Commerce will also be accessible, and added to these will be the report of the special committee of the House. I do not advocate the elimination of regional considerations, but it has become apparent that without centralized executive action the management of this great business, like the management of any other great business, will flounder in incapacity and languish under a division of council. A plain and unmistakable reassertion of this principle of unified control, which I have always been advised was the intention of the Congress to apply, is necessary to increase the efficiency of our merchant fleet. COAL The perennial conflict in the coal industry is still going on to the great detriment of the wage earners, the owners, and especially to the public. With deposits of coal in this country capable of supplying its needs for hundreds of years, inability to manage and control this great resource for the benefit of all concerned is very close to a national economic failure. It has been the subject of repeated investigation and reiterated recommendation. Yet the industry seems never to have accepted modern methods of adjusting differences between employers and employees. The industry could serve the public much better and become subject to a much more effective method of control if regional consolidations and more freedom in the formation of marketing associations, under the supervision of the Department of Commerce, were permitted. At the present time the National Government has little or no authority to deal with this vital necessity of the life of the country. It has permitted itself to remain so powerless that its only attitude must be humble supplication. Authority should be lodged with the President and the Departments of Commerce and Labor, giving them power to deal with an emergency. They should be able to appoint temporary boards with authority to call for witnesses and documents, conciliate differences, encourage arbitration, and in case of threatened scarcity exercise control over distribution. Making the facts public under these circumstances through a statement from an authoritative source would be of great public benefit. The report of the last coal commission should be brought forward, reconsidered, and acted upon. PROHIBITION

Under the orderly processes of our fundamental institutions the Constitution was lately amended providing for national prohibition. The Congress passed an act for its enforcement, and similar acts have been provided by most of the States. It is the law of the land. It is the duty of all who come under its jurisdiction to observe the spirit of that law, and it is the duty of the Department of Justice and the Treasury Department to enforce it. Action to prevent smuggling, illegal transportation in interstate commerce, abuse in the use of permits, and existence of sources of supply for illegal traffic is almost entirely imposed upon the Federal Government. Through treaties with foreign governments and increased activities of the Coast Guard, revenue agents, district attorneys, and enforcement agents effort is being made to prevent these violations. But the Constitution also puts a concurrent duty on the States. We need their active and energetic cooperation, the vigilant action of their police, and the jurisdiction of their courts to assist in enforcement. I request of the people observance, of the public officers continuing efforts for enforcement, and of the Congress favorable action on the budget recommendation for the prosecution of this work.

WATERWAY DEVELOPMENT For many years our country has been employed in plans and operations for the development of our intracoastal and inland waterways. This work along our coast is an important adjunct to our commerce. It will be carried on, together with the further opening up of our harbors, as our resources permit. The Government made an agreement during the war to take over the Cape Cod Canal, under which the owners made valuable concessions. This pledged faith of the Government ought to be redeemed. Two other main fields are under consideration. One is the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence, including the Erie Canal. This includes stabilizing the lake level, and is both a waterway and power project. A joint commission of the United States and Canada is working on plans and surveys which will not be completed until next April. No final determination can be made, apparently, except under treaty as to the participation of both countries. The other is the Mississippi River system. This is almost entirely devoted to navigation. Work on the Ohio River will be completed in about three years. A modern channel connecting Chicago, New Orleans, Kansas City, and Pittsburgh should be laid out and work on the tributaries prosecuted. Some work is being done of a preparatory nature along the Missouri, and large expenditures are being made yearly in the lower reaches of the Mississippi and its tributaries which contribute both to flood control and navigation. Preliminary measures are being taken on the Colorado River project, which is exceedingly important for flood control, irrigation, power

development, and water supply to the area concerned. It would seem to be very doubtful, however, whether it is practical to secure affirmative action of the Congress, except under a joint agreement of the several States. The Government has already expended large sums upon scientific research and engineering investigation in promotion of this Colorado River project. The actual progress has been retarded for many years by differences among the seven States in the basin over their relative water rights and among different groups as to methods. In an attempt to settle the primary difficulty of the water rights, Congress authorized the Colorado River Commission which agreed on November 24, 1922, upon an interstate compact to settle these rights, subject to the ratification of the State legislatures and Congress. All seven States except Arizona at one time ratified, the Arizona Legislature making certain reservations which failed to meet the approval of the governor. Subsequently an attempt was made to establish the compact upon a six-State basis, but in this case California imposed reservations. There appears to be no division of opinion upon the major principles of the compact, but difficulty in separating contentions as to methods of development from the discussion of it. It is imperative that flood control be undertaken for California and Arizona, preparation made for irrigation, for power, and for domestic water. Some or all of these questions are combined in every proposed development. The Federal Government is interested in some of these phases, State governments and municipalities and irrigation districts in others, and private corporations in still others. Because of all this difference of view it is most desirable that Congress should consider the creation of some agency that will be able to determine methods of improvement solely upon economic and engineering facts, that would be authorized to negotiate and settle, subject to the approval of Congress, the participation, rights, and obligations of each group in any particular works. Only by some such method can early construction be secured. WATER POWER Along with the development of navigation should go every possible encouragement for the development of our water power. While steam still plays a dominant part, this is more and more becoming an era of electricity. Once installed, the cost is moderate, has not tended greatly to increase, and is entirely free from the unavoidable dirt and disagreeable features attendant upon the burning of coal. Every facility should be extended for the connection of the various units into a superpower plant, capable at all times of a current increasing uniformity over the entire system. RAILROADS

The railroads throughout the country are in a fair state of prosperity. Their service is good and their supply of cars is abundant. Their condition would be improved and the public better served by a system of consolidations. I recommend that the Congress authorize such consolidations under the supervision of the Interstate Commerce Commission, with power to approve or disapprove when proposed parts are excluded or new parts added. I am informed that the railroad managers and their employees have reached a substantial agreement as to what legislation is necessary to regulate and improve their relationship. Whenever they bring forward such proposals, which seem sufficient also to protect the interests of the public, they should be enacted into law. It is gratifying to report that both the railroad managers and railroad employees are providing boards for the mutual adjustment of differences in harmony with the principles of conference, conciliation, and arbitration. The solution of their problems ought to be an example to all other industries. Those who ask the protections of civilization should be ready to use the methods of civilization. A strike in modern industry has many of the aspects of war in the modern world. It injures labor and it injures capital. If the industry involved is a basic one, it reduces the necessary economic surplus and, increasing the cost of living, it injures the economic welfare and general comfort of the whole people. It also involves a deeper cost. It tends to embitter and divide the community into warring classes and thus weakens the unity and power of our national life. Labor can make no permanent gains at the cost of the general welfare. All the victories won by organized labor in the past generation have been won through the support of public opinion. The manifest inclination of the managers and employees of the railroads to adopt a policy of action in harmony with these principles marks a new epoch in our industrial life. OUTLYING POSSESSIONS The time has come for careful investigation of the expenditures and success of the laws by which we have undertaken to administer our outlying possessions. A very large amount of money is being expended for administration in Alaska. It appears so far out of proportion to the number of inhabitants and the amount of production as to indicate cause for thorough investigation. Likewise consideration should be given to the experience under the law which governs the Philippines. From such reports as reach me there are indications that more authority should be given to the Governor General, so that he will not be so dependent upon the local legislative body to render effective our efforts to set an example of the sound administration and good government, which is so necessary for the preparation of the Philippine people for self-government under ultimate independence. If they are to be trained in these arts, it is our duty to provide for them the best that there is.

RETIREMENT OF JUDGES The act of March 3, 1911, ought to be amended so that the term of years of service of judges of any court of the United States requisite for retirement with pay shall be computed to include not only continuous but aggregate service. MOTHERS’ AID The Government ought always to be alert on the side of the humanities. It ought to encourage provisions for economic justice for the defenseless. It ought to extend its relief through its national and local agencies, as may be appropriate in each case, to the suffering and the needy. It ought to be charitable. Although more than 40 of our States have enacted measures in aid of motherhood, the District of Columbia is still without such a law. A carefully considered bill will be presented, which ought to have most thoughtful consideration in order that the Congress may adopt a measure which will be hereafter a model for all parts of the Union. CIVIL SERVICE In 1883 the Congress passed the civil service act, which from a modest beginning of 14,000 employees has grown until there are now 425,000 in the classified service. This has removed the clerical force of the Nation from the wasteful effects of the spoils system and made it more stable and efficient. The time has come to consider classifying all postmasters, collectors of customs, collectors of internal revenue, and prohibition agents, by an act covering in those at present in office, except when otherwise provided by Executive order. The necessary statistics are now being gathered to form the basis of a valuation of the civil service retirement fund based on current conditions of the service. It is confidently expected that this valuation will be completed in time to be made available to the Congress during the present session. It will afford definite knowledge of existing and future liabilities under the present law and determination of liabilities under any proposed change in the present law. We should have this information before creating further obligations for retirement annuities which will become liabilities to be met in the future from the money of the taxpayer. The classification act of 1923, with the subsequent legislative action providing for adjustment of the compensation of field service positions, has operated materially to improve employment conditions in the Federal service. The administration of the act is in the hands of an impartial board, functioning without the necessity of a direct appropriation. It would be inadvisable at this time to place in other hands the administration of this act.

FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION The proper function of the Federal Trade Commission is to supervise and correct those practices in commerce which are detrimental to fair competition. In this it performs a useful function and should be continued and supported. It was designed also to be a help to honest business. In my message to the Sixty-eighth Congress I recommended that changes in the procedure then existing be made. Since then the commission by its own action has reformed its rules, giving greater speed and economy in the disposal of its cases and full opportunity for those accused to be heard. These changes are improvements and, if necessary, provision should be made for their permanency. REORGANIZATION No final action has yet been taken on the measure providing for the reorganization of the various departments. I therefore suggest that this measure, which will be of great benefit to the efficient and economical administration of the business of the Government, be brought forward and passed. THE NEGRO Nearly one-tenth of our population consists of the Negro race. The progress which they have made in all the arts of civilization in the last 60 years is almost beyond belief. Our country has no more loyal citizens. But they do still need sympathy, kindness, and helpfulness. They need reassurance that the requirements of the Government and society to deal out to them even-handed justice will be met. They should be protected from all violence and supported in the peaceable enjoyment of the fruits of their labor. Those who do violence to them should be punished for their crimes. No other course of action is worthy of the American people. Our country has many elements in its population, many different modes of thinking and living, all of which are striving in their own way to be loyal to the high ideals worthy of the crown of American citizenship. It is fundamental of our institutions that they seek to guarantee to all our inhabitants the right to live their own lives under the protection of the public law. This does not include any license to injure others materially, physically, morally, to incite revolution, or to violate the established customs which have long had the sanction of enlightened society. But it does mean the full right to liberty and equality before the law without distinction of race or creed. This condition can not be granted to others, or enjoyed by ourselves, except by the application of the principle of broadest tolerance. Bigotry is only another name for slavery. It reduces to serfdom not only those against whom it is directed, but also those who seek to apply it. An enlarged freedom can only be secured by the application of the golden rule. No other utterance ever presented such a practical rule of life.

CONCLUSION It is apparent that we are reaching into an era of great general prosperity. It will continue only so long as we shall use it properly. After all, there is but a fixed quantity of wealth in this country at any fixed time. The only way that we can all secure more of it is to create more. The element of time enters into production. If the people have sufficient moderation and contentment to be willing to improve their condition by the process of enlarging production, eliminating waste, and distributing equitably, a prosperity almost without limit lies before us. If the people are to be dominated by selfishness, seeking immediate riches by nonproductive speculation and by wasteful quarreling over the returns from industry, they will be confronted by the inevitable results of depression and privation. If they will continue industrious and thrifty, contented with fair wages and moderate profits, and the returns which accrue from the development of our natural resources, our prosperity will extend itself indefinitely. In all your deliberations you should remember that the purpose of legislation is to translate principles into action. It is an effort to have our country be better by doing better. Because the thoughts and ways of people are firmly fixed and not easily changed, the field within which immediate improvement can be secured is very narrow. Legislation can provide opportunity. Whether it is taken advantage of or not depends upon the people themselves. The Government of the United States has been created by the people. It is solely responsible to them. It will be most successful if it is conducted solely for their benefit. All its efforts would be of little avail unless they brought more justice, more enlightenment, more happiness and prosperity into the home. This means an opportunity to observe religion, secure education, and earn a living under a reign of law and order. It is the growth and improvement of the material and spiritual life of the Nation. We shall not be able to gain these ends merely by our own action. If they come at all, it will be because we have been willing to work in harmony with the abiding purpose of a Divine Providence. CALVIN COOLIDGE

List of Papers [Unless otherwise specified, the correspondence is from or to officials in the Department of State]

GENERAL SCRAPPING OF SHIPS BY THE UNITED STATES, GREAT BRITAIN, AND JAPAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE TREATY FOR THE LIMITATION OF NAVAL ARMAMENT, SIGNED FEBRUARY 6, 1922 Date and number Subject Page 1925 Feb. (29440–

of Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7] Feb. (71) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Basis of Mr. Chamberlain’s views found to be his inference from general political situation in France and conversation with French Premier. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10] Feb. (74) From the Chargé in Great Britain (tel.) Mr. Chamberlain’s reply to a question in the House of Commons regarding the conference that the matter has been mentioned informally in conversations with the U. S. Ambassador and is under consideration. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10] Feb. (34) From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) United Press cablegram reporting consent of England, Japan, and Italy to conference, and consent of France awaited by President Coolidge. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10] Feb. (94) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Resume of what has occurred in regard to discussion of disarmament conference; assurance for French Government that no formal negotiations have taken place, as might have been inferred from press reports, and that if the United States takes any initiative in the matter, all the other Governments, including France, will be notified. 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 11] Feb. (19) To the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) Summary of situation concerning possible calling of conference, and U. S. position; regret that press reports have made it appear that some special negotiation was going on with Great Britain. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12] Mar. 18 (51) From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) London press despatch reporting President Coolidge’s alleged decision, following failure of Geneva Protocol, to proceed with the conference even if some powers refuse to take part. Japanese impression that U. S.-British conversations were significant. (Footnote: British Government’s announcement, March 12, of its inability to accept Geneva Protocol.) [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13] Mar. 19 (31) To the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) Secretary’s explanation to Japanese Ambassador in Washington that the subject of a disarmament conference was introduced by Mr. Chamberlain, that conversations were informal, and that if the President decided to call a conference [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

the United States would communicate with Japan as well as other Governments. Undated Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the French Ambassador, March 26, 1925 Opinion of French Government that disarmament is not now practical. Discussion of security question. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15] Oct. (385) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Instructions to cable summary of press comment in country to which accredited regarding the President’s remarks to the press on possibility of disarmament conference. (Similar instruction sent to Japan. Instructions to Ambassador in France to repeat to Great Britain, Germany, and Italy.) [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, and Doc. 18] Oct. (510) From the Chargé in France (tel.) Press comment opposed to any disarmament conference. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, and Doc. 18] Oct. (160) From the Chargé in Italy (tel.) No press comment in regard to a disarmament conference. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, and Doc. 18] Oct. (332) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Ambassador’s feeling that an atmosphere of hostility exists toward any conference in Washington on land armament, but that proposition to reduce naval armaments might be favorably received. General press comment to the effect that with the Locarno Agreement, initiative has passed from Washington to Geneva. 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 19] Oct. (322) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Request that Ambassador ascertain informally and unofficially the attitude of the British Government toward President’s calling of a disarmament conference, and the opinion of British officials as to its reception by other European countries. (Footnote: Telegram from Ambassador, October 26, stating that Department’s inquiry had been answered by his telegram No. 332, October 24.) [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20] Oct. (176) From the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Absence of editorial comment in Japanese press regarding President’s remarks. Information that Japan would prefer to see [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22]

settlement of obligations arising out of the 1922 Washington Conference before considering new commitments. Oct. (183) From the Ambassador in Germany (tel.) Information that the President’s remarks have received very little press comment. Ambassador’s opinion that Germany would welcome President’s calling of a conference. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22] Oct. (337) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Probability of the calling of a European conference for the limitation of armament, excluding United States. Ambassador’s suggestion that the situation might be aided if President Coolidge were to point out that any so-called American interference in European affairs has come only when European powers themselves were unable to agree and had asked for help. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23] Nov. 19 (338) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Information that the President will take up the subject in his message to Congress, December 8. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25] DISINCLINATION OF THE UNITED STATES TO BE ASSOCIATED IN EUROPEAN SECURITY PACTS: (1) GENEVA PROTOCOL; (2) LOCARNO AGREEMENT Date and number Subject Page 1925 Undated Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With the British Ambassador, January 5, 1925 British efforts for modifications in the Geneva Protocol. Secretary’s personal views as to aspects of protocol which might give concern to U. S. Government. Ambassador’s suggestion for possible reservation by Great Britain, and Secretary’s desire that, in event of such reservation, nothing be said to the effect that an arrangement satisfactory to United States had been made regarding ratification of the protocol.

Undated Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With the German Ambassador, March 16, 1925 Substance of proposition made by Germany to France and Great Britain for a joint security pact to secure France, including proposal that France’s security be guaranteed to United States. Secretary’s statement that United States is not authorized to join in any guarantee, nor is question of Germany’s joining the League of Nations a matter for U. S. comment or suggestion.

(Footnotes: Membership of American delegation and its technical advisers and secretarial staff.) Apr. To the American Delegation Instructions as to attitude to be taken in the event of Soviet participation in the conference. Reservation (text printed) to be made in proposed convention as safeguard against any possible misconstruction of attitude of United States toward a signatory or adhering power represented by a regime not recognized by the United States. 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. May (28) From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Desire of French delegation for provision in draft convention that signatories will undertake not to authorize the exportation of war material to countries where domestic legislation prohibits its importation. Circulation of draft provision to that effect by the Uruguayan representative. Request for instructions.

the proposal, even if redrafted in accordance with American delegation’s suggestion, might prove either useless or embarrassing. portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, and Doc. May (42) From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Request for instructions as to whether Department wishes delegation to endeavor to secure modification of article 31 regarding submission of disputes to arbitration, or to seek a reservation on the part of the United States.

Doc. 44 and Doc. 45] June (64) To the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Authorization for signature of convention, provided no new or objectionable features are introduced, and provided a reasonable number of other powers are prepared to sign.

FAILURE OF THE UNITED STATES TO SECURE THE ADOPTION OF THE RULES DRAFTED BY THE INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE REVISION OF THE RULES OF WARFARE Date and number Subject Page 1924 Jan. 26 (829) To the Ambassador in France Instructions to make clear to the Government to which accredited the readiness of United States, in conjunction with Great Britain, France, Italy, Japan, and the Netherlands, to accept the two sets of rules drafted by the International Commission of Jurists in 1923. Instructions, further, to inquire whether Government would be

disposed to conclude with United States and other powers mentioned two conventions (such as were proposed by the American delegation at The Hague, February 12, 1923), to each of which one set of rules should be annexed. (The same to representatives in Great Britain, Italy, Japan, and the Netherlands.) Apr. 23 (459–E) From the Ambassador in Japan Foreign Office note, April 19, 1924 (text printed), indicating willingness of Japan to adopt both sets of rules prepared by Commission of Jurists and to conclude conventions substantially as suggested by United States.

included either in conventions now in force or in practices of international law. Apr. (1166) From the Chargé in Great Britain Foreign Office note, April 6 (text printed), stating British Government’s decision to await further international discussion on question before formulating its views on the rules prepared by the Commission of Jurists. [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57] NEGOTIATIONS ON BEHALF OF THE WORLD WAR FOREIGN DEBT COMMISSION FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF DEBTS OWED THE UNITED STATES BY FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS BELGIUM Date and number Subject Page 1925 Mar. 26 (111) To the Ambassador in Belgium Note to be presented to Foreign Office (text printed) referring to correspondence of 1919 (extracts printed) whereby Belgium agreed to accord to post-armistice advances by United States as favorable treatment as that accorded to advances by other nations; and inquiring, in light of the foregoing, when United States may expect to receive payments on account of the Belgian postarmistice relief debt proportionate to payments which Belgium appears to have made to other creditor nations on similar account. (Footnote: Note delivered to the Foreign Office April 22.) [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58] May 29 (32) To the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.) Instructions to inform Belgian officials that United States will not object to notation of proposed $50,000,000 loan by Belgium, being negotiated with J. P. Morgan & Co., provided Belgian Government will undertake at once to refund its entire indebtedness to United States on certain principles enumerated, and will set forth in writing its acceptance of these principles and agree to send a commission to United States to negotiate settlement with World War Foreign Debt Commission.

June (35) To the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.) Information that Belgian note is unsatisfactory because it leaves certain particulars in doubt. Instructions to make a communication to Belgian Government (text printed), or, if considered preferable, to proceed along some other line to obtain unequivocal statement accepting principles set forth by United States.

May (12) From the Minister in Czechoslovakia (tel.) Information that Dr. Beneš, Czechoslovak Minister of Foreign Affairs, denies any intention of discriminating against United States by arranging payment of so-called Nansen relief bonds and will write Minister in explanation.

debt questions, and that negotiations should begin in the very near future. July 23 (41) From the Minister in Czechoslovakia (tel.) Receipt of note from Czechoslovak Government formally acknowledging indebtedness to United States and stating difficulty of submitting a full proposal for settlement because of fiscal and economic condition of Czechoslovakia.

Dec. 30 (493) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Unfavorable impression in United States caused by press publicity given to statement of so-called balance sheet of France issued by Clémentel (extracts printed). Secretary’s assurance to press correspondents that statement was not an official communication to U. S. Government and that French Government had never suggested possible repudiation or cancelation of its debt. Instructions to confer informally with Herriot and Clémentel and make clear U. S. position, removing any misunderstanding in regard to a proposal for partial or entire cancelation of the debt. [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80] Dec. 31 (618) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) Clémentel’s expression of regret over the entirely mistaken impression that his report has given in United States, and assertion that the report (excerpts printed) repeatedly affirmed France’s responsibility for her debts. [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81] 1925 Jan. From the Ambassador in France (tel.) Belief that Clémentel’s memorandum mentioned in Ambassador’s

renewed in an official form in order to pave the way for examination of financial status of France by representatives of Debt Commission prior to possible opening of negotiations. Feb. 6 To the Ambassador in France Enumeration of difficulties that must be faced and suggestion that some progress might be made if the French Government were to send a delegation to United States to show the exact economic situation and endeavor to bring about a common agreement as to the underlying facts. [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87] Mar. 20 (188) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) Clémentel’s realization of importance to France of settlement of debt question, and Ambassador’s hope that he will modify his proposals to extent that Debt Commission might regard them as basis for negotiations. [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89] Mar. 31 (206) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) Note from Clémentel, March 28 (text printed), enclosing new text of his memorandum. Ambassador’s hope that the new text, in view of conciliatory changes in comparison with first proposal, may serve as a starting point for negotiations. [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89] May (184) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Instructions to take up with French authorities the question of the French debt, in the belief that the statement communicated to the French Ambassador by Mr. Mellon on December 1, 1924, can appropriately be used as basis for further discussions. Assertion that it is preferable to elicit overture from France, if possible. [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90] May (268) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) Report of conversations with French officials. Opinion of M. Franklin-Bouillon (member of Chamber of Deputies) that certain basic principles must be agreed upon, namely: (1) Great Britain to be paid pari passu with United States; (2) France to be granted a

Franklin-Bouillon. Opinion that an official proposal will be made in the near future. Doc. 92 and Doc. 93] May 18 (203) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Secretary’s statement regarding debt-funding negotiations (text printed), made for information of newspaper correspondents. (Instructions to repeat to representatives in Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Rumania, and Yugoslavia.) [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 94] June 18 (336) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) Report of conversations with French officials. M. Briand’s statement that he would (1) admit publicly France’s debt to United States in speech on July 3; (2) in no way link France’s payments to United States with German reparation payments; (3) open correspondence with United States regarding details of debt; (4) send small official commission to confer with Debt Commission. [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95] June 23 (235) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Desire that suggestion be made, if possible, that in speech on July 3, M. Briand announce publicly the intention of sending a commission to Washington to enter upon debt-funding negotiations. [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. Doc. 97, and Doc. 98] July (362) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) M. Briand’s announcement, in his speech, of French Government’s decision to send a commission to United States in near future to negotiate debt settlement. [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. Doc. 97, and Doc. 98] Sept. 16 From the French Ambassador Membership of French mission to United States. Information that mission embarked at Havre on September 16. [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. Doc. 97, and Doc. 98] GREECE Date and number Subject Page 1925 July (237) To the Chargé in Greece Note to be presented to Greek authorities (text printed), calling attention to fact that no proposal has been received from

Greece looking toward settlement or funding of Greek indebtedness to United States. Sept. (406) From the Chargé in Greece Foreign Office note, August 30 (text printed), stating that the Greek Minister at Washington has been empowered to negotiate with the World War Foreign Debt Commission.

Sept. 2 (134) From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.) Foreign Office announcement of personnel of delegation to go to Washington in October to discuss debt settlement. Opinion of Italian press that Italy is unable to pay sums expected of her and will not undertake to do so.

Feb. 22 (12) From the Minister in Rumania (tel.) Opinion that attitude of Minister of Finance will probably hamper any efforts to bring about refunding of debt. Report that only vague promises have been elicited so far.

by U. S. Government to receiving early assurances from Rumania that appropriate action will be taken in regard to the funding of its indebtedness to United States. Doc. 115 and Doc. 116] July 18 (44) To the Chargé in Rumania (tel.) Advice from Rumanian Minister that his Government is shortly to make proposals to United States with respect to indebtedness.

YUGOSLAVIA Date and number Subject Page 1923 Feb. 12 (1795) From the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes Résumé of correspondence with Yugoslav officials regarding desire of World War Foreign Debt Commission for proposal for settlement or refunding of Yugoslav indebtedness to United States. Foreign Minister’s statement that question will be studied.

Apr. 27 To the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes Instructions to endeavor to impress upon Yugoslav Government the importance of refunding its obligation to United States and to report developments as to refunding of debt to France and England. (Footnote: Synopsis of correspondence in 1919 which resulted in Yugoslav assurances to United States of treatment on equal footing with other creditor nations.)

agreement to a plan for refunding of its post-war advances in order to guarantee British share of Blair loan. Doc. 127 and Doc. 128] Mar. 25 (11) From the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (tel.) Finance Minister’s request to know whether, if he accedes to British refunding demand, the United States will demand a similar reimbursement plan. (Footnote: Instructions to the Minister on April 8 to state U. S. intention to insist on a settlement of Yugoslav indebtedness to United States simultaneously with any settlement made by Yugoslavia with another creditor nation.)

that United States should take a definite stand. Suggestion that United States take no action in Conference of Ambassadors till March and then request that delivery of bonds be made to Reparation Commission as trustee, with instructions to the Commission to make no disposition of bonds or their proceeds except in agreement with United States. portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134] Feb. (108) From the Chargé in France (tel.) Information that British memorandum has been adopted by Conference, subject to Chargé’s reservation that no instructions have been received from United States.

Mar. (150) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) Information that memorandum has been presented to Conference of Ambassadors in pursuance of instructions in telegram No. 99, February 24, and is being reserved for future discussion.

call for the issue of liberation bonds in the present circumstances. 148, and Doc. 149] REFUSAL BY THE UNITED STATES TO CONSENT TO THE ADHERENCE OF THE SOVIET UNION TO THE SPITZBERGEN TREATY OF FEBRUARY 9, 1920 Date and number Subject Page 1925 Apr. 7 From the French Ambassador Objection of French Government to terminology used to designate the Government of Russia in the U. S. draft agreement handed to the French Ambassador in 1924 relative to Russian adherence to the Spitzbergen Treaty of February 9, 1920. Suggestion of a substitute designation. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, and Doc. 149] May 12 To the French Ambassador Draft agreement (text printed) which is believed to be in harmony with the views of the French Government. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150] June 16 From the French Ambassador French opinion that wording in U. S. draft may not be acceptable to all the powers signatory to the Spitzbergen Treaty. Submission of further draft embodying suggested change, with inquiry as to whether it meets U. S. approval. 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 151] July 3 To the French Ambassador U. S. inability to accept in its entirety the substitute clause suggested in latest French draft. Transmittal of a redraft for consideration. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153] July 13 From the French Ambassador Suggestion of further change in phrasing of draft agreement. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153] Aug. 17 From the French Ambassador Suggestion of slight modification in phrasing of draft agreement. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154] 1926 Jan. 7 From the French Chargé French Government’s desire for a communication from United States on the question of the proposed adherence of the Soviet Union to the Spitzbergen Treaty. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156] Feb. 2 To the French Ambassador U. S. inability, in view of the terms of the treaty, to see its [Pg. includes portions

way to consent to the adherence thereto of the regime functioning in Russia. of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

ASSENT BY PRESIDENT COOLIDGE TO PROVISIONS IN THE POLISH-SWISS ARBITRATION TREATY FOR INVOKING THE ASSISTANCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES UNDER CERTAIN CONTINGENCIES Date and number Subject Page 1925 Apr. 15 From the Polish Minister Inquiry whether it is agreeable to the President of the United States that the Governments of Poland and Switzerland should provide for invoking his assistance in certain circumstances described in articles 3 and 14 (texts printed) of the Polish- Swiss Treaty of Arbitration, signed on March 7. (Footnote: Identic note dated April 16 from the Swiss Minister.)

Apr. (5038) From the Ambassador in France Memorandum prepared by member of the Embassy staff (text printed) presenting arguments against the examination of foreign manufacturers’ books by representatives of U. S. Tariff Commission.

concerning their purpose and the method of procedure to be used in the future, as contained in instructions to the American Ambassador in London. Doc. 164 and Doc. 165] June (595) From the Ambassador in Spain Information that Spanish Government, while not according diplomatic status to the customs attachés, is willing to grant to them, upon request, such customs facilities as are usually extended to members of diplomatic missions.

July 10 (324) To the Ambassador in Italy U. S. understanding that Italian Government, while unable to accord diplomatic status to customs attaches, does not intend to prohibit them from performing in Italy their duties under the Tariff Act of 1922. Instructions to make informal inquiries to determine if understanding is correct.

carrying out their duties in Italy, but that any inspections of business concerns will depend upon acquiescence of the owners. Doc. 179 and Doc. 180] Aug. 11 (936) From the Minister in Denmark Danish Government’s inability to conform to U. S. wishes.

185, and Doc. 186] Nov. (597) From the Minister in Switzerland Swiss Government’s inability to accord diplomatic status to customs representatives.

Netherlands Government and appointment of delegates to attend conference. Nov. 6 Convention Between the United States and Other Powers For the protection of industrial property. 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193] ACCEPTANCE BY THE UNITED STATES OF INVITATION TO ATTEND THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL TELEGRAPH CONFERENCE AT PARIS IN 1925 Date and number Subject Page 1925 July 17 To the French Ambassador Views of U. S. Government that subjects to be discussed at the International Telegraph Conference in Paris should not include questions relating to radio, as such questions will be considered at the International Radiotelegraph Conference to be held in Washington. U. S. willingness, in response to French inquiry, to postpone the Washington conference till 1926.

(Footnote: Information regarding invitations to certain other European countries and to Latin American countries.) Sept. 19 (80) To the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.) Instructions to inform Radiotelegraph Section of International Telegraph Bureau that United States desires to obtain whatever additions or modifications to the International Radiotelegraph Convention that the various Governments desire to have considered at the conference, and to obtain propositions on certain subjects to be discussed at conference. Suggestion that propositions be submitted by February 1, 1926.

Date and number Subject Page 1925 To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.) Information that the President has signed the Tacna-Arica decision and that a summary will be cabled, copy of which is to be handed to the Foreign Minister. (Footnote: The same to the Ambassador in Peru.)

Apr. (41) From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.) Assertion by an informant that Peruvian people and Congress oppose participation in the plebiscite, in view of the Arbitrator’s ruling of April 9; that Government officials, however, desire participation; and that an American assurance of protection from outrage in the disputed region during voting would have a beneficial effect on both popular and governmental opinion.

Aug. 14 From the Consul at Arica (tel.) From Pershing: Information that the restrictions referred to are embodied in two decrees regulating travel; that the Ordonez incident was regrettable but not important; that there is no doubt of Chilean oppression and intimidation of Peruvians and that under existing conditions a fair plebiscite is impossible.

printed) regarding Chilean complaints as to Peruvian activities and alleged bids for U. S. sympathy; and efforts of President of Chile to maintain order and assure fair plebiscite. Secretary’s inquiry if Pershing still desires that representations be made to Presidents of Chile and Peru. portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222] Sept. (55) To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.) Instructions to make clear to Americans in Chile U. S. hope that they will maintain an absolutely neutral attitude in the Tacna- Arica controversy. (Repeated mutatis mutandis to Peru.)

questions in the resolution as proposed in telegram of September 24. Request for views as to whether time has come for representations to Chilean Government. portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229] Oct. 9 From the Consul at Arica (tel.) From Pershing: Opinion that time has arrived for representations to Chile.

given the Chilean Commissioner instructions to comply with substance of Pershing’s resolution. portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235] Oct. 25 From the Consul at Arica (tel.) From Pershing: Report of conversation with Chilean Commissioner, which indicated Chile’s refusal to recognize authority of Commission or to show sincere attempt to meet its demands.

United States might be in position to assist them to reach an agreement. (Footnote: The same to Embassies in Chile and Peru.) Doc. 242 and Doc. 243] Nov. (117) From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.) Inquiry whether Department wishes steps taken to investigate complaints of Peruvians detained in Santiago against their will.

Nov. 23 To the Consul at Arica (tel.) For Pershing: Suggestion that election rules and regulations be enacted as soon as possible, but that notification be given that compliance with decisions of Commission is expected.

Dec. (126) From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.) Foreign Minister’s regret over publication in Chilean press of articles impugning motives of the Arbitrator and his representatives. (Footnote: Information that last paragraph of Department’s telegram of November 27, concerning campaign of vilification, had been telegraphed to the Ambassador in Chile.)

Doc. 268 and Doc. 269] COLOMBIA AND PERU Date and number Subject Page 1925 To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.) Transmittal of Colombian proposal for settlement of boundary question between Colombia and Brazil, on condition that Brazil withdraw its memorandum protesting against Peru’s ratification of the Colombian-Peruvian boundary treaty of 1922. Instructions to state as personal opinion, in case matter should come up for discussion with Brazilian authorities, that United States might be disposed to use its good offices if Brazil should express readiness to negotiate settlement on basis suggested.

Feb. (10) From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.) Foreign Office acceptance of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as the boundary between Brazil and Colombia.

Feb. 25 To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.) Information that Colombian Minister has received instructions to sign procès-verbal. Instructions to endeavor to have Peruvian Ambassador authorized to sign without delay.

Feb. 28 From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.) President’s disapproval of Foreign Minister’s suggestion for modification in treaty; his promise that draft instructions for Ambassador in Washington would be ready shortly.

instructions authorizing the substitution to be made in one of the modifications specified. portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296] Mar. (21) From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.) Foreign Office opinion that instructions already sent to Chargé are adequate.

Mar. (11) To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.) Information that procès-verbal was signed March 4. Appreciation of Ambassador’s cooperation. (Footnote: The same to the Ambassador in Brazil; first sentence to the Minister in Colombia.)

COSTA RICA AND PANAMA Date and number Subject Page 1925 Jan. 23 (10) To the Minister in Panama (tel.) Information that, as Costa Rican Government has approached United States with a view to delimitation of the boundary between Panama and Costa Rica, the United States would be glad to have Panama appoint its engineer to delimit, in conjunction with those appointed by the arbitrator and by Costa Rica, the boundary as set forth in the arbitral award.

Nov. 10 (21) To the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.) Information concerning a compromise settlement of boundary line which Panama might accept. Inquiry as to what solution, in Minister’s opinion, would be acceptable to Costa Rica, if Panaman proposal is not. (Footnote: Repeated to Panama.)

1926 Jan. From the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.) Costa Rica’s rejection of Fabrega’s counterproposal and of his proposal to postpone the negotiations till May.

ALBANIA RECOGNITION BY THE UNITED STATES OF THE GOVERNMENT OF AHMED ZOGU Date and number Subject Page 1925 Jan. 5 From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Request for instructions as to attitude to be assumed toward the government of Ahmed Zogu, in view of his having been sentenced as one of those responsible for the murder of Coleman and De Long, American citizens, in 1924. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325] Jan. 8 (3) From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Report on possible attitude of other governments toward the government of Ahmed Zogu. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325] Jan. To the Minister in Albania (tel.) Information that Department would not be disposed to withhold recognition because of the charges that Zogu was implicated in the killing of Coleman and De Long. Instructions to maintain informal relations with authorities pending further instructions. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327] Jan. From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Report that in order to clear Zogu officially, the case of the murder of Coleman and De Long is to be reopened. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327] Jan. To the Minister in Albania (tel.) Information that if Minister can secure definite assurances from Zogu that the prosecution will be pressed, Department would consider sending early instructions to accord recognition. Inquiry as to what definite action has been taken by other powers. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, and Doc. 329] Jan. From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Report that the Assembly gave vote of confidence January 19; that all but the American representative sent acknowledgment in reply to official notification of establishment of the republic, which was proclaimed January [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, and Doc. 329] Jan. From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Assertion by Zogu’s government that every possible measure [Pg. includes portions of

has been taken for the arrest and exemplary punishment of those responsible for the murders. Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332] Jan. To the Minister in Albania (tel.) Authorization to extend recognition to the new regime and to acknowledge receipt of official notification of the establishment of the republic. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332] Feb. (10) From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Compliance with Department’s instructions of January 31. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332] RENEWED REPRESENTATIONS BY THE UNITED STATES FOR EQUITABLE TREATMENT OF AMERICAN OIL INTERESTS IN ALBANIA Date and number Subject Page 1925 Feb. To the Minister in Albania (tel.) Information that Standard Oil Co. of New York has received word of renewed activity on the part of the Anglo-Persian Oil Co. in Albania and is disposed to send a representative to Albania if the situation warrants. Instructions to report briefly.

session about 20 days more, the granting of the oil concession will be considered. of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339] Feb. 13 To the Chargé in Albania (tel.) Instructions to make representations, if the situation justifies, to the Albanian Government for the protection of American companies interested in the granting of oil concessions.

petroleum situation as an accomplished fact and proceed to investigate desirability of making further proposals. Report of rumors that Italians have already formed an agreement with the Anglo-Persian Co. of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347] Mar. 10 From the Vice President of the Standard Oil Co. of New York Cable from Mr. Sheffield, March 4 (text printed), reporting Anglo-Persian contract for concession and reporting his own efforts to learn where Anglo-Persian is to choose areas and whether there is a chance for similar concession to Standard Oil Co.

Foreign Minister’s attitude and informal comments, as well as formal reply, indicated that he did not understand seriousness of the situation. Mar. 31 (20) To the Chargé in Albania (tel.) Report from Standard Oil Co. that the granting of third choice has been conditioned upon the payment of a contribution of between $20,000 and $40,000 by the company. Instructions to inform Albanian Government orally of U. S. failure to understand the proposal of such a condition.

APPROVAL BY THE PARLIAMENT OF ALBANIA OF THE AMERICAN-ALBANIAN AGREEMENT EFFECTED BY AN EXCHANGE OF NOTES JUNE 23 AND 25, 1922 Date and number Subject Page

1922 Aug. From the Commissioner in Albania Transmittal of notes exchanged between United States and

AUSTRIA INFORMAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND AUSTRIA FOR CONTINUATION OF RECIPROCAL MOST-FAVORED-NATION TREATMENT IN CUSTOMS MATTERS Date and number Subject Page 1925 June (25) To the Minister in Austria (tel.) Instructions to inquire whether Austrian Foreign Office intends the continuance of most-favored-nation treatment to American commerce pending the conclusion of a treaty of friendship, commerce, and consular rights between the two countries. 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 364] July (45) From the Minister in Austria (tel.) Informal understanding for the continuance of reciprocal most-favored-nation treatment until the conclusion and entry into force of the treaty under negotiation. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

BELGIUM CONVENTION BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND BELGIUM FOR THE PREVENTION OF SMUGGLING OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS, SIGNED DECEMBER 9, 1925 Date and number Subject Page 1925 Sept. To the Belgian Chargé Presentation of a draft liquor convention almost identic with the one concluded with France on June 30, 1924. 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 366] Dec. 9 Convention Between the United States of America and Belgium For the prevention of liquor smuggling into the United States. 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 367]

INTEREST OF THE UNITED STATES IN GERMAN REPARATION PAYMENTS TO BELGIUM Date and number Subject Page 1924 Dec. 4 (118) From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.) Belgian Government’s fear that the British Treasury is seeking to do away with the Belgian priority to German reparation payments, and desire for U. S. assistance in support of the Belgian equities. (Copy to Logan.) [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 368] 1925 Jan. (11) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) For Logan: Assertion that the points on which Belgian priority has been contested have not been made clear. Reference to Belgian debt question, with the statement that the United States must maintain its position of looking to Belgium for payment. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 369] Jan. 11 (32) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) From Logan: Tentative agreement (text printed) providing for reimbursement of Belgian war debt from German reparation payments, with 12 percent as the amount allotted to Belgium on account of its debt to the United States. [Pg. includes portions of Doc.

and Doc. 370] Jan. 13 (32) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) For Herrick, Kellogg, and Logan: Department’s failure to understand differences in percentages as shown in the tentative agreement from those indicated in a previous letter. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 372] Jan. 14 (45) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) From Logan: Article 4 (text printed) of the agreement of January 14 regarding distribution of the Dawes annuities, showing percentages as indicated in the tentative agreement. Information that the 12 percent to be received by Belgium, “by reason of her debt to the United States,” is only tentative and “pending the final settlement;” and that the Belgians agree to turn this money over to the United States on account of their debt to the United States. Suggestion that a letter be obtained from the Belgians which will meet the U. S. angle of the situation and will arrange for form of payments to avoid possible difficulties in foreign exchange. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 372] Jan. 22 (53) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) For Logan: Draft by U. S. Treasury of letter to be obtained from Belgians, as suggested in Ambassador’s telegram No. 45, January 14, and of reply to be made (texts printed). [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 373] Jan. 29 (88) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) From Logan: Belgian suggestions for changes in the proposed letters. [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 374] Feb. (78) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) For Logan: Authorization that the proposed letters be exchanged, with the suggested modifications and further minor insertions, on the basis that it be made clear by an additional letter that the position of the United States as to the Belgian debt is in no way changed. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 375] Feb. 17 From the Unofficial Representative on the Reparation Commission Transmittal of letter received from tire Belgians (text printed) and of Logan’s letters in reply. [Pg. includes portions of Doc.

and Doc. 376] Mar. 31 (140) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) For Hill: U. S. position, to be conveyed to the Belgian Government, that the United States is in no way committed to the decision of the Reparation Commission as to the amount of the debt owed by Belgium to the United States—that this is a question solely between the two Governments. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 377] Apr. (208) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) From Hill: Information that Belgian representative understood perfectly the U. S. position, as communicated in accordance with Department’s instructions. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 378]

BRAZIL DISAPPROVAL BY THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE OF PROPOSED LOANS FROM AMERICAN BANKERS TO THE STATE OF SAO PAULO Date and number Subject Page 1925 Undated Memorandum by Mr. Stokeley W. Morgan, of the Division of Latin American Affairs, of a Conversation With Mr. Earle Bailie, August 18, 1925 Inquiry by Mr. Bailie as to whether the Department would have any objection to a projected loan by his company (J. & W. Seligman & Co.) to the Paulista Institute for the Permanent Defense of Coffee of São Paulo. 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 379] Aug. 21 To Mr. Earle Bailie Department’s inability to approve the proposed loan. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 379, Doc. 380, and Doc. 381] Nov. 4 From Speyer & Co. Inquiry as to Department’s attitude regarding a loan for 25 to 35 million dollars being negotiated with the State of Sao Paulo to finance agricultural and commercial interests. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 379, Doc. 380, and Doc. 381] Nov. 6 To Speyer & Co. Department’s inability to approve the proposed loan, in view of the policy of coffee valorization followed by the authorities of Sao Paulo. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

BULGARIA CONTINUANCE OF AMERICAN CAPITULATORY RIGHTS IN BULGARIA Date and number Subject Page 1924 July (503) From the Minister in Bulgaria Report of French inquiry as to whether the exchange of ratifications of the U. S.-Bulgarian extradition treaty should be taken as an indication of U. S. relinquishment of its capitulatory rights in Bulgaria. [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 383] 1925 Sept. 23 (141) To the Minister in Bulgaria Department’s opinion that no direct relation exists between U. S. capitulatory rights in Bulgaria and the provisions of the extradition treaty. Assertion that Department’s interest in capitulations is limited to securing most-favored-nation treatment for its nationals. Request for Minister’s comments on present situation and attitude of the various capitulatory powers. [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 384] Dec. (743) From the Chargé in Bulgaria Résumé of capitulations in Bulgaria from the Treaty of Berlin of 1878. Attitude of Ministry of Foreign Affairs that capitulations no longer exist. Information that the attitude of Great Britain, France, and Italy is more or less conciliatory; that at present American citizens in Bulgaria receive the same treatment as that accorded the nationals of other countries. Opinion that best policy for United States would be to hold capitulatory rights in reserve against either the possible defense of a national or to use for some commercial preference. [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 385]

CANADA EXTRADITION CONVENTION BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA APPLYING TO OFFENSES AGAINST LAWS FOR THE SUPPRESSION OF TRAFFIC IN NARCOTICS Date and number Subject Page 1925 Jan. Convention Between the United States of America and Great Britain in Respect of the Dominion of Canada For enlarging the list of crimes on account of which extradition may be granted under previous conventions between the two countries. 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386] BOUNDARY TREATY BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA Date and number Subject Page 1925 Feb. Treaty Between the United States of America and Great Britain in Respect of the Dominion of Canada To define more accurately, to complete, and to maintain the demarcation of the boundary between the United States and Canada. 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 387] CONVENTION AND PROTOCOL BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA TO REGULATE THE LEVEL OF THE LAKE OF THE WOODS Date and number Subject Page 1925 Feb. Convention Between the United States of America and Great Britain in Respect of the Dominion of Canada To regulate the level of the Lake of the Woods. 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388] Feb. 24 Protocol Accompanying the convention to regulate the level of the Lake of the Woods. 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389] Feb. 24 Agreement Accompanying the convention and protocol to regulate the level of the Lake of the Woods. 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390] CONTINUED PROTESTS BY THE CANADIAN GOVERNMENT AGAINST INCREASED DIVERSION OF THE WATERS OF THE GREAT LAKES

Date and number Subject Page 1925 Feb. 13 To the British Ambassador Transmittal of notice issued by the Secretary of War, February 10 (text printed), of a hearing to be held on February 20 on an application made by the Sanitary District of Chicago for a permit to divert an annual average of 10,000 cubic feet of water per second from Lake Michigan.

permits will actually be to authorize a greater diversion than is now being made cannot be confirmed.

INTIMATION BY THE CANADIAN GOVERNMENT OF ITS CLAIM TO SOVEREIGNTY IN THE ISLANDS OF THE NORTH Date and number Subject Page 1925 June (627) From the British Chargé Information of Canadian Government’s readiness to lend assistance of Canadian officers in the far North and posts of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to proposed MacMillan scientific expedition, and to furnish the necessary permits for entering Canadian northern territories. 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 398] June 19 To the British Chargé Route of proposed expedition; request for information as to what constitutes a post of the Royal Mounted Police, where such posts have been established, whether they are permanently occupied, and if so, by whom. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400] July (676) From the British Chargé Information regarding posts and duties of the Royal Mounted Police. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400] July 18 To the British Chargé Promise of reply to the Chargé’s notes of June 15 and July 2 when necessary study of the matter has been completed. (Footnote: Information that apparently no further reply was made to these British notes.) [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, and Doc. 402] REGULATIONS TO GIVE EFFECT TO THE CONVENTION OF JUNE 6, 1924, BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA FOR THE SUPPRESSION OF SMUGGLING Date and number Subject Page 1925 Sept. 19 Executive Order No. 4306 Approving regulations to give effect to the smuggling convention of June 6, 1924, between the United States and Great Britain in respect of Canada. 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, and Doc. 402]

CHILE DISINCLINATION OF THE UNITED STATES TO GRANT ASYLUM DURING REVOLUTIONARY CRISIS IN CHILE Date and number Subject Page 1925 Jan.

constitutional convention is to be called and political prisoners released. Feb. (19) From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.) Request of a religious order for protection for its property in Chile, on the ground that the title is in the name of an American citizen. Desire for instructions. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410] Feb. To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.) Instructions not to extend protection if the property mentioned is actually owned by the order and only the title is recorded in name of the American citizen; otherwise, to inform Department as to particulars. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412] Mar. 19 (11) To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.) Instructions that upon Alessandri’s resumption of office, formal relations may be maintained with him. (Footnote: Alessandri’s resumption of office on March 20.) [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

CHINA RENEWAL OF CIVIL WAR IN NORTH CHINA AND REFUSAL BY THE UNITED STATES TO LEND ITSELF TO A POLICY OF INTERVENTION Date and number Subject Page 1925 Jan.

(text printed), setting forth questions as to various details of the proposal, and requesting consul general to consult with Admiral McVay and send information requested. Jan. (29) From the Minister in China (tel.) Message from Admiral McVay (extract printed) that the force available for protection of the International Concession at Shanghai is considered by senior naval officers to be sufficient; that American sailors have been cleared of any responsibility in the shooting of the Chinese previously reported.

Jan. (56) From the Minister in China (tel.) Radiogram from Admiral McVay, January 30 (text printed), reporting that a detachment of Chang Tso-lin’s army has arrived in Shanghai and taken charge, and that Chang is now master of the eastern section of North China from Harbin to Shanghai.

Mar. (309) From the British Ambassador Information that the British Government has instructed its Ambassador in Tokyo to inquire of the Japanese Government whether it would desire to make any proposals with a view to international consultation or the use of diplomatic pressure upon the rival Chinese groups to prevent the hostilities now threatened. Request for U. S. views.

Doc. 435 and Doc. 436] May (179) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Report of mobilization of Feng forces, and other circumstances which make clash between Chang and Feng appear more imminent.

portions of Doc. 442, Doc.

Nov. (502) From the Minister in China (tel.) Information that telegram No. 497, November 25, was partially erroneous, as Chang Tso-lin is still in control at Mukden.

Dec. (528) From the Minister in China (tel.) Aide-mémoire (text printed) to be presented to the Chief Executive by the Ministers of the protocol powers, urging measures to bring about free communication between Peking and Tientsin in accordance with the protocol of 1901.

May (91) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Department’s feeling that it is impractical to consider in connection with the presentation of credentials, the qualifications which may have been attached to the recognition of the Peking regime in December 1924, in view of the relations that the powers are actually maintaining with that regime.

475 and Doc. 476] July (266) From the Chargé in China (tel.) From MacMurray: Arrival in Peking, July 7.

printed) stating the recognition of Karakhan as dean of the diplomatic corps for ceremonial purposes. portions of Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482] Apr. 25 (172) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Request for instructions as to attitude to be adopted in respect of relations with Karakhan as dean of the diplomatic body.

commercial type cannot legally be detained in transit to the Far East. Request for U. S. views as to possibility of U. S. pressure on the French Government to stop this traffic. portions of Doc.

and volunteers; increase of immediate need for additional war vessels; extensive spread of strike among workmen. Doc. and Doc. 494] June 3 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Resolutions passed by various meetings held on June 2; circulation of propaganda advocating extension of the strike to the public utilities and workmen indispensable to foreigners. [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 495] June 4 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Further spread of the strike. [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497] June 4 To the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Department’s desire that all needful measures be taken to prevent the further spread of trouble and to protect American lives and property. [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497] June (202) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Demonstrations by students in Peking, upholding certain demands against foreigners in connection with the Shanghai incident. [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 498] June (203) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Note handed to the Chinese Foreign Office by the Senior Minister (text printed) specifying the circumstances under which the police were led to the use of arms in the Shanghai disturbance of May 30; and expressing the hope that the Chinese Government will regard the incident with a conciliatory spirit pending the reestablishment of order. Information that Karakhan has addressed a note of sympathy to the Waichiaopu regarding the Shanghai incident. [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 499] June 4 From the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Italian Minister in China, Senior Minister Protest that alleged violent attitude of the authorities of the International Concession at Shanghai has resulted in gravest [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc.

consequences, notably general strikes; request for urgent instructions to the consular authorities that firing cease. and Doc. 500] June (204) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Karakhan’s note of sympathy to the Chinese Foreign Office (text printed). Information that Karakhan has transmitted to the Heads of Legation a telegram of protest received by him from the Shanghai Union of Teachers. [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 501] June (6320–

June 9 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Report that trial of the rioters is proceeding. Consul general’s proposal that he support at the consular body meeting the appointment of an international foreign mission to investigate actions of the police on May 30 and that a Chinese representative be invited to watch the proceedings. [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 507] June 10 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Report that conditions have improved since June 3 and 4 except in regard to the strike, which is spreading. [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 508] June 10 To the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Suggestion concerning the advisability of consultation with the diplomatic body and with its commission of investigation before considering the appointment of an international foreign mission of investigation, so that a duplication of effort may be avoided. [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 509] June 11 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Improvement of general conditions but no perceptible subsiding of strike. Information from Admiral McVay that naval vessels have been stationed at practically every treaty port. [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511] June 12 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Telegram to the Legation (text printed) reporting that Mixed Court trial of rioters was completed June 11, with extreme leniency shown to the accused. [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511] June (107) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Information that press articles appearing in United States which suggest the existence of a plot by European powers and Japan to draw United States into action oppressive of China in order to further their own interests, have received no sanction whatever from the Department. (Instructions to repeat to Tokyo and Shanghai.) [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513] June (217) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Note from the Waichiaopu to the Senior Minister, June 11, criticizing action of the Settlement authorities; reply drafted by [Pg. 664 includes portions of

Heads of Legation stating that diplomatic delegation at Shanghai has been instructed to consider with the consular body and Chinese delegates the best means to remedy the distressing situation, and recalling to the Chinese Government its grave responsibility for maintaining order throughout China. Opinions of Chang Tso-lin and Feng Yu-hsiang regarding Shanghai disturbances. Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513] June (225) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Report from the consul at Shanghai that part of defense forces have been withdrawn, owing to improved situation. [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 514] June (112) From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) Information that the purport of telegram No. 107, June 12, to Peking, has been conveyed to the Foreign Minister, who expressed gratification. [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 516] June (237) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Inability of diplomatic delegation at Shanghai to reach an agreement with the Chinese Government delegates in respect of the Shanghai incidents; departure of the delegation for Peking. Decision of Heads of Legation to constitute the Italian and the French Ministers and the U. S. Chargé^ as a committee to negotiate with the Chinese Government for settlement of the incidents and, if so agreed by the Governments concerned, for a reorganization of the International Settlement and the administration of justice in the Settlement. [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 516] June (238) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Chinese Government’s preference for Shanghai as the place for negotiations; desire of Heads of Legation, conveyed to the Foreign Minister, that negotiations be held in Peking. [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 517] June (242) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram from the consul general at Shanghai, June 22 (text printed), reporting belief that there will be no relaxation in strike until June 26; also that no practical assistance for maintaining order has yet been received from Chang Tso-lin. [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 519] June (Circular 187 bis) From the Italian Minister in China, Senior Minister, to the American Chargé Note from the Waichiaopu, June 24 (text printed), submitting the [Pg. 670 includes portions of

13 demands formulated by the Chinese delegation at Shanghai and the Chinese views concerning treaty revision, for consideration during the forthcoming negotiations at Peking. Doc. and Doc. 519] June (252) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram from the consul general at Shanghai, June 26 (text printed), reporting the reopening of all Chinese banks and most shops. [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521] July (255) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Opinion of Heads of Legation, conveyed to the Foreign Minister, that the Chinese Government’s 13 points cannot seriously be considered as basis for negotiations. Suggested possibility of referring settlement of the Shanghai incidents to the Permanent Court of International Justice in conjunction with the League of Nations. [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521] July (257) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Instructions from the Heads of Legation to the senior consul at Shanghai to be communicated to the Municipal Council (text printed), containing recommendations for revision of the police regulations of the International Settlement and for the replacement of Colonel McEuen, commissioner of police, because of negligence in connection with the incident of May 30. [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 522] July (129) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Department’s desire that in the negotiations for settlement of the Shanghai incidents, every effort be made to see that the Chinese point of view receives fair and just consideration. [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 524] July (262) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Request from the consular body at Shanghai, acceded to by Heads of Legation, for a delay until July 6 in presentation to the Municipal Council of the decisions of the Heads of Legation described in telegram No. 257, July 2. Intention to communicate the decisions to the Chinese Government and to the press on July [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 524] July (264) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Information that British Government has instructed its Chargé to cause suspension of communication of decisions of the Heads of Legation to the Chinese Government and to the press, pending further instructions. [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525,

and Doc. 526] July (133) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Instructions to refrain from joining any move to refer to the Permanent Court of International Justice or to the League of Nations any question in which U. S. Government is concerned, as United States is not a member of either body. [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526] July (684) From the British Chargé British Government’s instructions to its Chargé in Peking to satisfy himself, before taking any further action, that the decisions of the diplomatic body will not meet with any effective resistance from the Municipal Council of Shanghai, and that the U. S. and Japanese representatives have been officially authorized to make the proposed communications to the Chinese Government and to the press. Hope that the U. S. Chargé will be given similar instructions. [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 527] July (267) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Information that the decisions of the Heads of Legation have been transmitted to the Municipal Council. Displeasure among certain members of the diplomatic body, particularly the French Minister, over action of British Government as described in telegram No. 264, July 6. Compromise suggested by U. S. Chargé, and ultimately agreed upon, whereby the Municipal Council would be allowed to take the proposed action as on its own initiative, announcing that such action followed discussion with the consular body and approval by the representatives of the powers concerned at Peking; identic telegram in this sense to the U. S., British, and Japanese consuls at Shanghai. [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 528] July (268) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Refusal of the Municipal Council of Shanghai to accede to the conclusions of the diplomatic representatives; no reply to the identic telegram to the U. S., British, and Japanese consuls. Identic telegram from the Heads of Legation to their respective governments (text printed) requesting authorization to undertake, if necessary, negotiations for the modification of existing land regulations in the International Settlement. [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 529] July (271) From the Chargé in China (tel.) French Minister’s statement of his inability to continue as a member of the diplomatic commission delegated by the Heads of [Pg. 683 includes portions of

Legation to negotiate in their behalf with the Chinese authorities for the settlement of the Shanghai incident. Doc. and Doc. 530] July (146) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Authorization as requested in the identic telegram described in Chargé’s telegram No. 268, July 10. [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532] July (217) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) British Government’s proposed telegram to its Chargé in Peking (text printed), expressing opinion that a public judicial inquiry should be held in regard to the Shanghai incident, and suggesting a communication from the diplomatic body to the Municipal Council in this sense; and stating that pending the result of this inquiry the police commissioner should be suspended without prejudice. Hope of the British Government that similar instructions may be sent to the representatives at Peking of the United States, France, and Japan. [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532] July (159) To the Minister in China (tel.) Request for comments on the British proposal. [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 533] July (282) From the Minister in China (tel.) Recommendation that the United States accede to the British proposal with a qualification that the commission of inquiry should include a Chinese jurist. [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 534] July (236) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Instructions to inform the British Government that the United States is prepared to acquiesce in its proposal for the holding of a judicial inquiry provided the proposed commission shall include a Chinese jurist of high standing. [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 535] July (236) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) British Government’s approval of the suggestion that the proposed commission include a Chinese jurist. [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc.

and Doc. 537] Aug. 3 To the British Chargé Acknowledgment of the British Chargé’s note No. 684, of July 7, and assertion that since receipt of the note the situation has been altered by the proposal for a judicial inquiry. [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 537] Aug. (245) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Foreign Office note (extract printed) stating that the French, Japanese, and Italian Governments have agreed in principle to the establishment of a judicial inquiry, and requesting U. S. support in British efforts to obtain cooperation of certain other countries. [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539] Aug. (248) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Information that the U. S. representatives in certain European capitals have been instructed to support their British colleagues as requested by the British Government. [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539] Aug. (192) To the Minister in China (tel.) Chinese Minister’s statement to the Secretary that his Government could not see any need for the proposed judicial inquiry into the Shanghai matter. [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 541] Aug. (319) From the Minister in China (tel.) Review of the critical situation in China, including Foreign Minister’s objection to a judicial inquiry; British draft document for constitution of the commission of inquiry, which, in Minister’s opinion, confuses functions of inquiry with political considerations; and continued agitations at Shanghai. Recommendation of a plan of action to be urged upon the British Government, to consist of: (1) Immediate acceptance of Colonel McEuen’s resignation; (2) opening of negotiations with the Chinese Government; (3) holding of judicial inquiry, if insisted upon, to be limited to finding of facts. [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 541] Aug. (322) From the Minister in China (tel.) Telegram from Shanghai, August 7 (text printed), reporting [Pg. 695 includes portions of

decision of the naval authorities that the landing forces, except to guard public utilities, will be withdrawn on August 10. Doc. and Doc. 542] Aug. (197) To the Minister in China (tel.) Approval of Minister’s proposed plan of action as set forth in telegram No. 319, August 8; authorization to discuss the matter with the Japanese Minister. Information that the Embassy at London is being instructed to take the matter up with the Foreign Office. [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and Doc. 544] Aug. (257) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Foreign Office note (text printed), in reply to U. S. Ambassador’s informal note, objecting to the acceptance of McEuen’s resignation, but recommending that he be suspended by the Municipal Council pending outcome of the inquiry; agreeing to the immediate opening of negotiations with the Chinese Government; and agreeing to certain modification of its draft terms of reference in order to proceed with the judicial inquiry. [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and Doc. 544] Aug. (272) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Opinion of the Minister in China that McEuen’s resignation is necessary. Authorization to communicate this view to the British Government and to express the hope that it may be able to reconsider its position in this regard. [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 545] Aug. (354) From the Minister in China (tel.) Information that it now appears that the British Government desires that even McEuen’s suspension should not be put into effect or announced until immediately before the commission of inquiry convenes. [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 545, Doc. 546, and Doc. 547] Aug. (274) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Conversation with Sir Austen Chamberlain, in which he expressed desire of British Government to act in concert with the United States and Japan; fear of certain complications, however, if McEuen’s resignation is permitted before a public inquiry has been made. [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 545, Doc. 546, and Doc. 547] Aug. (362) From the Minister in China (tel.) Telegram from Shanghai (text printed) reporting cancelation of the state of emergency and reembarkation of all U. S. landing forces. [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 547,

Doc. 548, and Doc. 549] Aug. (364) From the Minister in China (tel.) Recommendation, in reply to Department’s request for comments and suggestions, that British Government be informed that in order to avoid an indefinite delay in settlement of the Shanghai affair, the United States will not insist upon McEuen’s resignation before the inquiry but feels that assurances should be given that he will be retired in the event of his vindication by the inquiry. [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549] Aug. (282) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Instructions to convey to the British Government the U. S. position as recommended by the Minister in China, together with the understanding that McEuen’s suspension will be arranged to take effect as soon as possible without awaiting the commencement of the judicial inquiry. [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 550] Sept. (278) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Information that the Foreign Office will instruct the British Chargé at Peking to cooperate with his U. S. colleague in accord with Department’s position as stated in telegram No. 282, August [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 552] Sept. (379) From the Minister in China (tel.) Formula drafted by the U. S. Minister, Japanese Minister, and British Chargé (extract printed), based upon the British Foreign Office draft for the terms of reference to judicial inquiry of the matters related to the Shanghai incident. Request for authorization to sign the formula, if satisfactory to Department. [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 552] Sept. (283) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Instructions to inform Foreign Office that the United States would consider acceptable a definite pledge from it as suggested by the British Chargé in China, to the effect that the British Government would, if necessary, at the close of the judicial inquiry, exert its influence to bring about McEuen’s retirement. [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 553] Sept. (232) To the Minister in China (tel.) Department’s approval of the formula transmitted in telegram No. 379, September 4, and authorization to sign it or any modification thereof importing no substantial alteration. [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 554, Doc. 555, and Doc. 556]

Sept. (385) From the Minister in China (tel.) Acceptance of terms of reference by interested colleagues, with certain modifications. Assertion that action awaits selection of American and Japanese judges. [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 554, Doc. 555, and Doc. 556] Sept. (238) To the Minister in China (tel.) Information that Associate Justice E. Finley Johnson, of the Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands, will be named as the American judge to serve on the commission of inquiry at Shanghai. [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 554, Doc. 555, and Doc. 556] Sept. (389) From the Minister in China (tel.) Letter received from the British Chargé transmitting British Government’s pledge in regard to McEuen’s retirement. Inquiry if assurance is satisfactory. [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 558] Sept. (241) To the Minister in China (tel.) Instructions to inform the British Chargé that the assurance given is satisfactory, and that the Minister is ready to proceed with negotiations with the Chinese Government regarding the Shanghai incident. [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 558] Sept. (Circular 259) From the Netherlands Minister in China, Senior Minister, to the American Minister Telegram from the senior consul at Shanghai stating that the Municipal Council confirms its agreement to conform to the conclusions of the judicial commission and to suspend the commissioner of police before the first meeting of the commission. Letter to the Chinese Foreign Minister (text printed) transmitting a certified copy of the terms of reference for the commission of inquiry. [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 559] Oct. (Circular 273) From the Netherlands Minister in China, Senior Minister, to the American Minister Note from the Chinese Foreign Minister, October 2 (text printed), stating that the Chinese Government maintains its attitude that a judicial inquiry is unnecessary and will only involve a waste of time. [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 560]

Oct. (431) From the Minister in China (tel.) First meeting of commission of inquiry, October 7. Telegram from Johnson, October 7 (text printed), reporting adjournment of sessions until October 12 to enable all parties to prepare their evidence; stating that apparently the Chinese witnesses will not appear; and asking if the inquiry should proceed. Minister’s reply that the inquiry should proceed. (Footnote: Personnel of the commission.) [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 561] Oct. (435) From the Minister in China (tel.) Telegram from Johnson (text printed) reporting the existence of general opposition to the inquiry. [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 562] Oct. (291) To the Minister in China (tel.) Instructions to inform Johnson that he is free to take any necessary action to bring out facts and truth, even though this should compel him to make a minority report. [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565] Oct. (446) From the Minister in China (tel.) Telegram from Johnson (text printed) stating that a minority report is imminent. [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565] Oct. (467) From the Minister in China (tel.) Message from Johnson reading, “Court has finished inquiry and I will make report in 6 to 10 days.” [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565] Nov. (492) From the Minister in China (tel.) Summary of Johnson’s report, with list of the three concluding recommendations; comment that the report exceeds the terms of reference, as it gives conclusions and recommendations beyond the scope of the inquiry. Minister’s opinion that it is unfortunate that dicta of a controversial political nature should be contained in a judicial finding intended to be published at this time. [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 566]

Nov. (324) To the Minister in China (tel.) Department’s surprise that Johnson took up matters outside the scope of the inquiry. Request for information as to whether matters of the same general nature are also dealt with in reports of the other judges. [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 567] Nov. (498) From the Minister in China (tel.) Information that the British and Japanese judges in their reports keep within the limits of the terms of reference. [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 567, Doc. 568, and Doc. 569] Nov. (500) From the Minister in China (tel.) Telegram to Shanghai (text printed) quoting message of the U. S., British, and Japanese Ministers to their respective consuls in Shanghai which outlined the differences in the findings of the judicial commission and suggested the desirability of certain action by the Municipal Council, including the offer of generous compensation to the victims of the Shanghai incident, and the devising of ways of dispensing with the services of the police commissioner and the officers actually involved in the incident. [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 567, Doc. 568, and Doc. 569] Dec. (355) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Résumé of information contained in telegram No. 500, November 27, from the Minister in China. Authorization to state to the Foreign Office that, while it is regrettable that the commission should have disagreed in its findings, the U. S. Government feels that it would be disastrous at present to suppress, edit, or delay the publication of the findings of the judicial commission. (Footnote: Authorization to Ambassador in Japan to repeat substantially the same views to the Japanese Foreign Office.) [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 570] Dec. (525) From the Minister in China (tel.) Authorization by the diplomatic body for certain Ministers to suggest to the Municipal Council the adoption of measures to settle the affair of May 30, namely, the resignation of the responsible police officers and the offer of reasonable amounts to the Chinese victims. [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 571] Dec. (538) From the Minister in China (tel.) Withdrawal of objections by Japan to the publication of the reports. Adoption by the Municipal Council of the suggestions outlined by the diplomatic body. [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc.

and Doc. 573] Dec. (540) From the Minister in China (tel.) Information that the interested Ministers have authorized the Senior Minister to release to the press on December 23 certain documents relative to the judicial inquiry, and that publication of full texts of the reports will follow in due course. (Footnote: Minister’s report, January 22, 1926, that texts of the reports were to be released to the press on January 23.) [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 573] SPREAD OF ANTIFOREIGN DISTURBANCES IN CHINA Date and number Subject Page 1925 Jan. 12 (15) From the Minister in China (tel.) Article in Shanghai conservative press declaring that a serious wave of antiforeign and anti-Christian feeling is sweeping across China. Information from the consul general at Shanghai, in reply to the Minister’s inquiry, that missionaries and educators have received reports from interior correspondents concerning anti- Christian move.

June (207) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram from the consul at Amoy (text printed) reporting student demonstration and strong feeling against Japanese and British.

June 15 (228) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Consideration by Heads of Legation of an offer from Chang Tsolin to send 10,000 soldiers to Peking to restore order; Chargé’s statement that the acceptance of such aid might compromise U. S. neutrality; similar expression by the British Chargé. Decision by Heads of Legation to reply to Chang in the affirmative, however, not opposed by U. S. and British representatives, but formula (text printed) worded in such a way as probably not to compromise neutrality.

June 19 (235) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Message from consul at Chungking (text printed) stating that no reports have yet been received justifying advice to Americans to be in readiness to leave.

members being allied with Yunnan and Kwangsi military groups, and the radicals, including the present civil administration, with Cantonese troops and Russian-trained volunteers. 598 and Doc. 599] June (195) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram from the consul general at Canton, June 1 (text printed), reporting local conditions critical, with every indication of the Government’s intention to fight, despite its denial that it is Communist.

accept the Kuomintang’s advice rather than that of Chang Tsolin. Aug. 24 (347) From the Minister in China (tel.) Substance of two telegrams from Canton reporting the assassination on August 20 of Liao Chung-hoi, head of the local radical movement.

suggesting a statement as to U. S. attitude regarding the safe conduct of U. S. vessels, and possible protest against the placing of mines. Request for authorization to approve the consul general’s recommendations.

Date and number Subject Page 1925 June 19 (236) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram from the consul general at Canton, June 18 (text printed), reporting the imminence of a general strike against foreigners and the consul general’s warning to American women and children to leave.

June 28 From the Consul General at Canton (tel.) Recommendation that the Department suggest to Great Britain and France that an international commission be created and that the Canton affair be dealt with separately from Peking.

defense of Shameen unless specifically requested to do so by the naval authorities of the countries concerned. Doc. 632 and Doc. 633] Oct. 16 (304) From the Consul General at Canton to the Minister in China Improvement in general attitude toward Americans, but conditions still too unsettled to advise American women and children to return.

June (249) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Identic telegram from the representatives of the Washington Conference powers to their respective Governments (text printed) requesting instructions with reference to the Chinese Government’s identic note of June 24. Chargé’s opinion that the reply, while reaffirming the principles and policies of the Washington Conference, should indicate the practical difficulties involved and the necessity for facing facts. (Telegram repeated to Tokyo.) [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 638] June (116) From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) Agreement with views of the Chargé in China; feeling that the Chinese proposal should be neither rebuffed nor received in such a manner as to convey an impression that the powers are yielding under pressure. [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 639] July (125) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Department’s opinion that the reply to the Chinese proposal should express a willingness to consider sympathetically the modification of existing treaties in measure as the Chinese authorities demonstrate their willingness and ability to fulfill their obligations to protect foreign rights. U. S. desire also to expedite preparations for the special conference on the Chinese customs tariff and for the despatch of the Commission on Extraterritoriality, said commission to be requested to make recommendations for a definite program to be followed. [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 640] Undated Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs Statement by the Secretary, in conversations with the Chinese Minister, June 30 and July 1, that the United States would be willing to urge upon the other interested powers the hastening of the calling of the conference on tariff matters, and also the sending of the Commission on Extraterritoriality. [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 641] July (677) From the British Chargé Opinion of the British Government that the powers should indicate an unwillingness to discuss particular reforms or to review treaty relations until order has been restored and the Chinese Government has evidenced its determination to repress antiforeign agitations and enforce protection of foreigners; unfavorable attitude toward a promise to expedite the meeting of the Commission on Extraterritoriality. [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 642] July (263) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Conversation with the Japanese Minister in regard to settlement of the Shanghai affair; belief of the Japanese Minister that his [Pg. 771 includes portions of

Government contemplates a larger cooperation between the U. S., British, and Japanese Governments with respect to China than merely cooperation regarding the Shanghai affair. Doc. and Doc. 643] July (134) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram dated July 4 from Mahlon F. Perkins, on special mission in London (text printed), conveying opinion of British Foreign Office official that it would be preferable to concentrate efforts on the early convening of the special conference on Chinese customs tariff rather than upon meeting of the extraterritoriality commission. [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 644] July (682) From the British Chargé British Government’s sympathy with the U. S. aims as set forth in Department’s telegram No. 125, July 1, to the Chargé in China; doubt expressed, however, as to the wisdom of laying down such definite terms of reference for the Commission on Extraterritoriality as those suggested by the Department. [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 645] July (683) From the British Chargé Proposal of a joint declaration (text printed) to be made publicly by the treaty powers in reply to the Chinese note of June 24. Inquiry as to U. S. attitude. [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 646] July 10 From the Secretary to the President (Sanders) to the Acting Secretary of State President’s opinion that the Secretary of State should cooperate as far as possible with the other interested powers, using great care not to have China think there is a division of counsel. [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 647] July (270) From the Chargé in China (tel.) From Mac Murray: Opinion that, in the face of the present agitation against foreign treaty rights, a strict adherence to the Washington Conference program is the only safe road. [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 648] July (124) From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) Foreign Office views of the primary importance of complete accord between the United States, Great Britain, and Japan. Information that the Japanese position will be defined shortly. [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 649]

July 13 To the British Chargé U. S. accord with British opinion that China must be impressed with the necessity of giving concrete evidence of its ability to suppress disorders and protect foreigners; feeling, however, that existing conditions in China can best be met by consistent and scrupulous observance by the powers of the obligations undertaken by them at the Washington Conference. Further exposition of U. S. attitude on the instructions to be given the Commission on Extraterritoriality. Opinion that the present is not an opportune moment for a joint public declaration such as proposed by the British Government in its note No. 683, July 7. (Footnote: Substance repeated to the representatives in Japan, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, and Portugal.) [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 650] Undated From the Japanese Embassy Memorandum presented July 16 stating willingness of the Japanese Government to support a policy looking toward a readjustment of treaty relations in China conjointly with the other powers, provided the Chinese Government shows a determination to carry out its obligations and provided certain questions are settled. [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 651] July (277) From the Minister in China (tel.) Opinion that the United States should welcome any offer from the British and Japanese to work as far as possible in harmony with them, but should carefully avoid any commitments or obligations which might hinder the maintenance of U. S. policies and views regarding China. [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 652] July (157) To the Minister in China (tel.) Secretary’s concurrence in the Minister’s opinion as to the attitude that should be taken by the United States; view that there should be no agreement with the powers whereby the U. S. general policy would be varied. Request for views as to the desirability of a separate note in reply to the Chinese note of June [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 654] July (701) From the British Chargé British Government’s opinion that it would be inadvisable to delay acquainting China with attitude of the powers. Outline of the statements which the British Government feels should be contained in the reply to the Chinese Government. [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 654] July (702) From the British Chargé Amendments suggested by the Japanese Government to the joint [Pg. 790 includes portions of

declaration proposed by the British Government; British approval of the amendments. Doc. and Doc. 655] July (703) From the British Chargé Italian proposal that the identic reply by the powers to the Chinese note of June 24 should embody and itself constitute the public declaration previously suggested by the British Government. [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 656] Undated [Rec’d July 21] From the Japanese Embassy Japanese draft of the proposed joint declaration in reply to the Chinese note of June 24. [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 657] July 23 To the British Chargé Assertion that the only point of difference among the powers appears to be in regard to the precise phraseology of the reply to the Chinese representations. Opinion that, as a matter of practical policy, it would be preferable to convey fair warning to the Chinese Government of its responsibility for the preservation of order and other matters rather than to make complete restoration of order a condition precedent to a discussion of reforms and treaty relations. U. S. draft reply (text printed). (Footnote: Countries to which text of the draft reply was telegraphed.) [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 658] July (165) To the Minister in China (tel.) Communication of text of the U. S. draft reply, with instructions to use it as a basis for discussion with the representatives of the other interested powers. (Instructions to repeat to Tokyo.) [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 659] July (292) From the Minister in China (tel.) Suggestion of certain changes in wording of the U. S. draft, particularly in the paragraph dealing with tariff revisions. Recommendation that if it should prove impossible to obtain almost immediate concurrence in an identic note based upon U. S. draft, the United States should send its own note and let the others reply as they see fit to the Chinese note of June 24. [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 660] July (293) From the Minister in China (tel.) Analysis of tentative impressions regarding the situation in China, with particular reference to the growing nationalism and the consequent difficulty of maintaining special treaty rights in China. [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 661]

July (170) To the Minister in China (tel.) Comment on the Minister’s suggested changes in wording of the U. S. draft reply to the Chinese note of June 24, and approval of his recommendation as set forth in telegram No. 292, July 27. [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 662] July (300) From the Minister in China (tel.) Further expression of opinion, in connection with the wording of the U. S. draft, that the phrase “tariff autonomy” ought not to be used, and that the wording of the sentence in question is not clear as it stands; suggestion of substitute wording. [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 664] July (301) From the Minister in China (tel.) Conversation with the Japanese Minister, in which he suggested the establishment of a close working relationship between the U. S., British, and Japanese Legations, looking toward a more definite leadership by those powers having the greatest responsibilities and interests in China. [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 664] July (173) To the Minister in China (tel.) Instructions for wording of the passage in the U. S. draft regarding the tariff, so that the U. S. position will be clear. [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 665] July (723) From the British Chargé Information that, as the U. S. draft differs so radically from the Anglo-Japanese text, the British representative in China has been authorized to discuss the two texts with the U. S. Minister and his other colleagues in the hope of combining both in a new agreed text. British disapproval of the statement in the U. S. draft with regard to the Extraterritorial Commission, and objection to the term “tariff autonomy.” [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 666] Aug. (180) To the Minister in China (tel.) Secretary’s conversation with the Japanese Ambassador, who indicated Japanese disagreement with U. S. proposal to make reference in the powers’ note to China to the questions of extending the scope of the tariff conference and also of tariff autonomy. Secretary’s reiteration of U. S. position and explanation of the phraseology which will be acceptable to the United States and which it is hoped will meet the objections of the Japanese Government. [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 667]

Aug. (306) From the Minister in China (tel.) Conversation with the Japanese Minister, who expressed his Government’s difficulty in assenting to the U. S. draft insofar as it conveys a formal promise to consider tariff autonomy at the special conference. U. S. Minister’s personal view that it would be tactically unsound to announce publicly at this time a readiness to go beyond the terms of the Washington Conference provisions for the special conference. Request for instructions. [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 668] Aug. (181) To the Minister in China (tel.) Readiness of the British Government, as well as the U. S. Government, to extend the scope of the tariff conference. Summary of British note No. 723, of July 30. [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 669] Aug. (142) From the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Statement of the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs that for the present the Japanese Government are not prepared to go beyond the terms of the Washington Conference in any discussion with the Chinese Government; his reiteration of Japanese desire to work with U. S. and British Governments in meeting the present situation, and assertion that the Washington Conference provided a basis upon which all agreed. [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 670] Aug. (311) From the Minister in China (tel.) Suggested modifications in the U. S. draft to meet what the Minister understands to be the British views. [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 671] Aug. 5 To the British Chargé Reply to the British note No. 723, of July 30, pointing out an apparent misinterpretation by the British Government of the statement in the U. S. draft with respect to the Extraterritorial Commission. [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 672] Aug. 6 To the British Chargé Information that the Department, desiring to meet the British point of view, has authorized the U. S. Minister in China to make certain changes in the text of the U. S. draft. Hope that with these amendments the British Government will find itself able to accept the American draft. [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 673] Aug. (193) To the Minister in China (tel.) Information as to the comments of various Governments in regard to the U. S. draft note to the Chinese Government: Concurrence of Belgium and the Netherlands in U. S. views; Italian agreement in principle with the essential points of the U. S. draft; French preference for the Japanese draft, considering the U. S. draft too mild in tone and the British perhaps too sharp. [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 674]

Aug. 11 (151) From the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Foreign Minister’s assertion that, so far as the Extraterritorial Commission is concerned, he is in substantial agreement with the American point of view; that concerning tariff, Japan could not go beyond the terms of existing treaties or the Washington Conference engagements. [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 675] Aug. 11 (738) From the British Chargé British concurrence in U. S. view regarding the Extraterritorial Commission as explained in the Secretary’s note of August 5, and willingness to adopt the new U. S. draft as a basis for an identic reply to the Chinese Government. [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 676] Aug. 19 (753) From the British Chargé Indications that the Japanese Government may be inclined to question the inclusion of Chinese tariff autonomy in the agenda of the forthcoming conference, thus causing divergence of view among the powers and consequent delay in replying to the Chinese note. British willingness to concur if the United States and Japan agree to omit mention of the tariff or agree on a compromise formula. [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 677] Aug. 22 To the British Chargé Information that the Japanese Government is willing to accept the U. S. modified draft with an amendment; U. S. willingness to accept the Japanese change provided it is acceptable to the other powers. Transmittal of the U. S. proposed draft embodying the modifications offered by the British and Japanese Governments. [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 678] Aug. 26 (766) From the British Chargé Information that, while in the opinion of the British Government the American draft embodying the British and Japanese modifications is not wholly suitable for an identic note, the British representative at Peking has been instructed to confer with his U. S. colleague with a view to reaching a definite agreement. [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680] Aug. 26 (353) From the Minister in China (tel.) Agreement reached with interested colleagues on a number of amendments to the draft note, all of which are matters of mere form. Information that certain of the representatives must await instructions from their Governments before sending the amended note. [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680] Aug. 31 Statement Issued to the Press by the Department of State Text of speech by the Secretary before the annual meeting of the American Bar Association, Detroit, Mich., September 2, dealing [Pg. 823 includes portions of

with the present situation in China and U. S. policy in relation to Chinese affairs. (Footnote: For release by the press after delivery.) Doc. and Doc. 681] Sept. (371) From the Minister in China (tel.) Information that all interested representatives have been instructed to send identic replies to the Chinese note of June 24 in the form agreed upon as reported in telegram No. 353, August 26. [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 682] Sept. (41) From the American Minister to the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs Reply to the Chinese Government’s note of June 24, expressing willingness to consider the modification of existing treaties in measure as the Chinese authorities demonstrate their willingness and ability to fulfill their obligations and to protect foreign rights; and readiness to appoint delegates to the Special Conference on the Chinese Tariff, as provided for in the Washington Conference Treaty, February 6, 1922, and a commissioner to sit on the Commission on Extraterritoriality, as provided for in Resolution V of the Washington Conference. (Footnote: Presentation of identic notes by representatives of the other Washington Conference powers.) [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 683] THE SPECIAL CONFERENCE ON THE CHINESE CUSTOMS TARIFF Date and number Subject Page 1925 Apr.

States, Japan, and Great Britain. (Footnote: Mahlon F. Perkins, sent to London to confer with the Foreign Office regarding the Special Conference.) Doc. 685 and Doc. 686] July (118) From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) Report of general views on certain points regarding the customs conference as expressed by the U. S. Minister to China (en route to his post) in an informal conversation with the Japanese Foreign Minister; Foreign Minister’s agreement with the views as stated.

full powers to confer with the other delegates, and to negotiate, conclude, and sign treaties for ratification by the United States. Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693] Sept. 9 To the American Delegation Instructions of a general character, including the opinion that the conference should discuss the entire subject of the conventional tariff, even proposals looking toward ultimate tariff autonomy; that the Chinese Government must be given an opportunity to present its plans regarding diminution and ultimate removal of likin; and that the conference should consider the advisability of using the surtax revenues for the refunding of China’s unsecured obligations.

Oct. (425) From the Minister in China (tel.) Identic telegram from the interested representatives to their respective Governments (text printed), suggesting modifications in the provisional agenda drawn up by the Chinese Government, as transmitted in telegram No. 418, September 25. Minister’s concurrence in advisability of the modifications; probable acceptability of the agenda as thus modified.

Oct. (449) From the Minister in China (tel.) Report that the practical purposes of the Chinese financial authorities are sharply contested by the diplomatic and political elements, with the resulting probability that Chinese will enter the conference without any definite program of action. Request for instructions for guidance of the delegation in meeting any forms of discrimination that cannot be met by the most-favored-nation clause.

Undated [Rec’d Oct. From the American Delegation (tel.) Report of meeting of committee on tariff autonomy at which China reiterated request for tariff autonomy to be effective with the abolition of likin, January 1, 1929. Submittal of a tentative working basis (text printed) and suggestion that reasonable concessions be made to meet the Chinese demands.

on other subjects, and subcommittee on rates. portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719] Nov. To the American Delegation (tel.) French Ambassador’s statement, in conversation with the Secretary, that apparently his Government thought the granting of tariff autonomy without making abolition of likin a correlate should be safeguarded by an agreement that no other kind of tax would be imposed in lieu of likin.

(130) Commission should not be put off until after the Special Customs Conference but should proceed at the earliest date possible. of Doc. 725 and Doc. 726] Sept. 10 To Mr. Silas H. Strawn Transmittal of Mr. Strawn’s commission as the American member of the Commission on Extraterritoriality.

CONTINUED SUPPORT BY THE UNITED STATES TO THE FEDERAL TELEGRAPH COMPANY IN EFFORTS TO OBTAIN EXECUTION OF ITS CONTRACT WITH THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT Date and number Subject Page 1924 Dec. 24 From the Japanese Embassy Summary of the points at issue between Japan and the United States in connection with the wireless contracts of the Mitsui Co. and the Federal Telegraph Co. with the Chinese Government. Proposal to adjust the controversy on a basis analogous to the four-power consortium arrangement, namely, that the contracts be pooled and superseded by a loan agreement for wireless enterprise in China, the Chinese Government to have control of the operation of the wireless telegraphy in question and a financial group representing U. S., British, French, and Japanese interests to supply the services of engineers and accountants. [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733] Dec. 27 (317) To the Minister in China (tel.) Information that Col. Manton Davis, attorney for the Radio Corporation of America, will sail for China to assist Barnes Moss, Federal Co.’s representative, in negotiations. [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 734] 1925 Jan.

Jan. (16) To the Minister in China (tel.) Possibility that the Radio Corporation may be unable to continue with the Federal Telegraph Co. project on the original plan; consequent reason to fear that the Japanese proposal may be the only available alternative. Department’s desire for further comment in view of these possibilities. [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 737, Doc. 738, and Doc. 739] Feb. (61) From the Minister in China (tel.) Suggestion that a conference be held in Peking between representatives of the Chinese Government and of all the companies with which China has radio agreements, to consult as to how best to coordinate the contracts for the most desirable results. [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 737, Doc. 738, and Doc. 739] Feb. (72) From the Minister in China (tel.) Arrival of Davis and Moss. Assertion that, according to Moss, it would seem that China, faced with the possibility of having to accept a radio consortium of four powers, may be willing to accept the Federal contract with a few minor changes. Request for explicit instructions as to the support to be given to Davis and Moss. [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 740] Feb. (24) To the Minister in China (tel.) Instructions to employ complete frankness in discussions with the representatives of the U. S. interests. Opinion that the radio conference proposal as set forth in telegram No. 61, February 5, might cause the Federal Co.’s valid legal position to be compromised without assuring effective results. [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 742] Feb. 28 To the Japanese Embassy U. S. desire to be reassured as to whether the Japanese proposal of December 24, 1924, would be acceptable to the Chinese Government before giving it further consideration. [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 742] Mar. 12 From Mr. Manton Davis to the Radio Corporation of America Delay in official negotiations because of illness of Minister of Communications; satisfactory progress in unofficial negotiations. Strong Japanese effort to have Federal contract canceled. Outline of proposed traffic arrangement to serve as a basis for settlement of the controversy. (Footnote: Information that Mr. Davis’ suggested traffic arrangement was approved by the Radio Corporation, the Federal [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 744]

Co. of Delaware, and the president of the Federal Co. of California.) Mar. 23 (123) From the Minister in China (tel.) Deadlock in negotiations, which the Federal Co.’s representatives attribute to Japanese influence in the Foreign Office and with the Chief Executive. Suggestion that strong U. S. representations telegraphed by the Chinese Minister in Washington might have an important effect at the Foreign Office at this juncture. [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 744] Apr. 8 To the Japanese Embassy U. S. suggestion of the traffic arrangement as set forth in Mr. Davis’ telegram of March 12, as an alternative to the Japanese proposal of December 24, 1924. [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 745] Apr. 8 To the Chinese Legation Transmittal of copy of the memorandum to the Japanese Embassy, April 8, and expression of desire for Chinese approval of the suggested arrangement. [Pg. 903 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 746] Apr. (168) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Efforts to hasten conclusion of negotiations with the Federal Co.; Foreign Minister’s assertion that the Chinese Minister in Washington had had negotiations with the State Department and that it was now necessary to await the Japanese reply to the U. S. proposal of April 8 before executing contract. [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 747] Apr. (87) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Instructions to inform Foreign Office that there are no negotiations pending with the Chinese Minister in Washington. [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 749] May 28 (566) From the British Ambassador Information that, subject to the safeguarding of the prior rights of the Marconi Co., the British Government would welcome in principle the formation of a consortium such as proposed in the Japanese memorandum of December 24, 1924, to the United States. [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 749] June 1 From the Japanese Embassy Assertion that the plan suggested in the U. S. memorandum of April 8 is simply an operating arrangement and assumes [Pg. 906 includes portions of

abandonment by the Mitsui Co. of its legal position, without any corresponding concession by the Federal Co.; also that such an arrangement would not make for fair and impartial treatment of the other powers interested. Suggestion of possible desirability of a meeting of representatives of the U. S., British, French, and Japanese radio interests to examine the feasibility of the Japanese proposal of December 24, 1924, and to work out detailed terms of adjustment. Doc. and Doc. 750] July (117) From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) Report of a conversation between the Foreign Minister, the U. S. appointed Minister to China (MacMurray), and a representative of the Mitsui Co., in which U. S. objections to the Japanese proposal and Japanese objections to the U. S. counterproposal were discussed, and in which all parties expressed desire and necessity for cooperation in reaching a settlement. [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 751] July (704) From the British Chargé Inquiry as to U. S. attitude toward the question of the future development of wireless telegraphy in China; British readiness to support the Japanese proposal to the United States of December

Aug. 22 (345) From the Minister in China (tel.) Report that as a result of Japanese pressure, the Chief Executive has directed that the interministerial committee must report in favor of the cancelation of the Federal contract. Reported intention of the Minister of Communications to recommend simultaneous cancelation of the Mitsui contract. [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 756] Aug. 25 (349) From the Minister in China (tel.) Chief Executive’s assurance that the Federal contract is recognized as valid and will be given effect; Minister’s inability, however, to obtain assurance as to the time and manner of giving effect to the contract. Proposed note to the Foreign Office (extract printed) requesting an early and definite statement on the subject. Request for authorization to present such a note. [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 757] Aug. 26 (218) To the Minister in China (tel.) Authorization to present the note to the Foreign Office as suggested. [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759] Aug. 26 (352) From the Minister in China (tel.) Report of the Chief Executive’s decision, at a secret Cabinet meeting, to cancel both the Federal and the Mitsui contracts. Minister’s intention to send his proposed note to the Foreign Office immediately, with a view to forestalling action on this decision. [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759] Aug. 29 (360) From the Minister in China (tel.) Aide-mémoire from the Foreign Office transmitting a proposal of the Ministry of Communications for replacement of both contracts by an arrangement whereby both parties would jointly make a loan to China for the development by it of a wireless system; Davis’ consideration of the plan as wholly unacceptable; note to the Foreign Office (substance printed) reiterating request for an early and definite statement whether China will give effect to the Federal contract, and if so, what date such action may be expected. [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 760] Aug. 29 (361) From the Minister in China (tel.) Message from Davis for the Radio Corporation (text printed), transmitting the Chinese proposal summarized in telegram No. 360, August 29. [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 761]

Sept. (374) From the Minister in China (tel.) Recommendation that the Chinese Minister be informed that the U. S. Minister’s notes of August 26 and 29 call for a definite reply and corresponding action by the Chinese Government. [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 762] Sept. (231) To the Minister in China (tel.) Chinese Minister’s statement that he had informed his Government that the U. S. Minister’s note of August 29 was supported by the Secretary. [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 763] Sept. 12 (249) To the Minister in China (tel.) Letter from the Radio Corporation requesting Department to consider the desirability of giving the corporation liberty to make such arrangements with foreign associates as it can to assure American participation in the wireless communications of China. Information that the Department is awaiting report of results of the Minister’s representations to China before answering the letter. [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 764] Sept. 15 (399) From the Minister in China (tel.) No reply as yet to the representations of August 26 and 29, and no indication as to what attitude the administration may take. [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 765] Sept. 15 (255) To the Minister in China (tel.) Acknowledgment of Radio Corporation’s letter with statement that the request is being carefully considered. Desire that Minister continue to impress upon the Chinese Government the importance which the United States attaches to this opportunity for China to demonstrate good faith. [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, and Doc. 767] Sept. 18 (404) From the Minister in China (tel.) Arrangement for a further interview with the Chief Executive to urge a prompt answer to the representations. Suggestion that a message from President Coolidge be cabled for delivery to the Chief Executive. [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, and Doc. 767] Sept. 19 (258) To the Minister in China (tel.) Secretary’s desire that the Minister have an interview with the Chief Executive and urge him to recognize the Federal contract. [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc.

and Doc. 768] Sept. 19 (260) To the Minister in China (tel.) Opinion that it would not be wise to have the President send a personal message to the Chinese Chief Executive. [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 770] Sept. 21 (405) From the Minister in China (tel.) Chief Executive’s assurance that the Federal contract will be carried out and that China will give whole-hearted support to the open-door policy. Minister’s renewed assurances, upon inquiry by Tuan, of U. S. readiness to discuss a mutual accommodation of interests between the Federal and Mitsui Companies as soon as the Federal contract has been put into effect. [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 770] Sept. 22 (263) To the Minister in China (tel.) Information that if the Japanese Ambassador makes inquiries regarding the Chinese wireless situation, as indicated by a press report from Tokyo, the Secretary will tell him that he is waiting to learn the results of the negotiations at Peking. [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 772] Sept. 29 (422) From the Minister in China (tel.) Message from Davis for the Radio Corporation (text printed), stating that an agreement will possibly be signed soon. [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 772] Oct. (426) From the Minister in China (tel.) Agreement reached for an interchange of notes, in which the Chinese Foreign Minister will state his Government’s intention to give effect to the Federal contract, and the U. S. Minister will confirm assurances that following the first steps in the carrying out of the contract, the U. S. interests will discuss an arrangement for cooperation with the Chinese and Japanese; the interchange of notes to be accompanied by a procès-verbal in respect to certain details. [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 773] Oct. (430) From the Minister in China (tel.) Information that the notes have been exchanged and the procèsverbal initialed. [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 773, Doc. 774,

and Doc. 775] Undated [Rec’d Oct. 9] From the Japanese Embassy Assertion that the Chinese proposal of August 28 (summarized in the U. S. Minister’s telegram No. 360, August 29), is in substantial agreement with the Japanese proposal of December 24, 1924; hope that the basic principle for adjustment now found acceptable to both Chinese and Japanese Governments will be favorably received by the United States. [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 773, Doc. 774, and Doc. 775] Undated [Rec’d Oct. 9] From the Japanese Embassy Renewal of the suggestion of June 1 that the Japanese proposal of December 24, 1924, be submitted to a meeting of representatives of the radio interests of the various countries concerned to be examined as to its feasibility. [Pg. 934 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 776] Dec. 29 (550) From the Minister in China (tel.) Report that no progress has been made since the exchange of notes reported in telegram No. 430, October 8, because of absence of certain Cabinet Ministers from Peking and political instability. [Pg. 935 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 778] EXECUTIVE ORDER BY PRESIDENT COOLIDGE REMITTING FURTHER PAYMENTS BY CHINA ON THE BOXER INDEMNITY Date and number Subject Page 1925 July Executive Order No. 4268 Providing for the remission of further payments of the annual installments of the Chinese indemnity. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 777 and Doc. 778]

General: Contents Belgium (Documents 58-66) Czechoslovakia (Documents 67-77) France (Documents 78-98) Greece (Documents 99-102) Italy (Documents 103-105) Latvia (Documents 106-106) Rumania (Documents 107-121) Yugoslavia (Documents 122-131) Colombia and Nicaragua (Documents 266-269) Colombia and Peru (Documents 270-309) Costa Rica and Panama (Documents 310-322)

Scrapping of ships by the United States, Great Britain, and Japan in accordance with the treaty for the limitation of naval armament, signed February 6, 19221

Foreign Service Report No. 15 On February 24th, 1925, the Minister for Foreign Affairs informed the Ambassador, in Note No. 22, a copy of a translation of which is enclosed herewith,4 that on February 9th, 1925, the Japanese Government completed the work of scrapping their vessels of war as provided for in the Treaty for the limitation of Naval Armament signed at Washington in February. 1922. A list, similar to that issued by the Japanese Navy Department, giving the names of the vessels which were scrapped and the manner in which they were disposed of was enclosed in the Foreign Minister’s Note. A copy of this list is also enclosed herewith.4 4 Not printed. 4 Not printed.

Proposals for the calling by the President of the United States of a disarmament conference [5] Excerpt From a Memorandum of a Conversation Between the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain) and the American

[10] The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State

[17] The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State

[24] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)

6 Sir Austen Chamberlain. 7 French Premier and Minister for Foreign Affairs.

reasonable prospect of agreement. The French Government could be assured that if the Government of the United States took up the matter on its own initiative, it would bring it to the attention of all the other Governments, including France. Present discussion in the press had grown simply out of this informal statement made by Chamberlain; and the United States was not advised as yet of any change in situation which would warrant calling of another conference. I added that by this I did not mean to say that I would not welcome a suggestion from the French Government that it would look favorably upon an invitation and was ready to proceed with an agreement for limitation of auxiliary craft. The Ambassador said that he was glad to have my statement, but made no further comment. Foregoing is for your information and informal use, should you have occasion to discuss the subject with French officials.

Britain when none was. There was nothing more than these conversations in which Mr. Chamberlain had brought up the matter, in addition to fact that for a year or so there had been such general and informal talks with other interested Governments as had taken place with Government of Japan on this matter. Although the Chargé has doubtless reported this conversation, you may take occasion to assure yourself that situation is fully understood by Japanese Foreign Office. It is not necessary for me to assure you that I am aware of danger of appearing to work with other powers in disregard of Japan. This has neither been done nor intended. Press publicity has tended to give great definiteness to what is entirely nebulous at this time and has been the more embarrassing to me because of difficulty of making any effectual denial without running the danger of chilling public interest and sympathy for the further plans of naval limitation which it is still our wish to bring about. HUGHES

would be resented by them. All Chamberlain has ever said to me is that he told Luther20 that Germany must not expect a disarmament of the other powers so complete as had been forced on her. As you are aware, we are not popular in Europe just now. Our refusal to join the League of Nations and our insistence upon debt repayments have left us without friends. The conclusion is inescapable for me that an open refusal to allow us to take lead in European disarmament would be popular over here; but I also think that an entirely new method of approach in which we could have something to offer would change present situation. Daily press of this week beginning the 19th has carried various articles quoting the White House spokesman as having pointed out desirability of holding a disarmament conference upon signing of the Locarno Agreement and indicating that President upon any favorable intimation from Europe might consider issuing invitations to one. There have been no direct editorial articles but the general press comment has been that with the Locarno Agreement initiative has passed from Washington to Geneva, and points out that the Locarno Agreement was reached without any American participation. An alleged statement by Chamberlain to the French press is generally referred to, that Locarno had brought the question of universal disarmament nearer realization than it had ever been before; that Mr. Coolidge was interesting himself in this problem but that it ought to be widely known that at present time the League of Nations was busy preparing for summoning of an international disarmament conference. [The remainder of the telegram quotes excerpts from British newspaper statements.] HOUGHTON 17 Telegram in two sections.

I am informed that Japan would prefer to see settlement as far as possible of all the outstanding obligations arising out of Washington 1922 Conference before considering new commitments; that for the present moment the country is content with its armament situation and would not welcome further conference on armament until Chinese situation shows some sign of clarifying and until relations with Russia are placed upon more secure foundation than at present exists. NEVILLE

I believe, however, that German opinion in general for obvious reasons would welcome call from President Coolidge for disarmament conference at Washington. SCHURMAN

Disinclination of the United States to be associated in European security pacts: (1) Geneva protocol; (2) Locarno agreement [25] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With the British Ambassador (Howard), January 5, 1925 January 5, 1925

where the action of the United States itself might not be involved but that of some other country with which the United States had trade relations, and the action of the Powers who had joined in the Protocol might turn out to be inimical to the interests of the United States in such relations with the country in question. The Ambassador said that he had not supposed that the first situation would actually arise and he really had in mind the second case that the Secretary had put. In other words, they might be called upon to blockade some country and come into antagonism to the interests of the United States in consequence. The Secretary said that there was one thing he believed could be depended upon, and that was that this Government from its very beginning had been insistent upon the rights of neutrals and would continue to maintain them. The Secretary did not believe any Administration, short of a treaty concluded and ratified, could commit the country against assertion of its neutral rights in case there should be occasion to demand their recognition. The Ambassador said that he believed that that was the situation and that that was the point which his Government had in view. The Secretary said that while the effect of the Protocol upon the interests of the United States in the contingencies suggested seemed to be quite obvious, the Government of the United States did not desire to be put in the position of taking action against the adoption of the Protocol. He had rather expected that situations similar to those which might arise in the view of the United States, would be in contemplation of other Governments and especially of the British Government, and he had not believed that the Protocol would become effective according to its present terms; that it was desired by this Government that if other Governments did not approve the Protocol, they should deal with the matter from the standpoint of their own interests and not put the responsibility upon the United States. The Ambassador said that there had been nothing on the particular point in Mr. Chamberlain’s letter, but it had occurred to him (the Ambassador) that possibly the result might be reached by a reservation on the part of the British Government; that they could reserve the right in any contingency to which the sanctions might apply to consult with any Power that was not a member of the League of Nations and make such arrangements as might be desirable in the light of such consultation. The Ambassador said that he had not worked out the phraseology but the idea occurred to him and it seemed to him that it might be a satisfactory solution. The Secretary said that he could well understand the reasons which might lead the British Government to make such a reservation but that he thought it would be inadvisable to have anything said on the other side to the effect that an arrangement had been made in relation to the ratification of the Protocol which was satisfactory to the United States. The Secretary said that if any such statement or suggestion was made there would at once be inquiry here as to what understanding we had and why we had it and what right we had to have it, et cetera; that it would be a most unpleasant situation. The Secretary must emphasize the point, therefore, that whatever action the British

Government took it must take on its own responsibility and while, as it seemed to the Secretary, they could appropriately envisage the possible contingencies of conflict with the interests of the United States and develop their course accordingly, they should not make any suggestion that the course they did take was taken pursuant to some understanding with the United States. The Secretary said this was all he cared to say at present and he would talk over the matter with the President. The Ambassador said that he was leaving the city and would not write to Mr. Chamberlain at once and might see the Secretary again on his return on Thursday.27 25 Protocol for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes; text printed as S. Doc.

applied. The Secretary said that this Government, not being a signatory of the Protocol or represented at Geneva, felt that it should not be called up to take the responsibility of opposing the Protocol. But the particular difficulties to which the Ambassador referred had their analogy in other difficulties that might arise elsewhere and the Secretary supposed that the British Government would be alive to all the possibilities and that the action which the Ambassador had suggested as possible, in making reservations, would be taken in view of the British Government’s own interests. The Ambassador said that he felt that the frankest way in such emergencies was the best way, and therefore he was disposed to think that instead of making a reservation that the British Government in any contingency would be at liberty to consult with a Government not a member of the League, they might better say that they desired to retain the privilege of consulting with the United States and making its [their] arrangements in view of the interests of the United States. The Ambassador felt that it would be well for the British Government to say frankly to its associates in the League that there could be no hope of applying the sanctions successfully in opposition to the views of the United States as they might be entertained by its people when a contingency arose. The Secretary reiterated the importance of the United States Government remaining entirely separate from the discussion.29 29 The remainder of the memorandum deals with other matters.

Proposals for a Pact of Security Made by the German Government on February 9, 1925.

With best wishes [etc.] F. A. STERLING [Enclosure] German Memorandum on the Subject of a Security Pact BERLIN, 20 January, 1925. The Disarmament and Evacuation questions which are now being discussed are often regarded in France from the point of view of security against possible German intentions of aggression. Therefore, they would possibly more easily find a solution, if an agreement of a general kind could be brought about with the intention of guaranteeing peace between Germany and France. Germany is entirely ready to accept this point of view. She wishes to see all problems which may accrue between her and France to be treated in no other way than by peaceful understanding and is therefore, for her part, also interested in the formation of a special treaty-basis for such a peaceful understanding.

When considering all the different methods which might at present be brought into being for the formation of a pact of security, one might start from an idea similar to the one which in December 1922 formed the basis of the suggestion made by the then German Chancellor Cuno.35 Germany could, for instance, declare herself in agreement with a pact, whereby the Powers interested on [in?] the Rhine, above all England, France, Italy and Germany, could solemnly pledge themselves to the Government of the United States of America as Trustees, to carry on no war with one another for a still to be defined period of time. A far reaching treaty of arbitration could be connected with such a pact between Germany and France in a similar way, as has already been formed during the last few years between several European Powers. Germany is ready to enter into such treaties of arbitration with all other States as well, in order to guarantee a peaceful settlement of judicial and political conflicts. Besides this a pact would also be acceptable to Germany which expressly guarantees the territorial statics quo on the Rhine. The tenor of such a pact could eventually be that the States which are interested in the Rhine should reciprocally agree fully to respect the inviolability of the territorial status quo on the Rhine, that they furthermore, both jointly and separately, guarantee the execution of this obligation and, finally, that they will consider every action which tends to counteract the obligation as a matter of joint or individual concern. In the same sense these Treaty States could guarantee in this pact the execution of the obligation regarding the demilitarisation of the Rhineland which Germany has undertaken in Articles 42 and 43 of the Treaty of Versailles. Included in

this pact could also be arbitral conventions of the kind mentioned above between Germany and all other States who would be ready to take part in such conventions. It will be possible to add several other possibilities of solution to the above-named examples. And the ideas which form the basis of these examples could in one way or another be also combined. But the examples might possibly suffice to show that, if all States concerned have the wish for guarantees to bring about a peaceful development, it would not be difficult to find a definite basis by treaty means. 32 Not printed. 33 The text is similar to, not identical with, the text of the German note presented to the French Government on February 9. 32 Not printed. 34 French Premier and Minister for Foreign Affairs.

On fifteen occasions between 1875 and 1918 the people of Pomerania cast their ballots for the election of a member to represent that district in the German Reichstag. These elections invariably resulted in the choice of a Pole to represent Pomerania. The Transit Convention of Paris, signed by Poland and Germany April 25, 1921, provides for free and unrestricted traffic between the German Province of East Prussia lying to the east of Pomerania and the main body of Germany lying to the west. For the settlement of complaints and grievances arising in connection with this transit traffic the contracting parties established a Mixed Transit Tribunal under neutral presidency with final jurisdiction. The first case which this Transit Tribunal was called upon to hear in the course of its three years of existence was a German protest in connection with the railway disaster occurring at Starogard on April 30, 1925. In this case the Tribunal exonerated the Polish Government of any responsibility for the disaster, the evidence pointing to a criminal attempt by parties unknown. Pomerania constitutes no barrier to communication between one part of Germany and another. Persons and goods are moved through the territory in question without being subject to any formality whatever. Neither passports nor visas are required, and freight and baggage are liable to no tariff nor inspection. This is true not only on the railroads but on the waterways. The first draft of the Treaty of Versailles provided that the Polish-inhabited districts of Upper Silesia should be given to Poland. Because of Germany’s protest and in deference to the opinion of the British representative who reversed his position the final Treaty provided for the taking of a plebiscite as a guide in the delimitation of the boundary line. Article 88 of the Treaty of Versailles provided as follows: “In …,37 Upper Silesia …,37 the inhabitants will be called upon to indicate by a vote whether they wish to be attached to Germany or to Poland: …37 Germany hereby renounces in favor of Poland all rights and title over the portion of Upper Silesia lying beyond the frontier line fixed by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers as a result of the plebiscite. “Annex Paragraph 4. …37 The result of the vote will be determined by communes according to the majority of votes in each commune. “Paragraph 5. On the conclusion of the voting, the number of votes cast in each commune will be communicated by the Commission to the Principal Allied and Associated Powers, with a full report as to the taking of the vote and a recommendation as to the line which ought to be adopted as the frontier of Germany in Upper Silesia. In this recommendation regard will be paid to the wishes of the inhabitants as shown by the vote and to the geographical and economic conditions of the locality.”

The plebiscite was held under Interallied supervision on March 20, 1921. As was expected, in some districts heavy majorities were cast for Poland, in other districts heavy majorities for Germany. Faced with the problem of delimiting the frontier so as to conform as nearly as possible with the spirit and letter of the Treaty, the Supreme Council invoked the good offices of the Council of the League of Nations. The Council appointed a Polish-German Commission under the presidency of Felix Calonder, former President of the Swiss Republic, which actually delimited the boundary line in conformity with the wishes of the inhabitants as expressed in the vote by communes and with due regard for geographical and economic considerations. The work of this Commission was approved by the Council of the League and accepted by the Supreme Council. On May 15, 1922, Poland and Germany signed a Treaty at Geneva embodying the terms of the settlement including the boundary line as approved by the Council of the League and the Supreme Council. No boundary line could have been drawn which would have placed all of the Poles within Poland and all of the Germans within Germany. Sizeable minorities of Poles and Germans respectively were by the force of necessity excluded from the country of their choice. Immediately after the incorporation within Poland of the part of Upper Silesia allotted by the Treaty, a very large measure of autonomy was granted it by the Polish Diet. A special Upper Silesian Diet was elected by universal suffrage. In the Diet so elected

Participation by the United States in the Conference for the Supervision of the International Traffic in Arms, at Geneva,

[34] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton)

[41] The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of State

[48] The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of State

Germany Great Britain Greece Hungary India Italy Japan* Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats & Slovenes Latvia Netherlands Persia Poland Spain Sweden Switzerland United States of America Uruguay. I have [etc.] [Signature illegible] [For the] Secretary-General 39 Not printed.

* The participation of Japan is conditional upon the representation at the Conference of the States mentioned in Article 32 of the draft Convention. These States are Belgium, United States of America, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan and Russia. [Footnote in the original.]

are considered necessary or desirable before any convention is submitted to the Senate for approval or to Congress for legislation. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS This Government is prepared to give careful consideration to any constructive proposals for the proper regulation of the international trade in arms with a view not only to securing adequate publicity with respect to such trade but also for the purpose of reducing to a, minimum the traffic in arms which is calculated to foment disorder, encourage militarism or render more difficult the realization of this Government’s desire that further progress should be made toward an era of continuing peace. In this connection it may appropriately be pointed out that the United States, while declining to ratify the Convention of Saint Germain has already complied with the spirit of that convention in the reductions which have been effected in its war times munitions industry and the consequent reduction to relatively small proportions of the American trade in arms and ammunition. Further, it should be noted that of the High Contracting Powers specifically mentioned in Article 32 of the draft convention, the United States, in contrast with other Powers, is the only nation that does not maintain large Government arsenals for the supply of its own war time need. Consequently, in the event of any national emergency this Government will be dependent for its arms and ammunition almost exclusively upon the relatively meager private industry and manufacture of war material. It is therefore clear that this Government could not properly acquiesce in any measure which would be directed against private munitions factories while leaving government-owned or controlled factories in other countries free to continue their trade or production. Further, it is clearly to be borne in mind that, with respect to the United States, the further control of the traffic in arms could only be made effective by Congressional action. It would, therefore, be useless for this Government to conclude a convention unless there were reasonable grounds to believe that it was of a character to commend itself to Congress and that the necessary legislation to make it effective could be obtained. AGENDA OF THE CONFERENCE The Department understands that the Conference is to consider solely the question of the international trade in arms, munitions and implements of war, taking as a basis for discussion the draft convention prepared by the Temporary Mixed Commission of the League of Nations which was communicated to this Government under date of October

League, will participate on the same basis in all the deliberations and functions of the Conference- It further understands that the draft convention, while serving as a basis for discussion, is susceptible of any and all modifications which may be considered desirable by the participating States.

Before proceeding to a consideration of the draft convention article by article, the Department desires to take up the three important principles underlying the convention in its present form, as follows: (1) The licensing system; (2) The restriction of sales to recognized governments and belligerents, and (3) The prohibited zones. THE LICENSING SYSTEM Under existing legislation the President is authorized whenever in his opinion conditions of domestic violence exist which are or may be promoted by the importation of arms from the United States, to prohibit such exportation except under licenses in the case of countries in this hemisphere and countries in which the United States exercises extraterritorial jurisdiction. The draft convention contemplates the extension of this system of licensing to cover all countries of the world in time of peace irrespective of the conditions prevailing in such countries. The purpose of the licensing system, as indicated in the Convention, in the securing of adequate information with regard to the movements of arms and ammunition and, taken in conjunction with other provisions of the Convention, to prevent such arms from reaching the hands of unauthorized parties. As far as the United States is concerned, the statistical data could be obtained without requiring the somewhat elaborate system of licensing. In fact at the present time the United States published [publishes] statistics, both of production and of export and import trade, which are believed to be more complete than the corresponding statistics of any other country. While the Department is prepared to take up with Congress the question of securing the necessary legislation for the licensing of the export of arms and ammunition in international trade, in the event that an agreement at Geneva should be reached on this basis, nevertheless it seems preferable, and you are authorized to suggest, if occasion offers, that the ends of publicity would be equally well served by the requirement that in the case of each exportation of arms and ammunition, whether by a government or by a private company or individual, there should be filed with the appropriate local authorities an export declaration or statistical statement giving full data with regard to the nature, size, and destination of the shipment. A copy of such

declaration could also accompany the shipment. (As indicated below, there would, however, be no objection to providing for a system of licensing with respect to the “prohibited zone.”) The suggestion has been made that special export declarations for arms shipment be required rather than licenses granted by the Government. In this connection certain objections have been raised to the license system and the views of the War Department on this subject might briefly be summarized as follows: (a) Licensing might involve the Government in a responsibility as to the ultimate destination of the shipment, a responsibility which it is in no position to carry out since it has no control of the arms once the shipment leaves its territory. (b) Licensing might result in undue interference with private trade. (c) Non-producing States object to a requirement that they turn to other governments to secure licenses for the export from a foreign country of the arms necessary for their national defense. (d) A licensing system if it placed impediment in the way of acquirement abroad by non-producing States of the arms necessary to their defense would tend to force such States to become producers of arms. This result would not help toward world peace. The Department therefore desires you to ascertain whether effectual agreement could be reached on the basis that the term “export declarations” or its equivalent should be inserted for “licenses” in various articles of the convention as hereafter indicated. This is not, however, a point of such vital importance as to justify a course of action which would seriously imperil the success of the Conference. In the event, therefore, that the Powers represented at the international conference are generally agreed that the license system is the only satisfactory method of securing the control and the statistical data desired, the Department would not wish to jeopardize the success of the Conference by advocating the abandonment of the license system. SALES RESTRICTED TO RECOGNIZED GOVERNMENTS AND BELLIGERENTS This provision of the Convention should be amplified so as clearly to reserve the right of this Government or of its nationals to make direct sale of arms and war material to the authorities of any self-governing dominion, colony, dependency, mandated territory, and to the federal or administrative subdivision thereof with the consent of the central authority. It is obvious that this Government could not acquiesce in the view that sales to self-governing dominions should be made exclusively by one State or that the Mandatory or Sovereign Powers should be permitted to monopolize the trade in arms

with countries under mandate, or with their colonies and thereby defeat the principle of equality of opportunity. There is a further question of no little difficulty, which arises under the provisions of the Convention restricting sales to recognized governments or belligerents. If this Government does not extend recognition to a particular régime while other countries extend such recognition, the result would be that other countries would be free to export arms to that country and American manufacturers would be prevented from so doing. This situation is taken into account in the modification of Article 3, Paragraph 1. THE QUESTION OF THE PROHIBITED AREA The Department desires you to support the position that the Convention as at present drafted should be divided into two separate conventions—one dealing with publicity and the control of the general export trade in arms, the other dealing with the special supervision of the trade in the so-called prohibited zones which it is apparently the desire of certain Powers to place under a further system of control. In this connection you will note that the Department’s instruction of June 17th favored the division of the Convention as above indicated and that on page 147 of the League publication47 there is given a detailed statement as to the desirability of this procedure. The Department believes that it would facilitate the consideration of the Arms Traffic question in this country if the two questions, that of the general publicity and control on the one hand and that of the prohibited areas on the other, were dealt with separately. They are distinct problems. The latter only concerns this Government to a very limited degree. The United States has no territorial possessions in the general region (i. e. Africa, South Western Asia, etc.) which have in the past been considered as possible prohibited areas. Further, neither this Government nor its nationals have ever engaged in any considerable traffic in arms with this area of the world. The question of the measure of control to be exercised in any such “prohibited zones” is largely a matter for determination by the Powers which have colonies or mandates in this region, provided, however, that no restrictions are imposed which would impair the principle of most-favored-nation treatment. Whether this Government could properly be a party to a convention setting up a control of the arms trade in the prohibited areas can only be determined when the scope and purpose of the convention is more clearly defined. In any event the Department would not desire you to support any effort directed toward the placing in the “prohibited zone” of sovereign States, such for example as Persia, which the Department notes has already made vigorous protest against such action. In taking up the discussion of the Convention, article by article, the Department will deal further with this question of the “prohibited zone” in considering Articles 9 to 25

inclusive.

SHIPMENTS BY GOVERNMENTS TO BE MADE PUBLIC AS WELL AS SHIPMENTS BY PRIVATE PARTIES It should be made entirely clear that the Convention covers the full publicity for all export of arms by or on behalf of the governments themselves, (exclusive, of course, of shipments for their own military forces abroad) as well as shipments by private individuals or companies within the territories of the High Contracting Parties. The reasons for this are obvious. One of the chief purposes of the Convention is to obtain statistical information with respect to the volume, character, destination, etc., etc., of the international trade in arms and ammunition. In the case of certain countries such export is to a large degree carried on by or on behalf of the governments which manufacture the arms in Government factories or, as the case may be, directly control the bulk of the manufacture and trade. If the export of arms and ammunition by Governments is not given publicity, the result would be that the figures on exports from countries such as the United States, where the trade in arms is almost entirely carried on by private companies, would be out of its proper ratio if contrasted with the export of the countries of which the governments themselves engage in a considerable traffic in arms. This point will be dealt with in further detail in considering the specific articles of the Convention. CONSIDERATION OF THE CONVENTION ARTICLE BY ARTICLE PREAMBLE* “Whereas the Convention of Saint Germain signed by the High Contracting Parties therein mentioned has not entered into full force and effect; “Whereas it is necessary to exercise a general supervision over the international trade in arms, munitions and implements of war, with the object of securing the fullest possible publicity in regard to such trade; “Whereas the existing treaties and conventions, and particularly the Brussels Act of July 2nd, 1890,48 regulating the traffic in arms and munitions in certain regions, no longer meet present conditions; “Whereas a special supervision of the maritime zone adjacent to certain countries is necessary to ensure the efficacy of the measures adopted by the various Governments both as regards the import of arms, ammunition and implements of war into these countries and their export from their own territory;

“Have appointed . . . . . . . . . . . .”

In view of the fact that the Convention of Saint Germain never became generally effective, it is considered preferable that it should not be mentioned in the preamble. Further, the statement that this Convention “has not entered into full force and effect” might lead to the erroneous conclusion that it was partially effective. The Department does not understand that this is the case with respect to any of the important producing countries. Further, there is already included in Article 27 a provision to the effect that the Convention of Saint Germain is to be superseded by the present Convention in so far as the Powers which ratified the former are concerned. The second paragraph of the Preamble should be modified to avoid giving any ground for the erroneous conclusion that the purpose of the Convention is to provide for the international “general supervision” over the arms trade. It is suggested, therefore, that the second paragraph of the Preamble be modified to read: “Whereas the High Contracting Parties are agreed as to the desirability of exercising, each in so far as it is concerned, a supervision over the foreign trade in arms, munitions and implements of war,” etc., etc. In the event that the present draft convention is divided into two separate conventions, as heretofore suggested, the Preamble would of course be modified to meet this change. ARTICLE I “This Convention applies to the following arms, munitions and implements of war: Category I “1. Arms and Munitions, Assembled or Component Parts, Exclusively Designed for Land, Sea or Aerial Warfare, Whatever Their Mode of Employment. (List follows) “2. Implements of War Hereafter Enumerated and Component Parts Which are Capable of Being Utilized Only In the Manufacture of the Said Material. (List follows) Category II

“Arms and Munitions, Assembled or Component Parts, Capable of Use Both For Military and Other Purposes. (List follows) Category III “Arms and Munitions Having No Military Value.” (List follows)

It has been pointed out by representatives of American manufacturers particularly interested in the export of sporting arms and arms for personal self-defense that the division of arms into categories according to caliber is misleading and unless modified would result in placing in Category I, that is arms which can only be exported under license, certain sporting arms which could properly be exported without license. Further, it is to be noted that pistols and revolvers are in Category I. It has therefore been suggested, and it seems reasonable to the Department, that the Categories as at present drafted should be modified so as to exclude from Category I pistols, revolvers and sporting arms. In this connection the following recommendations of the War Department with regard to Categories as contained in a suggested redraft of Article 1 are deserving of careful consideration. ARTICLE 1 “This convention applies to the following arms, munitions and implements of war; Category I “(a) Arms, ammunition, and implements of war, exclusively designed for land, sea, or aerial warfare, which are, or shall be, comprised in the equipment of the armed forces of the different states, whether military, naval or aerial, with the exception of pistols and revolvers, and with the exception of sporting arms. (b) All arms except pistols, revolvers and sporting arms and ammunition for the same, which, after having been employed in the services of the different states, are no longer part of their

equipment but remain capable of being utilized for military purposes to the exclusion of any other utilization. (c) Component parts of the items listed in (a) and (b) above, if capable of being utilized only in the manufacture or repair of the items listed in (a) and (b) above, for land, sea or aerial warfare.” The War Department suggests the omission of Category II. In view of the fact that the control of the export of such weapons as pistols, revolvers and sporting arms may be desirable within the “prohibited zone”, there would be no objection, in principle, to retaining a second category to include such arms. The export to the prohibited zone, except under license, of arms in both Categories I and II might be prohibited. In connection with the definition of categories, or wherever in the convention it might be considered most appropriate, the Department would desire to see an article inserted absolutely prohibiting international trade in asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases for use in war. In this connection you will recall that the Treaty between the United States, Great Britain, France, Italy, and Japan, signed on February 6, 1922,49 contained, in Article 5, a prohibition against the use of such gases. This Treaty, it may be noted, is not yet effective as it has not been ratified by France. However, as this Government and various other governments are clearly committed to the principle that poisonous gases should not be used in warfare, there is every reason for you to press for the inclusion of an article prohibiting the shipment of such gases in foreign trade for possible use in time of war. The form which such an article might take, following in part the phraseology of the Treaty of February 6, 1922, might be somewhat as follows: The use in war of asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases, and all analogous liquids, materials or devices, has been justly condemned by the general opinion of the civilized world and a prohibition of such has been declared in treaties to which a majority of the civilized Powers are parties. The High Contracting Parties therefore agree absolutely to prohibit the export from their territory of any such asphyxiating poisonous or other gases and all analogous liquids, intended or designed for use in connection with operations of war. ARTICLE 2 “The High Contracting Parties undertake not to export themselves, and to prohibit the export of arms, munitions and other implements of war enumerated in Category I, except on the conditions hereinafter mentioned.”

Instead of a general prohibition against the export of arms and ammunition followed by exceptions—a misleading form of drafting, since it is not the purpose of the Convention to prohibit the export of arms or ammunition—the Department considers that it would be preferable to combine Article Two with the first paragraph of Article Three, as indicated below: ARTICLE 3 “Notwithstanding this prohibition, the High Contracting Parties may grant in respect of arms, munitions and implements of war whose use is not prohibited by international law, licenses for the export of arms, munitions and implements of war enumerated in Category I, in the following conditions.” If Article Two is suppressed as above indicated, the first paragraph of Article Three might well be modified to read: “Each of the High Contracting Parties agree that the following conditions shall be applicable to the exportation or shipment from their territory, including self-governing dominions, colonies, protectorates, mandated territories, of all arms, munitions and implements of war enumerated in Article I, Category 1, exclusive of arms shipped for the use of their own military forces, whether such export is by or on behalf of the Government itself or by private companies or individuals.” ARTICLE 3, PARAGRAPH ONE “Licenses are not to be granted except for a direct supply to a Government recognized as such by the Government of the exporting country.” This paragraph should be modified somewhat as follows: “Exports* are not to be permitted except for a direct supply to a government recognized by at least one of the High Contracting or adhering Powers or to the authorities in any self governing dominion, colony, protectorate, mandatory territory, or to the authorities in any federal or administrative subdivision thereof, with the consent of the central authorities of the importing country.” ARTICLE THREE, PARAGRAPHS TWO AND THREE (2) “The Government acquiring the consignment must act through a duly accredited representative.” (3) “Such representative must produce a written authority from the Government he represents for the acquisition of each consignment,

which authority must state that the consignment is required for delivery to that Government for its own use.” To replace or to supplement the provisions of paragraphs two and three it is suggested that the visa of the consul of the importing country upon the export declaration (or license as the case may be) should be sufficient indication that the shipment referred to in paragraph 1 is authorized by the Government of that State. ARTICLE THREE, PARAGRAPHS FOUR, FIVE AND SIX (4) “The form in which this license shall be given shall, so far as practicable, be that given as an appendix to the present Convention. “Each licence must contain a description sufficient for the identification of the arms, munitions and implements of war to which it relates and the names of the exporter and the acquiring Government, ports of embarkation, and disembarkation, means of transport, intended route and destination. (5) “A separate licence shall be required for each separate consignment which crosses the frontier of the exporting country, whether by land, water or air, and shall accompany each separate consignment. (6) “A return of the licences granted shall be sent quarterly to the Central International Office referred to in Article 8 of the present Convention by the issuing Governments; importing Government, when High Contracting Parties, shall also forward quarterly to the Central International Office a return of the same licences enclosing particulars of the heading under which the imported goods will appear in their imports statistics.” In the event that export declarations replace licenses, it would be necessary to make corresponding changes in the above paragraphs. If licenses are retained it would be important to clarify exactly what is meant by the reference to the “return of the licenses” to the Central International Office. Does this mean a report of the total export of various categories of arms based on information obtained from the licenses or is it the intention that copies of the licenses themselves should be forwarded to the Central Office? In this connection your attention is called to the provision in Article 8 which would appear to indicate that the return of the licenses covers an indication of the quantities and the destination of the arms exported under licenses.

ARTICLE 4 “Further, licences for the export to private individuals of component parts covered by Category 1 may be granted on the following conditions: “The said component parts must be exported direct to a recognized manufacturer of war material, duly authorized by his own Government, on a declaration from him to the effect that the said component parts are required by him. “The Government which grants the licence and the Government of the importer’s country shall take all adequate precautions to ensure that the said component parts are sent direct to their destination. “The licences granted in the terms of the present Article shall, so far as practicable, be drafted according to the form annexed to the present Convention, and shall conform to the provisions of the present Convention, and particularly to those of Article 8.” The provision that the exporting government shall “take all adequate precautions to insure that the said component parts are sent direct to their destination” is one which it would be difficult to carry out since the exporting country cannot control the shipment after it has left its territory. This provision should be modified or eliminated. With respect to the shipment of component parts, the following suggested redraft of Article 4, prepared by the War Department, is submitted to you for your consideration. “The export of items or component parts of items specified in Article 1, including samples for demonstration, may be permitted to recognized manufacturers, or to trade representatives of the exporter, on the following conditions: 1. The said items or component parts of items must be exported direct (a) to a recognized manufacturer of war material dulyauthorized by his own government; or (b) to a trade representative of the exporting manufacturer. The export declaration (or license) must show that said item or component part is required by the importer. 2. The government which permits the export and the government of the importer’s country, shall take all reasonable precautions to insure that the said

items or component parts are sent direct to their destination.” ARTICLE 5 “Without prejudice to any obligations to which they may have subscribed under international conventions dealing with transit, the High Contracting Parties, when they have reason to believe that any consignment of arms, munitions or implements of war in transit through their territory’ does not conform to the provisions of the present Convention, undertake to investigate the circumstances and if necessary to prohibit the transit.” It is suggested that before the word “transit” the word “land” be inserted. The Department feels that it would be undesirable to conclude a convention which might conceivably be construed as authorizing the detention, for examination, of ships temporarily in transit through the territorial waters of one of the High Contracting Parties merely because of the suspicion that such ship might possibly contain a consignment of arms not properly authorized. Such a provision might easily lead to abuse. Further, this Government would not wish to be obligated by an international convention to exercise such a supervision with respect, for example, to ships passing through the Panama Canal. Nor would it desire that such a supervision be exercised under the present Convention upon American vessels passing through, or temporarily remaining in, the territorial waters of other countries. The Department feels that the phrase “does not conform to the provisions of the present Convention” is too broad and general. It is suggested that it be replaced by the phrase “is not properly authorized.” Furthermore, it might be pointed out that a third State would presumably have no opportunity to examine goods shipped in bond over its territory and shall not therefore be under any obligation to control arms so shipped. A provision to the effect that “articles shipped in bond” should not be disturbed might be considered in this connection.

ARTICLE 6 “Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 7, arms and munitions in Categories II and III may, if the exporter’s country so desires, be exported without licence. Provided, nevertheless, that in the case of arms and munitions of Category II the High Contracting Parties hereby undertake to determine from the size, destination and other circumstances of each consignment whether these arms and munitions are intended for war

purposes. If such is the case, the High Contracting Parties undertake that the shipments shall become subject to Articles 2 to 5.” While the Department concurs in the view that arms not in Category I should be shipped without license (except in the case of the prohibited zone) there is no reason why there should not be full publicity as to such shipments. In this way it would be much easier to detect and thus to prevent the shipment in large quantities of arms which are alleged to be for sporting purposes though in reality they may be for military purposes. Each of the High Contracting Parties would be free to provide the necessary machinery to secure the desired publicity but the items of information desired might well be indicated in the convention and it might further be provided that all such information should be sent to the International Central Office. The War Department prefers that Article 6 be omitted. ARTICLE 7 “The High Contracting Parties further undertake to prohibit the export of arms, munitions and implements of war enumerated in Article I, to the maritime or territorial zones specified in Article 9. “Nevertheless, the High Contracting Parties may grant export licences, notwithstanding this prohibition, provided that they conform to the provisions of Articles 3 to 5. The competent authorities must satisfy themselves, before issuing the licences, that the arms, munitions or implements of war are not intended for export to any destination or for disposal in any way contrary to the provisions of this Convention.” If the Conference adopts the suggestion with respect to the separation of the Convention into two parts, i. e. one covering publicity and the general control and the other the prohibited areas, it would be necessary to indicate definitely in Article Seven the extent of the prohibited zone. It is also desirable to include in this article a provision for most-favored-nation treatment. ARTICLE EIGHT “A Central International Office shall be established by the Council of the League of Nations for the purpose of collecting, preserving and publishing documents of all kinds exchanged by the High Contracting Parties with regard to the trade in and the distribution of arms, munitions and implements of war, as well as the text of all laws, orders and regulations made for the carrying out of the present Convention. “Each of the High Contracting Parties shall publish an annual return of the export licences which each may have granted in respect of arms, munitions

and implements of war in pursuance of the present Convention, mentioning the quantities and destination of the arms, munitions and implements of war to which the export licences refer. A copy of this return shall be sent to the Central International Office. “The High Contracting Parties further undertake to forward to the Central International Office all information which they will be in a position to provide relating to consignments under contracts entered into before the coming into force of the present Convention.” It is clear to the Department that any provision that the Central International Office should be established by the Council of the League of Nations would be objectionable and would seriously prejudice the prospect of the ratification of the Convention. It is noted that provision is made in a subsequent Article for a “conditional or partial adherence.” The Department feels, however, that it would be unfortunate for the Convention to be drafted in a form to make amendments or reservations essential. You should therefore endeavor to secure an alteration in Article Eight so that that Article shall not provide for the designation of the International Office by the Council of the League. In this connection the Department has noted, on pages 88 and 191 of the League publication,50 that various proposals for the separation of the International Office from the League have been made but not adopted by the League committees on the ground, chiefly, that committees of the League could hardly themselves suggest that the Central Committee be entirely divorced from the League. The International Conference, however, being entirely independent of the League, would be in a different position, and it would be appropriate for you to indicate this Government’s view that the Central International Body should be established by agreement among the High Contracting Parties or that it should be set up pursuant to the agreement of certain specified Powers. Upon the opening of the Conference the Department would be glad to receive from you any further suggested formulae to cover this point which you feel might profitably be suggested to the Conference. It is further suggested that the last paragraph of Article Eight be omitted. There will be considerable time between the signature of any convention and its going into effect. Arms manufacturers will be clearly on notice as to the conditions which they may be called upon to meet, in the event the Convention is made effective, and it would therefore seem proper that all shipments after Convention goes into effect should be subject to its terms, whether contracted for prior to or after such date. It would seem unnecessary, and perhaps prove to be impracticable, to endeavor to secure specific information relating to shipments made before the coming into force of the convention since the legal provisions for securing such information might not then be in effect in certain countries. However, in view of the fact that the United States already secures

and publishes such data there would be no serious objection to this provision unless it meant, in effect, that the United States would be the only country to supply this information to the Central Bureau. It is felt that this Article should further be amended to provide for a more frequent publication of statistics by the Central Bureau, which might well be done quarterly rather than annually. Further it should be provided that the High Contracting Parties may submit to the Central Bureau information which they receive as to infractions of the Convention for circulation by the Central Bureau to the High Contracting Parties. It is doubtful, however, whether the Central International Office should undertake to pass upon the information so furnished. It should rather act merely as a channel of transmission and of publicity. Finally it would be desirable to provide in Article 8 that the cost of the maintenance of the Central Bureau should be apportioned equitably among the High Contracting Parties. Possibly the best basis for computing the cost would be according to the Trade of each country as reported to the Central International Office. III. THE QUESTION OF THE PROHIBITED AREAS AND THE CONTROL TO BE EXERCISED THEREIN ARTICLES NINE TO TWENTY-FOUR, INCLUSIVE As already indicated, it is not felt that this section of the proposed Convention vitally concerns the United States Government, which has no territorial possessions, colonies, dependencies or mandates within the zones contemplated as prohibited areas. The only question which would appear to arise, so far as this Government is concerned, with respect to the Articles in question is whether it could consent that its nationals and their trade should be subject to the supervision proposed. As far as the provision for land surveillance is concerned, it seems clear that this Government could not object to any reasonable measure of control exercised in territory under the sovereign or mandatory control of other Powers. It would, of course, insist that such control should not result in discrimination, denial of the principle of equality of opportunity, or undue interference with legitimate trade. Subject, however, to these reservations, the Department would not be disposed to object to any agreement which might be reached among the interested Powers for a uniformity of control in the matter of importation of arms into the so-called “prohibited zone” if the zone is under the authority of the several Contracting Powers. This Government would not, however, consent to third Powers exercising any form of control over its trade with other sovereign countries, subject of course to the rules applicable in time of war to contraband or blockade.

It should further be pointed out that this Government could not consider itself bound by any such provision as that included in the penultimate paragraph of Article Thirteen, which states: “In cases where a violation has been duly proved, no further transit license shall be granted to the offending State without the previous consent of the Council of the League of Nations.” With respect to the question of maritime supervision, the question would naturally arise whether this Government could recognize the right of the High Contracting Parties to visit and search on the sea outside of territorial waters. The Department understands from Article Eighteen that the supervision contemplated applies to “native vessels of less than five hundred tons.” From the foregoing it appears unlikely that vessels flying the American flag would be affected. As far as the Department can judge from the facts before it, it would not be disposed to object to the exercise of supervision of this character by other Powers within certain specified zones adjacent to their own territories with respect to native vessels of the tonnage suggested, but it would not undertake to participate in any such supervision. As already suggested the Department is inclined to believe that it would not serve any useful purpose for this government to become a party to a convention comprising provisions similar to those in Articles 9–24. However, as this government is a party to the Brussels Act of 1890 which contains somewhat similar provisions the Department would be prepared to give careful consideration to the question in the event that you should affirmatively recommend the signature of such a convention. ARTICLE 25

It is further recommended that the provision that recognition of belligerency must be communicated to the other High Contracting Power be omitted. In the event that the license system is abandoned this article would be unnecessary but in that event Article 3, paragraph 1 should be amended to include “belligerents.” ARTICLE 26 “Any Government may, on signing or adhering to the present Convention, declare that it accepts its provisions partially or conditionally, provided that the High Contracting Parties consent and that it does not thereby affect the effectiveness of the supervision of the trade in arms, munitions and implements of war. “Nevertheless, the Convention shall only apply to Powers availing themselves of the option provided in the previous paragraph if, within the period of one year from the notification by the French Government of the deposit of their ratification (or adherence), partial or conditional, no opposition to such ratification (or adherence) has been raised by any of the Contracting Parties.” No comment. ARTICLE 27 “All the provisions of former general international Conventions relating to the matters dealt with in the present Convention, including the Convention for the Control of the Trade in Arms and Ammunition and the protocol signed at Saint Germain-en-Laye September 10th, 1919, shall be considered as abrogated in so far as they are binding between the Powers which are Parties to the present Convention. “The present Convention shall in no way affect the rights and obligations which may arise out of the provisions either of the Covenant of the League of Nations or of the Treaties of Peace signed in 1919 and 1920 at Versailles, Neuilly, Saint German and Trianon or of the Treaty limiting Naval Armaments signed at Washington on February 6th, 1922,51 and the provisions of Agreements registered with the League of Nations and published by the League up to the date of coming into force of the present Convention, so far as the Powers which are signatories of or benefit by the said Treaties or Agreements are concerned.” Your attention is particularly directed to the provisions in Article 27 that the “Convention shall in no way affect the rights and obligations which may arise out of

the provisions …52 of Agreements registered with the League of Nations and published by the League up to the date of coming into force of the present Convention. In view of the large number of agreements which have been so registered, the Department desires you, before acquiescing in any such provision, to ascertain whether any of the Powers parties to the proposed Convention have concluded and registered arrangements the terms of which conflict with those of the proposed convention. In the event that such is the case, the Department would wish you to consider the bearing of such arrangements upon the effectiveness of the control proposed before consenting to the insertion of any such provision as that quoted above. ARTICLE 28 “The Council of the League of Nations shall cause to be published an annual report on the operation on [of] the present Convention. “This report shall be presented to the Assembly of the League of Nations.” The Central International Office should publish the report quarterly rather than annually. If the Council of the League also desires to make a report, it would of course be entirely free to do so without any provision in the Convention to that effect. ARTICLE 29 “The present Convention, of which the French and English texts shall both be authentic, is subject to ratification. It shall bear today’s date and shall be open for signature by the Powers until . . . . . . . . . . (date). “Each Power shall address its ratification to the French Government, which shall at once notify the deposit of ratification to each of the other signatory Powers. “The instruments of ratification shall then remain deposited in the archives of the French Government.” No comment.

ARTICLE 30 “The High Contracting Parties will use their best endeavors to secure the accession to the present Convention of the other States, whether members of the League or not. On and after . . . . . . . . . . (date) the present Convention may be acceded to by any Power. Accession shall be effected by an

instrument communicated to the French Government, which shall at once notify such deposit to all Powers which are signatories of or accede to the Convention. “The instruments of accession shall remain deposited in the archives of the French Government.” Omit “whether members of the League or not.” ARTICLE 31 “Disputes between the Parties relating to the interpretation or application of this Convention shall, if they cannot be settled by direct negotiation, be referred for decision to the Permanent Court of International Justice. In case either or both of the Parties to such a dispute should not be parties to the Protocol of Signature of the Permanent Court of International Justice, the dispute shall be referred, at the choice of the Parties, either to the Permanent Court of International Justice or to a court of arbitration.” It might be well to insert after “Justice” the following: “to the Hague Tribunal.” ARTICLE 32 “The present Convention will not come into force until it has been ratified by twelve Powers, among whom shall be the following: Belgium, the United States of America, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan and Russia. “The date of its coming into force shall be the … day after the receipt by the French Government of the twelfth ratification. Thereafter, the present Convention will take effect in the case of each Party … days after the receipt of its ratification or accession.” The important point to be considered in connection with Article 32 is that a sufficient number of arms producing States should be included among the Powers whose ratification is necessary before the Convention enters into full force and effect. Further, it should be noted that if any of the participating or adhering powers have not been recognized by the United States the Department might desire to consider whether a reservation at the time of signature would be necessary to safeguard its position. ARTICLE 33 “The present Convention may be denounced by any Party thereto after the expiration of ten years from the date when it came into force in respect of that Party. Denunciation shall be effected by notification in writing addressed

to the French Government, which shall forthwith transmit copies of such notification to the other Parties, informing them of the date on which it was received. “A denunciation shall take effect two years after the date on which the notification thereof was received by the French Government, and shall operate only in respect of the notifying State.” The Department considers that the period of ten years for the effectiveness of the Convention is far too long. The question of the control of the traffic in arms is yet in its experimental stage, and this Government would not desire to be bound for any such protracted period without an opportunity to examine the effectiveness and practicability of the contemplated procedure. It is therefore suggested that “ten years” be replaced by “three years” and that denunciation should take effect “one year” after notification. It might be well to add that after the expiration of three years the Convention, unless denounced, would continue to remain in force until one year after denunciation. ARTICLE 34 “The High Contracting Parties agree that, at the conclusion of a period of five years, the present Convention shall, in the light of the experience then gained, be subject to revision upon the request of a third of the said High Contracting Parties.” “Five years” should be replaced by “three years” to bring this Article in line with the preceding one. In conclusion, the Department desires again to emphasize the position indicated in the early pages of this instruction; namely, that it would welcome any agreement which, while protecting the legitimate interests of this Government, might be calculated to lessen the evils of the illicit trade in arms and war material and thereby aid in the preservation of peace. In working toward this end, this Government does not desire that its representatives at the Conference should be bound by instructions on points of drafting or phraseology. It is believed, however, that the foregoing instructions will serve to indicate the points of particular interest to this Government. You should consider the proposed rephrasing of the various Articles of the Convention as suggestive rather than as mandatory. In the event that the discussions at the Conference should raise questions involving substantial modifications on matters of principle, you should communicate with the Department for further instructions.

Before any agreement is signed, the Department desires you to indicate the final form of the Convention in order that specific instructions with respect to the signature of the Convention may be given. FRANK B. KELLOGG 41 Theodore E. Burton, chairman of the delegation, member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives; Hugh S. Gibson, vice chairman of the delegation, Minister to Switzerland; Rear Admiral Andrew T. Long, Navy Department; Allen W. Dulles, Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs, Department of State; Brig. Gen. C. L’H. Buggies, Assistant Chief of Ordnance, War Department. 42 Charles E. Herring, commercial attaché at Berlin; Alan F. Winslow, secretary of legation at Berne; Maj. George V. Strong, General Staff, War Department; Comdr. Herbert F. Leary, assistant naval attaché at London. Maj. Earl J. Atkinson, War Department, was also later attached to the delegation as technical adviser.

acting through a régime not recognized by the United States as the Government of Russia. Article 32 would thus seem to indicate that the Convention might become operative upon the action of Russia as the twelfth state, making known its consent to the Convention through the medium of the Soviet regime, and that consequently all of the signatory Powers were disposed to permit the arrangement to become operative and binding upon each through the action of the Soviet régime. Such consent unless explained might well be taken to amount to recognition of that régime as the Government of Russia. Again, it would be highly unwise for a country, such as our own, not recognizing the Soviet régime, to undertake any contractual obligation with respect to Russia so long as it was represented by a regime not recognized by us. Accordingly, it is desired that, as a safeguard against any possible misconstruction of the attitude of the United States in signing a Convention at Geneva, or in accepting a Convention signed in its behalf, appropriate reservation be made covering the three following points: first, the effect of signing; secondly, the effect of failure on the part of the United States to object to the operation of Article 32 of the Convention; and, thirdly, the suspension of the operation of the Convention as between the United States and a signatory or adhering Power represented by a régime not recognized by the United States until such Power or signatory is represented by a Government recognized as such by the United States. The text of a reservation covering these points is set forth herein below. It may be observed that this Government has consented in correspondence with other interested Powers to permit Russia to adhere to the treaty concerning Spitzbergen under terms which could in no wise be regarded as implying recognition of its Soviet Government.54 It is understood that there is no objection abroad to this action by the United States, although there is not yet entire agreement as to the phraseology to be used with reference to the Soviet Government. In order to deprive the Soviet régime of cause to complain that the United States is thwarting its effort to represent Russia in its foreign affairs, it is suggested that it might be unwise for the American Delegation to endeavor to have stricken from Article 32 the provision with respect to Russia. So long as this Government is abundantly able to prevent misconstruction of its acts or those of the American Delegation by appropriate reservations, it should safeguard its action by that method rather than by aggressive steps serving to weaken the position of Russia or its delegates in the conference. RESERVATION The action of the American Delegation in signing this Convention is taken with the clear understanding that it is not to be construed as constituting the recognition by the

United States of the regime or entity functioning in any signatory or adhering Power as the Government thereof which is not recognized by the United States as the Government of such signatory or adhering Power; secondly, that the failure of the United States to object to the coming into force of this Convention through the ratification thereof by any specified Power pursuant to Article 32 through the medium of a regime or entity functioning therein which has not been recognized by the United States’ as the Government of such Power, shall not be regarded as constituting the recognition by the United States of such régime or entity as the Government of the Power in whose behalf it acts; and, thirdly, that the acceptance of this Convention by the United States shall not put into force any contractual obligation between itself and any signatory or adhering Power represented by a régime or entity not recognized by the United States as the Government thereof until such Power is represented by a Government recognized by the United States. FRANK B. KELLOGG

This matter will be further discussed Monday afternoon and further instructions would be much appreciated. BURTON

Delegation appreciates that we are already a party to a treaty on this subject and that at the present time we might not desire to go further than we have already gone in that treaty. It further realizes that there may be other plans for a conference of a very much broader scope and that the above suggestion may not harmonize with such plans. However, it is felt that this suggestion should be clearly placed before the Department and as the report of the Military and Naval Committee may be considered at early meeting it is very important the instructions be received at the earliest possible moment. Consider it imperative that this or some equivalent action be taken so that our country may retain initiative and that course of our delegation be consistent with its original action in pressing this matter. BURTON

In the belief, however, that it is very important to keep initiative of this matter in our hands, and that these proposals may not be sufficient, I shall consult the President tomorrow in regard to whether he will be willing to call a conference in event the other powers indicated willingness to attend. He might desire appropriation for expenses unless he should under present authorization of Congress call a further naval disarmament conference, when the other could be made a part of it as it was during the last one. I shall cable you after consultation with the President. KELLOGG

[Enclosure] Statement Approving the Provisions of the Convention and Consenting to Its Signature The undersigned Delegates, having examined the text of the Convention for the Control of the Trade in Arms, Ammunition and Implements of War, approve of its provisions and consent to the signing thereof by the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the American Delegation. A. T. LONG A. W. DULLES C. L’H. RUGGLES GENEVA, June 17, 1925.

[Enclosure 164 ] Convention for the Supervision of the International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in Implements of War, Signed at Geneva, June 17, 192565 GERMANY, THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, AUSTRIA, BELGIUM, BRAZIL, THE BRITISH EMPIRE, CANADA, THE IRISH FREE STATE AND INDIA, BULGARIA, CHILE, CHINA, COLOMBIA, DENMARK, EGYPT, SPAIN, ESTHONIA, ABYSSINIA, FINLAND, FRANCE, GREECE, HUNGARY, ITALY, JAPAN, LATVIA, LITHUANIA, LUXEMBURG, NICARAGUA, NORWAY, PANAMA, THE NETHERLANDS, PERSIA, POLAND, PORTUGAL, ROUMANIA, SALVADOR, SIAM, SWEDEN, SWITZERLAND, THE KINGDOM OF THE SERBS, CROATS AND SLOVENES, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, TURKEY, URUGUAY AND VENEZUELA, Whereas the international trade in arms and ammunition and in implements of war should be subjected to a general and effective system of supervision and publicity; Whereas such a system is not provided by existing Treaties and Conventions; Whereas in relation to certain areas of the world a special supervision of this trade is necessary in order to render more effective the measures adopted by the various Governments as regards both the import of such arms and ammunition and implements of war into these areas and their export therefrom; and Whereas the export or import of arms, ammunition or implements, the use of which in war is prohibited by International Law, must not be permitted for such purpose; Have decided to conclude a Convention and

have accordingly appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: [Here follow the names of the Plenipotentiaries.]66

Who, having communicated their full powers, found in good and due form, HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: CHAPTER I.—Categories ARTICLE 1 For the purposes of the present Convention, five Categories of arms, ammunition and implements are established: CATEGORY I. ARMS, AMMUNITION AND IMPLEMENTS OF WAR EXCLUSIVELY DESIGNED AND INTENDED FOR LAND, SEA OR AERIAL WARFARE A.—Arms, ammunition and implements exclusively designed and intended for land, sea or aerial warfare, which are or shall be comprised in the armament of the armed forces of any State, or which, if they have been but are no longer comprised in such armament, are capable of military to the exclusion of any other use, except such arms, ammunition and implements which, though included in the above definition, are covered by other Categories. Such arms, ammunition and implements are comprised in the following twelve headings: 1. Rifles, muskets, carbines. 2. (a) Machine-guns, automatic rifles and machine-pistols of all calibres; (b) Mountings for machine-guns; (c) Interrupter gears.

(d) Gun carriages, mountings, recuperators, accessories for mountings. 6. Projectiles and ammunition for the arms enumerated in No. 5 above. 7. Apparatus for the discharge of bombs, torpedoes, depth charges and other kinds of projectiles. 8. (a) Grenades; (c) Land mines, submarine mines, fixed or floating, depth charges; (d) Torpedoes. 9. Appliances for use with the above arms and apparatus. 10. Bayonets. 11. Tanks and armoured cars. 12. Arms and ammunition not specified in the above enumeration.

B.—Component parts, completely finished, of the articles covered by A above, if capable of being utilised only in the assembly or repair of the said articles, or as spare parts. CATEGORY II. ARMS AND AMMUNITION CAPABLE OF USE BOTH FOR MILITARY AND OTHER PURPOSES A.—1. Pistols and revolvers, automatic or self-loading, and developments of the same, designed for single-handed use or fired from the shoulder, of a calibre greater than 6.5 mm. and length of barrel greater than 10 cm. 2. Fire-arms designed, intended or adapted for non-military purposes, such as sport or personal defence, that will fire cartridges that can be fired from fire-arms in Category I; other rifled fire-arms firing from the shoulder, of a calibre of 6 mm. or above, not included in Category I, with the exception of rifled fire-arms with a “breakdown” action. 3. Ammunition for the arms enumerated in the above two headings, with the exception of ammunition covered by Category I. 4. Swords and lances.

B.—Component parts, completely finished, of the articles covered by A above, if capable of being utilised only in the assembly or repair of the said articles, or as spare parts. CATEGORY III. VESSELS OF WAR AND THEIR ARMAMENT 1. Vessels of war of all kinds. 2. Arms, ammunition and implements of war mounted on board vessels of war and forming part of their normal armament. CATEGORY IV 1. Aircraft, assembled or dismantled. 2. Aircraft engines. CATEGORY V 1. Gunpowder and explosives, except common black gunpowder. 2. Arms and ammunition other than those covered by Categories I and II, such as pistols and revolvers of all models, rifled weapons with a “breakdown” action, other rifled fire-arms of a calibre of less than 6 mm. designed for firing from the shoulder, smooth-bore shot-guns, guns with more than one barrel of which at least one barrel is smooth-bore, fire-arms firing rimfire ammunition, muzzle-loading fire-arms.

CHAPTER II.—Supervision and Publicity ARTICLE 2 The High Contracting Parties undertake not to export or permit the export of articles covered by Category I, except in accordance with the following conditions: 1. The export shall be for a direct supply to the Government of the importing State or, with the consent of such Government, to a public authority subordinate to it; 2. An order in writing, which shall be signed or endorsed by a representative of the importing Government duly authorised so to act, shall have been presented to the competent authorities of the exporting country. This order shall state that the articles to be exported are required for delivery to the importing Government or public authority as provided in paragraph 1.

ARTICLE 3 Nevertheless, export for supply to private persons may be permitted in the following cases: 1. Articles covered by Category I exported direct to a manufacturer of war material for use by him for the requirements of his industry, provided their import has been duly authorised by the Government of the importing country; 2. Rifles, muskets and carbines and their ammunition exported for supply to rifle associations formed for the encouragement of individual sport and duly authorised by their own Government to use them, the import of which is not contrary to any other provisions of the present Convention. Such arms and ammunition shall be sent direct to the Government of the importing country for transmission by such Government to the associations for which they are supplied. 3. Samples of articles covered by Category I exported for demonstration purposes direct to a trade representative of the exporting manufacturer, such representative being duly authorised by the Government of the importing country to receive them. In the above-mentioned cases, an order in, writing, endorsed by the Government of the importing country or by its representative duly authorised so to act, must have been presented to the authorities of the exporting country. It shall contain all the information necessary to show that the order is properly made under this Article. ARTICLE 4 Permission to export under Articles 2 and 3 shall be signified by a licence. An export declaration, if filed with and approved by the competent authorities of the exporting country, may take the place of a licence.

Such licence or declaration must contain: (a) A description sufficient for the identification of the articles to which it relates, and giving their designation according to the headings in Category I, and their number or weight; (b) The name and address of the exporter; (e) The name and address of the importing consignee;

(d) The name of the Government which has authorised the import. Each separate consignment which crosses the frontier of the exporting country, whether by land, water or air, shall be accompanied by a document containing the particulars indicated above. This document may be either the licence or export declaration or a certified copy thereof or a certificate issued by the Customs authorities of the exporting country, stating that the consignment is exported under licence or export declaration in accordance with the provisions of the present Convention. ARTICLE 5 The articles covered by Category II shall only be exported under cover of an export document, which may be either a licence issued by the competent authorities of the exporting country or an export declaration endorsed by or filed with them. If the legislation of the importing country requires the endorsement of a duly authorised representative of its Government, and if this fact has been notified by the said Government to the Government of the exporting country, then such an endorsement must have been obtained and submitted to the competent authorities of the exporting country before the export may take place. Neither the licence nor the export declaration shall entail any responsibility upon the Government of the exporting country as to the destination or ultimate use of any consignment. Nevertheless, if the High Contracting Parties consider, on account of the size, destination or other circumstances of a consignment, that the arms and ammunition consigned are intended for war purposes, they undertake to apply to such consignment

The High Contracting Parties further undertake, so far as each may be concerned, to publish within the same time-limits a return containing the same information in respect of the consignments of articles covered by Categories I and II to other territories placed under their sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage, or under the same sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage. The first statistical return to be published by each of the High Contracting Parties shall be for the quarter beginning on the first day of January, April, July or October, subsequent to the date on which the present Convention comes into force with regard to the High Contracting Party concerned. The High Contracting Parties undertake to publish as an annex to the above-mentioned return the text of the provisions of all statutes, orders or regulations in force within their territory dealing with the export and import of articles covered by Article 1, and to include therein all provisions enacted for the purpose of carrying out the present Convention. Amendments and additions to these provisions shall be likewise published in annexes to subsequent quarterly returns. ARTICLE 7 The High Contracting Parties, in all cases covered by Category III, undertake to publish within two months of the close of each quarter a return for that quarter, giving the information detailed below for each vessel of war constructed, in course of construction or to be constructed within their territorial jurisdiction on behalf of the Government of another State: (a) The date of the signing of the contract for the construction of the vessel, the name of the Government for which the vessel is ordered, together with the following data: Standard displacement in tons and metric tons; The principal dimensions, namely: length at water-line, extreme beam at or below water-line, mean draft at standard displacement; (b) The date of laying the keel, the name of the Government for which the vessel is being constructed, together with the following data: Standard displacement in tons and metric tons; The principal dimensions, namely: length at water-line, extreme beam at or below water-line, mean draft at standard displacement;

(c) The date of delivery, the name of the Government to which the vessel is delivered, together with the following data with respect to the vessel at that date: Standard displacement in tons and metric tons; The principal dimensions, namely: length at water-line, extreme beam at or below water-line, mean draft at standard displacement; As well as the following information regarding the armament installed on board the vessel at the date of delivery and forming part of the vessel’s normal armament: Number and calibre of guns; Number and calibre of torpedo-tubes; Number of bomb-throwers; Number of machine-guns. The above information concerning the armament of the vessel shall be furnished by means of a statement signed by the shipbuilder and countersigned by the commanding officer or such other representative fully authorised for the purpose by the Government of the State to whom the vessel is delivered. Such statement shall be transmitted to the competent authority of the Government of the constructing country. Whenever a vessel of war belonging to one of the High Contracting Parties is transferred, whether by gift, sale or other mode of transfer, to the Government of another State, the transferor undertakes to publish within two months of the close of the quarter within which the transfer is effected the following information: The date of transfer, the name of the Government to whom the vessel has been transferred and the data and information referred to in paragraph (c) above. By the standard displacement in the present Article is to be understood the displacement of the vessel complete, fully manned, engined and equipped ready for sea, including all armament and ammunition, equipment, outfit, provisions and fresh water for crew, miscellaneous stores and implements of every description that are intended to be carried in war, but without fuel or reserve feed-water on board. ARTICLE 8 Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 7, if the transport of any vessel of war is carried out otherwise than by such vessel’s own motive power or towage, the vessel,

whether assembled or in component parts, and the armament thereof will become subject also to the provisions of this Convention as if they were included in Category I.

ARTICLE 9 The High Contracting Parties undertake to publish, within six months of the close of each quarter, a return for that quarter of the export of aircraft and aircraft engines, giving quantities exported and their allocation according to country of destination. ARTICLE 10 Subject to the provisions of Chapter III, the articles covered by Categories IV and V may be exported without formalities or restrictions. ARTICLE 11 The High Contracting Parties undertake not to apply a more favourable regime to imports of articles referred to in Article 1 coming from territories of non-contracting States than that which they will apply to such imports coming from territories of contracting States, and to subject these imports, of whatever origin, to the same conditions of authorisation and, so far as possible, of publicity. CHAPTER III.—Special Zones ARTICLE 12 The High Contracting Parties agree that the provisions of this Chapter apply to the territorial and maritime zones hereinafter defined and referred to in the present Convention as the “special zones”. 1. Land zone. (a) The whole of the continent of Africa, with the exception of Egypt, Lybia, Tunisia, Algeria, the Spanish possessions in North Africa, Abyssinia, and of the Union of South Africa together with the territory under its mandate, and of Southern Rhodesia. This zone also includes the adjacent islands which are situated within 100 marine miles from the coast thereof and also Prince’s Island (Principe) in the Bight of Biafra, St. Thomas (Sâo Thomé), Annobon and Socotra, but does not include the Spanish islands situated to the north of the parallel of 26° North latitude. (b) The Arabian peninsula, Gwadar, Syria and Lebanon, Palestine and Transjordan, and Iraq.

2. Maritime zone. A maritime zone, which includes the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden, the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman and is bounded by a line drawn from and following the latitude of Cape Guardafui to the point of intersection with longitude 57° East of Greenwich and proceeding thence direct to the point at which the eastern frontier of Gwadar meets the sea.

ARTICLE 13 The High Contracting Parties undertake not to export or to permit articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V to be exported to places within the special zones, unless a licence has been issued in conformity with the conditions defined in Article 14. An export declaration, if filed with and approved by the competent authorities of the exporting country, may take the place of a licence. The High Contracting Parties also undertake, each in respect of any territory under its sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage situated within the special zones, not to permit articles covered by the Categories above mentioned to be imported into such territory unless their import has been authorised by the authorities of the territory concerned. Such articles shall only be admitted into territory within the special zones at such ports or other places as the authorities of the State, colony, protectorate or mandated territory concerned shall designate for this purpose. ARTICLE 14 The High Contracting Parties undertake not to issue the export licences nor to approve the export declarations required under Article 13 unless they are satisfied that the conditions stated in paragraph (a) or (b) hereof are fulfilled and also, as regards articles

(b) That, if an export is being made to territory which is not under the sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage of a High Contracting Party, articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V are required for lawful purposes. ARTICLE 15 The High Contracting Parties undertake to publish, in addition to the returns provided for in Article 6 and Article 9 in respect of articles covered by Categories I, II and IV, a return of articles covered by Category V exported to territory situated within the special zones. This return shall be published within the same time-limits and at the same intervals as those provided in the first paragraph of Article 6, and shall contain, as far as possible, the same particulars. ARTICLE 16 The trade in articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V within the special zones shall be placed under the supervision of officials of the authorities of the State, colony, protectorate or mandated territory concerned. The admission and transit of and trade in such articles within the said zones shall also be subject to the provisions of Section I, §§ 1 and 2, of Annex II of the present Convention, to which provisions the High Contracting Parties undertake to conform. An authorisation must be given by a duly authorised representative of the authorities aforesaid in each case before any such articles may be reconsigned to any place outside the territory to which they have been admitted. ARTICLE 17 The manufacture, assembly and repair within the special zones of articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V shall be subject to the provisions of Section I, § 3, of Annex II of the present Convention, to which provisions the High Contracting Parties undertake to conform. ARTICLE 18 The High Contracting Parties undertake, each in respect of any territory under its sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage situated within the special zones, not to permit the transit by land across such territory of articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V when their destination is another territory also situated in the special zones, unless their transport to their destination is assured and the authorities of the latter territory have authorised their import.

The prohibition referred to in the above paragraph shall not apply to the transit of such articles through a territory situated in the special zones when their destination is territory of one of the High Contracting Parties not included in the said zones, provided that their transport to their destination is assured. If, for the purposes of transport to a territory situated within the special zones, it is necessary to pass through a contiguous territory likewise situated within the said zones, the transit shall be permitted, subject always to the conditions laid down in the first paragraph hereof, at the request of the authorities of the importing territory, provided that such authorities guarantee that the articles in respect of which the request is made shall not at any time be sold, or otherwise transferred, contrary to the provisions of the present Convention. Nevertheless, if the attitude or the disturbed condition of the importing State constitutes a threat to peace or public order, permission for transit shall be refused to such State by the authorities of all such contiguous territories until this threat has ceased to exist. ARTICLE 19 Subject to any contrary provisions in existing special agreements or in any future agreements, provided that in all cases such agreements otherwise comply with the provisions of the present Convention, the High Contracting Parties agree that in the special zones the authorities of the State, colony, protectorate or mandated territory concerned shall carry out within their territorial waters the supervision and police measures necessary for the application of the present Convention. ARTICLE 20 The High Contracting Parties agree that within the special zones no native vessel, as hereinafter defined, of less than 500 tons (net tonnage) shall be allowed to ship, discharge or tranship articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V. A vessel shall be deemed to be a native vessel if she is either owned, fitted out or commanded by a native of any country bordering on the Indian Ocean west of the meridian of 95° East of Greenwich and north of the parallel of 11° South latitude, the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, or the Gulf of Oman, or if at least one-half of the crew are natives of such countries. The provisions of paragraph 1 hereof do not apply to lighters or barges or to vessels engaged exclusively in the coasting trade between different ports of the same State, colony, protectorate or mandated territory where warehouses are situated. The conditions under which articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V may be carried by such vessels are laid down in § 1 of Section II of Annex II of the present Convention, to which the High Contracting Parties undertake to conform.

The provisions of this Article and of Section II, § 1, of Annex II do not apply: (a) To arms, ammunition or implements carried on behalf of a Government either under an authorisation or accompanied by a duly authorised official of such Government; or (b) To arms and ammunition in the possession of persons provided with a licence to carry arms on the condition that such arms are for the personal use of the bearer and are accurately described in such licence.

ARTICLE 21 The High Contracting Parties agree that, with the object of preventing all illicit conveyance within the special zones of articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V, all native vessels within the meaning of Article 20 must carry a manifest of their cargo or a similar document specifying the quantities and nature of the goods on board, their origin and destination. This manifest shall remain covered by the secrecy to which it is entitled by the law of the State to which the vessel belongs, and must not be examined during proceedings for the verification of the flag, unless the interested party consents thereto. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to: (a) Vessels exclusively engaged in the coasting trade between different ports of the same State, colony, protectorate or mandated territory; or (b) Vessels engaged in carrying arms, ammunition and implements on behalf of a Government under the conditions defined in Article 20 (a) and proceeding to or from any point within the said zones; or (c) Vessels only partially decked, having a maximum crew of ten men, and exclusively employed in fishing within territorial waters. ARTICLE 22 The High Contracting Parties agree that no authorisation to fly the flag of any of such High Contracting Parties shall be granted to native vessels of less than 500 tons (net tonnage) as defined in Article 20, except in accordance with the conditions prescribed in Section II, §§ 3 and 4, of Annex II of the present Convention. Such authorisation, which shall be in writing, shall be renewed every year and shall contain the particulars necessary to identify the vessel, the name, tonnage, type of rigging, principal

dimensions, registered number and signal letters if any. It shall bear the date on which it was granted and the status of the official who granted it. ARTICLE 23 The High Contracting Parties agree to communicate to any other High Contracting Party who so requests the forms of the documents to be issued by them under Articles

ARTICLE 27 The High Contracting Parties agree that the provisions of Articles 16 to 26 inclusive and of Annex II of the present Convention establishing a certain regime of supervision in the special zones shall not be interpreted, as regards such High Contracting Parties as have no territory under their sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage within or immediately adjacent to the said special zones, either as constituting an obligation to apply the regime defined in the abovementioned provisions or as involving their responsibility with respect to the application of this regime. However, the said High Contracting Parties shall conform to the provisions of Articles

CHAPTER IV.—Special Provisions ARTICLE 28 Abyssinia, desirous of rendering as effective as possible the supervision of the trade in arms and ammunition and in implements of war, which is the subject of the present Convention, hereby undertakes, in the free exercise of her sovereign rights, to put into force, so far as concerns her own territory, all regulations which may be necessary to fulfil the provisions of Articles 12 to 18 inclusive of the said Convention relating to exports, imports and the transport of arms, ammunition and implements of war. The High Contracting Parties take note of the above undertaking, and, being in full sympathy with the desire of Abyssinia to render as effective as possible the supervision of the trade in arms and ammunition and in implements of war, hereby undertake to conform to the provisions of the above-mentioned Articles so far as concerns Abyssinian territory, and to respect the regulations put into force, in accordance with the said undertaking, by Abyssinia as a sovereign State. If a State, at present included in the special zones, should at the moment of its accession to the present Convention assume with respect to its own territory the same undertakings as those set forth in the first paragraph of this Article, and also, when such State possesses a sea-coast, those contained in Articles 19 to 26 inclusive in so far as the same are applicable, the High Contracting Parties hereby declare that they will consider such State as excluded from the said zones from the date that its accession becomes effective as specified in Article 41 and that they will accept as regards such State the obligations set forth in the second paragraph of the present Article, and also, when the State excluded possesses a sea-coast, the obligations of Articles 19 to 27 inclusive in so far as they are applicable. ARTICLE 29

The High Contracting Parties agree to accept reservations which may be made by Esthonia, Finland, Latvia, Poland and Roumania at the moment of their signature of the present Convention and which shall suspend in respect of these States, until the accession of Russia to the present Convention, the application of Articles 6 and 9, as regards both export to and import into these countries by the High Contracting Parties. These reservations shall not be interpreted as preventing the publication of statistics in accordance with the laws and regulations in effect within the territory of any High Contracting Party.

ARTICLE 30 The High Contracting Parties who possess extra-territorial jurisdiction in the territory of another State party to the present Convention undertake in cases where the rules of this Convention cannot be enforced by the local courts as regards their nationals in such territory to prohibit all action by such nationals contrary to the provisions of the present Convention. CHAPTER V.—General Provisions ARTICLE 31 The provisions of the present Convention are completed by those of Annexes I and II which have the same value and shall enter into force at the same time as the Convention itself. ARTICLE 32 The High Contracting Parties agree that the provisions of the present Convention do not apply: (a) To arms or ammunition or to implements of war forwarded from territory under the sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection or tutelage of a High Contracting Party for the use of the armed forces of such High Contracting Party, wherever situated, nor (b) To arms or ammunition carried by individual members of such forces or by other persons in the service of a High Contracting Party and required by them by reason of their calling, nor (c) To rifles, muskets, carbines and the necessary ammunition therefor, carried by members of rifle clubs for the sole purpose of individual use in international competitions in marksmanship. ARTICLE 33

In time of war, and without prejudice to the rules of neutrality, the provisions of Chapter II shall be suspended from operation until the restoration of peace so far as concerns any consignment of arms or ammunition or of implements of war to or on behalf of a belligerent. ARTICLE 34 All the provisions of general international Conventions anterior to the date of the present Convention, such as the Convention for the Control of the Trade in Arms and Ammunition and the Protocol signed at St. Germain-en-Laye on September 10th, 1919, shall be considered as abrogated in so far as they relate to the matters dealt with in the present Convention and are binding between the Powers which are Parties to the present Convention.

The present Convention shall not be deemed to affect any rights and obligations which may arise out of the provisions) either of the Covenant of the League of Nations or of the Treaties of Peace signed in 1919 and 1920 at Versailles, Neuilly, St. Germain and Trianon, or of the Treaty Limiting Naval Armaments signed at Washington on February 6th, 1922, or of any other treaty, convention, agreement or engagement concerning prohibition of import, export or transit of arms or ammunition or of implements of war; nor, without prejudice to the provisions of the present Convention itself, shall it affect any other treaty, convention, agreement or engagement other than those referred to in paragraph 1 of the present Article having as its object the supervision of import, export or transit of arms or ammunition or of implements of war. ARTICLE 35 The High Contracting Parties agree that disputes arising between them relating to the interpretation or application of this Convention shall, if they cannot be settled by direct negotiation, be referred for decision to the Permanent Court of International Justice. In case either or both of the States to such a dispute should not be parties to the Protocol of December 16th, 1920, relating to the Permanent Court of International Justice, the dispute shall be referred, at the choice of the Parties and in accordance with the constitutional procedure of each State, either to the Permanent Court of International Justice or to a court of arbitration constituted in accordance with the Hague Convention of October 18th, 1907, or to some other court of arbitration. ARTICLE 36 Any High Contracting Party may declare that its signature or ratification or accession does not, as regards the application of the provisions of Chapter II and of Articles 13, 14 and 15 of the present Convention, bind either all or any one of the territories subject

to its sovereignty, jurisdiction or protection, provided that such territories are not situated in the special zones as defined in Article 12. Any High Contracting Party which has made such a declaration may, subsequently, and in conformity with the provisions of Article 37, adhere entirely to the present Convention for any territories so excluded. Such High Contracting Party will use its best endeavours to ensure as soon as possible the accession of any territories so excluded. Any High Contracting Party may also, as regards the application of the provisions of

In case a denunciation has the effect of reducing the number of States parties to the Convention below fourteen, any of the remaining High Contracting Parties may also, within a period of one year from the date of such denunciation, denounce the Convention without waiting for the expiration of the period of four years mentioned above and may require that its denunciation shall take effect at the same date as the first-mentioned denunciation. ARTICLE 39 The High Contracting Parties agree that, at the conclusion of a period of three years from the coming into force of the present Convention under the terms of Article 41, this Convention shall be subject to revision upon the request of one-third of the said High Contracting Parties addressed to the Government of the French Republic.

ARTICLE 40 The present Convention, of which the French and English texts are both authentic, is subject to ratification. It shall bear to-day’s date. Each Power shall address its ratification to the Government of the French Republic, which will at once notify the deposit of ratification to each of the other signatory Powers. The instruments of ratification will remain deposited in the archives of the Government of the French Republic. ARTICLE 41 A first proces-verbal of the deposit of ratifications will be drawn up by the Government of the French Republic as soon as the present Convention shall have been ratified by fourteen Powers. The Convention shall come into force four months after the date of the notification of this proces-verbal by the Government of the French Republic to all signatory Powers. Subsequently, the Convention will come into force in respect of each High Contracting Party four months after the date on which its ratification or accession shall have been notified by the Government of the French Republic to all signatory or acceding States. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the above-mentioned Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention.

DONE at Geneva, in a single copy, this seventeenth day of June, One Thousand Nine Hundred and Twenty-Five. For Germany H. VON ECKARDT For the United States of America THEODORE E. BURTON HUGH S. GIBSON For Austria E. PFLÜGL For Belgium For Brazil CONTRE-AMIRAL A. C. DE SOUZA E SILVA MAJOR ESTEVAO LEITÃO DE CARVALHO Brazil reserves the right, during the whole period of application of the present Convention, to execute it, in so far as she is concerned, in accordance with the spirit of the clauses which aim at rendering the supervision general both as regards the trade in and the manufacture of armaments.67 For the British Empire I declare that my signature does not bind India or any British Dominion which is a separate Member of the League of Nations and does not separately sign or adhere to the Convention. ONSLOW For Canada For the Irish Free State For India P. Z. Cox

For Bulgaria For Chile GÉNÉRAL DE DIVISION LUIS CABRERA For China For Colombia For Denmark For Egypt For Spain EMILIO DE PALACIOS For Esthonia Subject to the suspension of the application of Articles 6 and 9 in virtue of the right accorded to Esthonia by Article 29. LAIDONER For Abyssinia GUÉTATCHOU BLATA HEROUY HEROUY A. TASFAE For Finland Subject to the suspension of the application of Articles 6 and 9 in virtue of the right accorded to Finland by Article 29. O. ENCKELL For France B. CLAUZEL For Greece

For Hungary DR. BARANYAI ZOLTÁN For Italy PIETRO CHIMIENTI ALBERTO DE MARINIS-STENDARDO For Japan M. MATSUDA For Latvia Subject to the suspension of the application of Articles 6 and 9 in virtue of the right accorded to Latvia by Article 29. COLONEL HARTMANIS For Lithuania For Luxemburg CH. G. VERMAIRE For Nicaragua For Norway For Panama For the Netherlands For Persia For Poland Subject to the suspension of the application of Articles 6 and 9 in virtue of the right accorded to Poland by Article 29. GÉNÉRAL CASIMIR SOSNKOWSKI G. D. MORAWSKI

For Portugal For Roumania Ad referendum subject to the reservation provided for in Article 29 of the Convention to the effect that the application of Articles 6 and 9 as regards both export to and import into Roumania by the High Contracting Parties shall be suspended until the adhesion of Russia to the present Convention and to its Annexes. N. P. COMNENE GÉNÉRAL T. DUMITRESCU For Salvador J. GUSTAVO GUERRERO For Siam For Sweden For Switzerland For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes J. DOUTCHITCH GÉNÉRAL KALAFATOVITCH CAPT. D. FRÉG. MARIASEVITCH For Czechoslovakia DR. VEVERKA, FERDINAND For Turkey For Uruguay For Venezuela Annex I STATISTICAL FORMS

FORM I Imports1 into . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (name of importing country) during the . . . . . . . . . . quarter of 19. . Description2 of arms and ammunition and implements of war according to the headings in attached schedule. Countries of Origin Total A3 Z3 No. of articles Weight Declared value4 No. of articles Weight Declared value4 No. of articles Weight Declared value4 Totals EXPLANATORY NOTES

FORM II Exports and Re-exports1 from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (name of exporting country) during the . . . . . . . . . . quarter of 19. . Description2 of arms and ammunition and implements of war according to the headings in attached schedule. Countries of Destination Total A3 Z3 No. of articles Weight Declared value4 No. of articles Weight Declared value4 No. of articles Weight Declared value4 Total EXPLANATORY NOTES SCHEDULE

CATEGORY I. ARMS, AMMUNITION AND IMPLEMENTS OF WAR EXCLUSIVELY DESIGNED AND INTENDED FOR LAND, SEA OR AERIAL WARFARE Arms and ammunition and implements exclusively designed and intended for land, sea or aerial warfare, which are, or shall be, comprised in the armament of the armed forces of any State, or which, if they have been, are no longer comprised in such armament but are capable of military to the exclusion of any other use, except such arms, ammunition and implements which, though included in the above definition, are covered in other categories. Such arms, ammunition and implements are comprised in the following twelve headings: 1. Rifles, muskets, carbines (number). 2. (a) Machine-guns, automatic rifles and machine-pistols of all calibres (b) Mountings for machine-guns (number); (c) Interrupter gears (number).

(b) Bombs (number); (c) Land mines, submarine mines, fixed or floating, depth charges (number); (d) Torpedoes (number). 9. Appliances for use with the above arms and apparatus (number). 10. Bayonets (number). 11. Tanks and armoured cars (number). 12. Arms and ammunition not specified in the above enumeration (number or weight). Component parts, completely finished, of the articles covered by the above headings, if capable of being utilised only in the assembly or repair of the said articles, or as spare parts, should be entered separately, by weight, under each of the above headings or subheadings to which they belong. CATEGORY II. ARMS AND AMMUNITION CAPABLE OF USE BOTH FOR MILITARY AND OTHER PURPOSES 1. Pistols and revolvers, automatic or self-loading, and developments of the same, designed for single-handed use or fired from the shoulder, of a calibre

SECTION I. Supervision on Land § 1 All articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V admitted into the territory of a State, colony, protectorate or mandated territory situated in the special zones, except such articles imported by individuals for their personal use under an authorisation issued by the authorities of the territory concerned, shall be deposited by the importer at his own expense and risk in a public warehouse maintained under the exclusive custody and permanent supervision of the authorities aforesaid or their officials, of whom at least one must be a member of their armed forces, and who shall keep an official record of such deposit. Every withdrawal from a public warehouse must be authorised beforehand by such authorities. No such authorisation shall be given except for the purposes of transfer to another public warehouse or to a private warehouse duly approved by the said authorities or for delivery to individuals who have proved to the satisfaction of the said authorities that the articles are necessary to them for their personal use. Articles required for the equipment of the national forces or for the defence of the territory are exempted from all formalities in connection with deposit in or withdrawal from a public warehouse. No private warehouse for articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V shall be allowed within the special zones unless authorised by the authorities of the State, colony, protectorate, or mandated territory. Such warehouse must consist of enclosed premises, reserved for that purpose and having only one entry, which must be fitted with two locks, one of which can be opened only by officials of the authorities. The person in charge of the warehouse shall be responsible for all such articles deposited therein and must account for them on demand by the authorities. Such articles must not be withdrawn from the warehouse nor be transported or transferred without a special authorisation. The particulars entered on such authorisations shall be noted in a special register numbered and initialled.

Every arm imported under the provisions of § 1 by an individual for his personal use or transferred under the provisions of the same § from a public warehouse to a private warehouse or a private individual must be registered. A mark shall be stamped thereon if it does not already bear another mark or a number sufficient for identification. The mark or number shall be noted in the licence to carry arms issued by the authorities.

The manufacture or assembly within the special zones of articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V is prohibited otherwise than in establishments instituted for the defence of the territory or maintenance of public order by the authorities of the territory concerned, or in the case of mandated territory by such authorities under the supervision of the mandatory Power. The repair of such articles shall only be carried out in establishments instituted by the authorities or in private establishments which shall have been authorised for this purpose by the said authorities. Such authorisation shall not be granted without guarantees for the observance of the rules of the present Convention. SECTION II. Maritime Supervision § 1 Cargoes of articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V shipped on board the lighters, barges or coasting vessels referred to in Article 20, paragraph 3, must be covered by a special licence issued by the authorities of the State, colony, protectorate or mandated territory in which such cargoes are shipped, and containing the particulars specified in § 2 hereof. All articles so shipped shall in addition be subject to the provisions of the present Convention. Special licences referred to in § 1 of Section II of the present Annex shall contain the following particulars: (a) A statement of the nature and quantity of the articles in respect of which the licence is issued. (b) The name of the vessel on which the cargoes are to be shipped. (c) The name of the ultimate consignee. (d) The ports of loading and discharge. It shall be certified on such licences that they have been issued in conformity with the provisions of the present Convention.

An authorisation to fly the flag of a High Contracting Party may only be granted by the authorities mentioned in paragraph (b) below, and subject to the three following conditions: (a) The owners must be nationals of the Power whose flag they claim to fly or companies who are nationals under the laws of that Power. (b) The owners must have furnished proof that they are bona fide owners of real estate in the territory of the authorities to whom the application for a licence is addressed, or have given to such authorities sufficient guarantees for the payment of any fines to which they may become liable. (c) The owners and the captain of the vessel must have furnished proof that they enjoy a good reputation and, in particular, that they have never been convicted of illicit conveyance of arms or ammunition or implements of war. All native vessels before they are authorised to fly the flag of a High Contracting Party shall have complied with the following regulations for the purpose of their identification at sea: (a) The initial letters of the port of registration of the native vessel, followed by the vessel’s registration number in the serial port numbers, must be incised and painted in white on black ground on both quarters of each vessel in such a position as to be easily distinguishable from a distance. (b) The net tonnage of the native vessel shall also, if practicable, be incised and painted inside the hull in a conspicuous position. The regulations referred to in Article 24 of the present Convention are as follows: 1. When a warship belonging to one of the High Contracting Parties encounters within the maritime zone but outside territorial waters a presumed native vessel of under 500 tons burden (net tonnage), (a) Flying the flag of one of the High Contracting Parties, or (b) Flying no flag, and the Commanding Officer of the warship has good reason to believe that the said vessel is flying the flag of any High Contracting Party without being entitled to do so, or is illicitly conveying articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V, he may proceed

to stop the vessel in order to verify the nationality of the vessel by examining the document authorising the flying of the flag, but no other document.

2. Any vessel which presents the appearance of native build and rig may be presumed to be a native vessel. 3. For the purpose of verifying the nationality of the suspected vessel, a boat commanded by a commissioned officer in uniform may be sent to visit the vessel after she has been hailed so as to give notice of such intention. The officer sent on board the vessel shall act with all possible consideration and moderation. Before leaving the vessel, the officer shall draw up a proces-verbal in the form and language in use in his own country. This proces-verbal shall state the facts of the case and shall be dated and signed by the officer. Should there be on board the warship no commissioned officer other than the Commanding Officer, the above prescribed operations may be carried out by a warrant, petty or non-commissioned officer at the discretion of the Commanding Officer. The captain or master of the vessel visited, as well as the witnesses, shall be invited to sign the proces-verbal and shall have the right to add to it any explanations which they may consider expedient. 4. In the cases referred to in paragraph 1 (a) hereof, unless the right to fly the flag can be established, the vessel may be conducted to the nearest port in the maritime zone where there is a competent authority of the Power whose flag has been flown and shall be handed over to such authority, but if such a port should be at such a distance from the point of detention that the warship would have to leave her station or patrol to escort the detained vessel thereto, the vessel may be taken to the nearest port where there is a competent authority of one of the High Contracting Parties of nationality other than that of the warship and handed over to such authority, and steps shall at once be taken to notify this fact to the competent authority representing the power concerned. No proceedings shall be taken against the vessel or her crew until the arrival of the representative of the Power whose flag the vessel was flying or without authority from such representative. Instead of conducting the suspected vessel to a port as laid down above, the Commanding Officer of the detaining warship may hand her over to a warship of the nation whose flag she has flown if the latter consents to take charge of her.

5. The procedure laid down in paragraph 4 may also be followed if, after the verification of the flag and in spite of the voluntary production of the manifest, the Commanding Officer of the warship continues to suspect the vessel of engaging in the illicit conveyance of articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V. 6. In the cases referred to in paragraph 1 (b) hereof, if it is ascertained, as a result of the visit made on board the vessel that, whereas it flew no flag, it was also not entitled to fly the flag of a recognised State, the vessel may, unless the innocent nature of her cargo can be duly established to the satisfaction of the Commanding Officer of the warship, be conducted to the nearest point in the maritime zone where there is a competent authority of the Power to which the detaining warship belongs, and shall be handed over to such authority. 7. The authority before whom the suspected vessel has been brought shall institute a full enquiry in accordance with the laws and regulations of his country and in conformity with the procedure laid down in paragraph 8 below. This enquiry shall be carried out in the presence of an officer of the detaining warship. If, however, the presence of such officer is impracticable owing to the duties upon which the warship is engaged, an affidavit sworn by the Commanding Officer may in special cases be accepted by the authority holding the enquiry in place of the oral evidence of an officer of the warship. 8. (a) In the case of vessels referred to in paragraph 1 (a) above, if it is proved at this enquiry that the flag has been illegally flown, but that the vessel is entitled to fly the flag of a recognised State, she shall, if that State is one of the High Contracting Parties, be handed over to the nearest authority of that State. If such State is not a High Contracting Party, the vessel shall be disposed of by agreement between the State responsible for her detention and the State whose flag she is entitled to fly, and, pending such agreement, shall remain in the custody of the authorities of the nationality of the detaining warship. (b) If it should be established that the use of the flag by the detained vessel was correct, but that the vessel was engaged in the illicit conveyance of articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V, those responsible shall be brought before the courts of the State under whose flag the vessel sailed. The vessel herself and her cargo shall remain in charge of the authority conducting the enquiry. The illicit cargo may be destroyed in accordance with laws and regulations drawn up for the purpose. (c) In the case of vessels referred to in paragraph 1 (b) above, if it be established that the vessel had the right to fly the flag of one of the High Contracting Parties but was engaged in the illicit conveyance of any of the articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V, the procedure laid down in the preceding paragraph should be followed.

(d) In the case of vessels referred to in paragraph 1 (b) above, if it be established that the vessel was not entitled to fly the flag of any of the High Contracting Parties and was engaged in the illicit conveyance of any of the articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V, the vessel and all cargo carried in addition to these articles shall be seized by such authorities and disposed of according to the national laws and regulations of the authorities before whom the vessel has been brought. The destruction of this cargo may be ordered according to the same laws and regulations. (e) If the authority entrusted with the enquiry decides that the detention and diversion of the vessel or other measures imposed upon her were irregular, he shall assess the amount of the compensation which he considers to be due. 9. If the decision and assessment of the said authority are accepted by the detaining officer and the authorities to whom he is subject, the amount awarded shall be paid within six months from the date of the said assessment. 10. If the detaining officer, or the authorities to whom he is subject, contest the decision or the amount of the compensation assessed, the dispute shall be submitted to a Court of Arbitration consisting of one arbitrator appointed by the Government whose flag the vessel was flying, one appointed by the Government of the detaining officer, and an umpire chosen by the two arbitrators thus appointed. The two arbitrators shall be chosen, as far as possible, from among the Diplomatic, Consular or Judicial officers of the High Contracting Parties. These appointments must be made with the least possible delay. Any compensation awarded shall be paid to the persons concerned within six months at most from the date of the award of the court. 11. The Commanding Officer of a warship who may have stopped a vessel flying a foreign flag shall in all cases make a report thereon to his Government, stating the grounds on which he acted. An extract from this report, together with a copy of the proces-verbal, drawn up by the officer, warrant officer, petty or non-commissioned officer sent on board the vessel detained, shall be sent as soon as possible to the Government whose flag the detained vessel was flying and to such of the High Contracting Parties as may have expressed the desire to receive such documents. [Enclosure 2] Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, Signed at Geneva, June 17, 192568 THE UNDERSIGNED PLENIPOTENTIARIES, in the name of their respective Governments: WHEREAS the use in war of asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases, and of all analogous liquids, materials or devices, has been justly condemned by the general opinion, of the civilised world; and

WHEREAS the prohibition of such use has been declared in Treaties to which the majority of the Powers of the World are Parties; and TO THE END that this prohibition shall be universally accepted as a part of International Law, binding alike the conscience and the practice of nations; DECLARE: That the High Contracting Parties, so far as they are not already Parties to Treaties prohibiting such use, accept this prohibition, agree to extend this prohibition to the use of bacteriological methods of warfare and agree to be bound as between themselves according to the terms of this declaration. The High Contracting Parties will exert every effort to induce other States to accede to the present Protocol. Such accession will be notified to the Government of the French Republic, and by the latter to all signatory and acceding Powers, and will take effect on the date of the notification by the Government of the French Republic. The present Protocol, of which the French and English texts are both authentic, shall be ratified as soon as possible. It shall bear to-day’s date. The ratifications of the present protocol shall be addressed to the Government of the French Republic, which will at once notify the deposit of such ratification to each of the signatory and acceding Powers. The instruments of ratification of and accession to the present Protocol will remain deposited in the archives of the Government of the French Republic. The present Protocol will come into force for each signatory Power as from the date of deposit of its ratification, and, from that moment, each Power will be bound as regards other Powers which have already deposited their ratifications. IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Protocol. DONE at Geneva in a single copy, this seventeenth day of June, One Thousand Nine Hundred and Twenty-Five. For Germany H. VON ECKARDT For the United States of America THEODORE E. BURTON

HUGH S. GIBSON For Austria For Belgium For Brazil CONTRE–AMIRAL A. C. DE SOUZA E SILVA MAJOR ESTEVÃO LEITÃO DE CARVALHO For the British Empire I declare that my signature does not bind India or any British Dominion which is a separate Member of the League of Nations & does not separately sign or adhere to the Protocol. ONSLOW For Canada WALTER A. RIDDELL For the Irish Free State For India P. Z. Cox For Bulgaria For Chile LUIS CABRERA Général de Division For China For Colombia For Denmark A. OLDENBURG

For Egypt For Spain EMILIO DE PALACIOS For Esthonia J. LAIDONER For Abyssinia GUÉTATCHOU BLATA HEROUT HEROUY A. TASFAE For Finland O. ENCKELL For France J. PAUL-BONCOUR For Greece VASSILI DENDRAMIS D. VLACHOPOULOS For Hungary For Italy PIETRO CHIMIENTI ALBERTO DE MARINIS-STENDARDO For Japan M. MATSUDA For Latvia

COLONEL HARTMANIS For Lithuania For Luxemburg CH. G. VERMAIRE For Nicaragua A. SOTTILE For Norway For Panama For the Netherlands W. DOUDE VAN TROOSTWIJK W. GUERIN For Persia For Poland GÉNÉRAL CASIMIR SOSNKOWSKI G. D. MORAWSKI For Portugal A. M. BARTHOLOMEU FERREIRA AMERICO DA COSTA LEME For Roumania Ad referendum N. P. COMNENE GÉNÉRAL T. DUMITRESCU For Salvador

J. GUSTAVO GUERRERO For Siam For Sweden For Switzerland Sous réserve de ratification: LOHNER ED. MÜLLER For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes J. DOUTCHITCH GÉNÉRAL KALAFATOVITCH CAPT. D. FRÉG. MARIASEVITCH For Czechoslovakia For Turkey M. TEVFIK For Uruguay ENRIQUE E. BUERO For Venezuela 62 Not printed. 63 For texts of the convention and of the protocol concerning gases, see enclosures 1 and 2, infra. The Declaration Regarding the Territory of Ifni was not signed by the American delegates. The final act enumerated the instruments drawn up at the Conference and declared: (1) That the governments the delegates of which signed it “have the firm intention of applying strictly their internal laws and regulations to prevent anything that might constitute a fraudulent commerce in arms within the meaning of the said laws and regulations, and to exchange with such Parties as may be concerned all information material for this purpose”; (2) that the convention signed June 17, 1925, “must be considered as an important step towards a general system of

international agreements regarding arms and ammunition and implements of war, and that it is desirable that the international aspect of the manufacture of such arms, ammunition and implements of war should receive early consideration by the different Governments.” The protocol of signature provided that for the states enumerated in the preamble of the convention the period allowed for signature of the convention, the Declaration Regarding the Territory of Ifni, and the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, should be any date prior to Sept. 30, 1926. 64 A copy of the authentic final text of the convention, together with the annexes, has been here substituted for the copy enclosed with despatch No. 471. This text is printed in League of Nations, Proceedings of the Conference for the Supervision of the International Trade in Arms, transmitted to the Department with despatch No. 544,

2 Arms and ammunition and implements of war covered by Category I shall be tabled separately from those in Category II. 3 Name of country which issued the licence or similar document mentioned in Article 4 of the present Convention. But when the goods come from a Colony or Dependency, not issuing licences in its own name, but having an autonomous Customs system, such colony or dependency shall be shown as the country of origin. 3 Name of country which issued the licence or similar document mentioned in Article 4 of the present Convention. But when the goods come from a Colony or Dependency, not issuing licences in its own name, but having an autonomous Customs system, such colony or dependency shall be shown as the country of origin. 4 In legal currency of the importing country. In cases where the values are the result of conversion on a gold standard basis, this fact should be expressly mentioned in the heading of this column. In all cases the value shall be shown, except in the case of samples referred to in Article 3, paragraph 3, of the Convention when it is not obligatory. 4 In legal currency of the importing country. In cases where the values are the result of conversion on a gold standard basis, this fact should be expressly mentioned in the heading of this column. In all cases the value shall be shown, except in the case of samples referred to in Article 3, paragraph 3, of the Convention when it is not obligatory. 4 In legal currency of the importing country. In cases where the values are the result of conversion on a gold standard basis, this fact should be expressly mentioned in the heading of this column. In all cases the value shall be shown, except in the case of samples referred to in Article 3, paragraph 3, of the Convention when it is not obligatory. 1 The exports and re-exports included in this table shall be the general exports and reexports of arms and ammunition and implements of war set out in the attached schedule leaving for abroad, i. e., the total of the goods exported and re-exported from the internal market from warehouse, free zones, free ports and all other places excluded from the Customs territory, also temporary exports and re-exports, improvement trade, etc., but excluding goods for transit or transhipment. When temporary warehousing pending transit or transhipment is permitted, the arms and ammunition and implements of war arriving under these conditions shall not be considered as imports provided that the consignments are accompanied by a licence or similar document mentioned in Article 4 of the present Convention showing some other country as destination. 2 Arms and ammunition and implements of war covered by Category I shall be tabled separately from those in Category II.

3 Country in whose favour the licence or similar document mentioned in Article 4 of the present Convention has been issued. In the case of an application by a mothercountry on behalf of a Colony or Dependency having an autonomous Customs regime, such Colony or Dependency should be shown as country of destination. 3 Country in whose favour the licence or similar document mentioned in Article 4 of the present Convention has been issued. In the case of an application by a mothercountry on behalf of a Colony or Dependency having an autonomous Customs regime, such Colony or Dependency should be shown as country of destination. 4 In legal currency of the exporting country. In cases where the values are the result of conversion on a gold standard basis, this fact should be expressly mentioned in the title of this column. In all cases value shall be shown, except in the case of samples referred to in Article 3, paragraph 3, of the Convention when it is not obligatory. 4 In legal currency of the exporting country. In cases where the values are the result of conversion on a gold standard basis, this fact should be expressly mentioned in the title of this column. In all cases value shall be shown, except in the case of samples referred to in Article 3, paragraph 3, of the Convention when it is not obligatory. 4 In legal currency of the exporting country. In cases where the values are the result of conversion on a gold standard basis, this fact should be expressly mentioned in the title of this column. In all cases value shall be shown, except in the case of samples referred to in Article 3, paragraph 3, of the Convention when it is not obligatory. 68 In English and French; French text not printed. Submitted to the Senate by the President on Jan. 12, 1926; at the time of publication of this volume, the Senate’s advice and consent to ratification had not been given.

Failure of the United States to secure the adoption of the rules drafted by the International Commission for the Revision of the Rules of Warfare69 69 For previous correspondence concerning the revision of rules of warfare, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 47 ff. [50] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) Washington, January 26, 1924.

The Government of the United States is led to believe that the Rules as reported represent a finer achievement with respect to the matters dealt with than could be anticipated from the action of any other international body, and that they mark a distinct step forward in promoting the work of international justice in time of war. It is, therefore, disposed to initiate proceedings looking to the adoption of the Rules by the several Powers which cooperated in their formulation. This Government is accordingly prepared to make known to the other interested Powers its readiness, in conjunction with them, to accept both sets of Rules as reported, and to make inquiry whether they would be disposed to conclude Conventions in such a sense, annexing the Rules thereto. As an appropriate basis for such Conventions, the Department believes that the outline of a treaty proposed by the American delegation on the Commission of Jurists on February 12, 1923,74 would suffice. That Convention, embracing three short Articles, provides, after a preamble, (a) for the issuance of instructions to military and naval forces in conformity with the annexed Rules respecting the use of aircraft (or radio telegraphy); (b) that the annexed Rules be regarded not as superseding but as supplementing the Rules as they may from time to time exist, the observance of which in warfare is enjoined by international law and usage, by international conventions, and by the dictates of humanity and the public conscience; and (c) that the annexed Rules shall remain in force until July 1, 1933, and that in case none of the Contracting Parties shall, eighteen months before that date, have given notice of a desire for the revision of the Rules, they shall continue in force until the expiration of eighteen months after notice of a desire for such revision shall be given; the Contracting Parties further agreeing that, within ten months after such notice has been given, they will meet in conference for the purpose of revising the Rules. To the foregoing might possibly be added a fourth Article providing for the adherence of States other than the Powers above mentioned. You will accordingly, at an early date, bring to the attention of the Government of the State to which you are accredited the substance of the foregoing statement. You will make it clear that the Government of the United States is ready, in conjunction with the Powers above mentioned, to accept the two sets of Rules reported by the Commission of Jurists. You will inquire whether the Government of the State to which you are accredited would be disposed to conclude with the United States and the Powers above mentioned two Conventions such as were proposed by the American delegation at The Hague, February 12, 1923, and as above outlined (including a fourth Article as proposed above), to one of which the Rules for the Control of Radio in Time of War should be annexed, and to the other the Rules for Aerial Warfare should be annexed; both Conventions to be ratified according to the constitutional requirements of the signatory States. You are further directed to inform such Government that the Government of the United States is prepared, in conjunction with the several Powers mentioned above, to authorize the signature of Conventions such as those proposed.

CHARLES E. HUGHES

substantially on the lines suggested by the American Delegation at the Hague on February 12, 1923, and presented to me in Mr. Caffery’s Note under acknowledgment, (including a fourth Article providing for the adherence of States other than the abovementioned Powers), the Rules for the Control of Radio in Time of War to one Convention and the Rules for Aerial Warfare to the other, both Conventions to be ratified in accordance with the constitutional requirements of the signatory Powers. I avail myself [etc.] BARON KEISHIRO MATSUI 75 Not printed.

JOSEPH C. GREW 76 Similar instructions were sent on the same date to the Ambassadors in Great Britain and Italy, and to the Minister in the Netherlands.

MR. AMBASSADOR: I have the honor to refer to the Note of Your Excellency dated January 12,

Her Majesty’s Government has devoted particular attention to the study of the whole of these rules which the United States and Japan appear disposed to accept in conjunction with the other countries represented on the Commission which so carefully elaborated them. As a result of the examination to which these rules were subjected by the

Netherlands, I am able to reply as follows to the question as to whether the Netherlands Government would be disposed to conclude two conventions with the United States and the other countries above mentioned on the basis outlined by the Government of the United States, one of which would have as an annex the rules concerning aerial warfare and the other the rules for the control of radio in time of war. With respect to the form of the conventions to be concluded, Her Majesty’s Government agrees in principle with the ideas expressed by the American Government through the intermediary of the American delegation to the International Commission of Jurists, in its plenary session of February 12, 1923, as well as in the abovementioned letter from Your Excellency. On its side, the Netherlands Government proposes the insertion in each of the said conventions of a provision conformable to the proposal concerning indemnities made by the Netherlands delegation on the Commission of Jurists with respect to the rules of aerial warfare and inserted at the end of the general report of the Commission. It points out that the principle of indemnity had been approved by the Commission. The Netherlands Government likewise proposes the insertion in the two conventions of a provision whereby differences which might arise with respect to these indemnities would be submitted, in the absence of settlement through other means, to arbitration or to the jurisdiction of the Permanent Court of International Justice. For it is expedient, when, as is now the case, there is a question of establishing new rules of international law and particularly new rights for belligerents, to surround them with guarantees with a view to assuring their strict application. While, with respect to the context of the rules to be annexed, it reserves the right to present observations of detail at the proper moment, the Royal Government would be grateful if the Government of the United States would be good enough to consider the question as to whether it is not expedient, in order to obtain as great a number as possible of adhesions to the two conventions to be concluded, to convoke a new conference to which all states of a certain importance would be invited, in order definitely to agree upon the rules above mentioned. It seems that these rules could then count with more certainty upon general approval and enforcement than if, as is proposed, the states represented upon the Commission of Jurists agreed amongst themselves whilst leaving to the other states—of which some may be reckoned as the most important from the standpoint of military importance—merely the possibility of adhering to these rules without their having had an opportunity to express their opinion on these subjects. This procedure also seems better to carry out the idea of the Washington resolution, whilst it constitutes the best manner of assuring the conclusions of the Commission being taken into consideration by the other civilized powers. The Netherlands Government would be glad to learn the view of the American Government on this important point and would appreciate it if it would take up this suggestion with the other States represented on the International Commission of Jurists.

Her Majesty’s Government also believes, even if a relatively large number of states should adhere to the conventions to be concluded, but especially in case they are concluded only by the states represented on the Commission, that it would be advisable to remove all doubt concerning the reply to the question as to whether these conventions must or must not be applied in a war in which the noncontracting states might be a party. This point is not clearly regulated in the draft treaty presented by the American delegation on February 12, 1923, and Your Excellency’s letter under acknowledgment makes no mention thereof. With respect to the rules regarding aerial warfare elaborated by the Commission which would be annexed to the above-mentioned convention, the Netherlands Government believes that these rules could contribute, at least in a great measure, toward bringing certainty in a domain of international law where, until now, this certainty is lacking, and toward favoring the development of international law in a direction which seems to fill the needs of international society as the Netherlands Government understands them. For this reason, the Netherlands Government, always desirous of promoting the development of international law, would be happy to subscribe to most of the rules in question, and it thanks the American Government for having taken the initiative toward the conclusion of a convention which would set up these rules as provisions of law. The Netherlands Government, while still referring to the right it has reserved above to suggest modifications of form later, can agree to the greater part of the provisions of the project. But, excepting the provisions of chapter VII, concerning which its point of

belligerent war vessels to capture, after certain formalities, merchant vessels used for such commerce. Nothing justifies the extension of this right to aircraft, which constitute a new engine of war entirely different from that of a war vessel, and entirely incapable of exercising on merchant vessels or on private aircraft a control similar to that exercised by a war vessel on vessels of commerce. Consequently there is no reason to grant to military aircraft the right of capture as though it were a war vessel, and no reason for subjecting commerce to capture when it is done by aircraft. In the development of international law the tendency must be to accord greater rather than fewer immunities to private property.” May I be permitted to recall that this attitude was adopted by the delegation, aside from the foregoing arguments, for the following reasons: Even if one were inclined for other reasons to give to military airplanes the right to stop, to search, and to capture merchant ships and private airplanes, it is necessary to recognize that, in view of the present state of aviation, it will be impossible in most cases for the said military airplanes to proceed in accordance with the rules and customs established for the exercise of this right by vessels against vessels. For these rules and customs require (a) search on the site of stoppage at sea, (b) (in case of stoppage followed by capture) the placing on board of the captured vessels of a crew for conducting the prize, and escort of the latter by a war vessel of the capturing state to one of its ports. It is evident that search at the site of stoppage at sea, as well as the placing on board of a crew to conduct the prize and escort to a port of the belligerent state will in most cases be impracticable for airplanes. The delegation also brought to light the fact that, just because submarines cannot conform to the rules and customs of maritime war, the use of these same submarines against merchant vessels was subjected, by the Washington Conference of 1921–22, to prescriptions of a wider scope. The same thing should have been done with respect to the use of airplanes against merchant vessels and private airplanes, because they are even less capable of conforming to the rules and customs above mentioned than are submarines. I likewise recall that the discussions which took place in the Commission were of such nature as even more to increase the fears of the delegation. For it appeared that certain delegations believed that the visitation and search of a vessel or an airplane stopped at sea does not necessarily have to take place on the spot, before such vessel or airplane can be forced to proceed to belligerent territory. It is certain that, if this rule were admitted—and Her Majesty’s Government, for its part, does not admit it—visitation and search of vessels would hardly ever take place on the spot, and that the merchant vessels and airplanes would be almost always taken to belligerent ports, under the menace of the belligerent’s guns and with all the direful consequences which would follow. All guarantee against unjustified deviations would disappear; signals not understood or imperfectly understood, either from units of a same belligerent or from units of diverse belligerents, a lack of fuel—very possible in the case of airplanes—in the course of the journey of deviation, and many other circumstances would expose

peaceful navigation to the worst perils; there is also the fact that a great many small craft which have no radiotelephone or radiotelegraph apparatus on board, would not as a general rule understand the signals given by aviators. There is only one case in which the Netherlands delegation on the Commission of Jurists was ready to permit the capture of a neutral airplane or vessel by a belligerent airplane; that is, in the case of hostile assistance contrary to neutrality. On its side, the Netherlands Government believes that its delegation rightly raised the greatest objections against chapter VII of the rules concerning aerial warfare. If it were sure that the last word had been said concerning this subject, it would be constrained to reject this chapter. But it wonders whether amendments to this chapter might not make it acceptable. It would like first of all to know whether the pretense to the right of deviation is really the final word of the Governments which have presented it. It would like, secondly, to be advised of the possibility of having accepted, afterward, the American proposal concerning the exercise by a belligerent military airplane of the right of visit against merchant vessels, which proposal appears at the place in the general report of the Commission where this question is discussed at length. Finally, the Netherlands Government recalls that its delegation on the Commission of

grateful if the American Government would be good enough to ask the other states—in the first place those which were represented on the Commission of Jurists—to give their opinion in this connection. While awaiting with the greatest interest the remarks which the contents of this note will suggest to the Government of the United States, I seize this occasion [etc.] For the Minister: A. M. SNOUCK HURGRONJE The Secretary General 80 Not printed.

The provisions with regard to aerial warfare which the aforementioned Commission has more especially endeavored to regulate, are already included to a great extent in the Convention on Aerial Navigation of October 13, 1919,87 but at times have a tendency to deviate therefrom. The ratification by the United States of the Air Convention of 1919, which they have already signed, would have the advantage of putting immediately into practice the provisions already accepted for several years and which have received a contractual basis, while the present suggestion of the Government of the United States would risk delaying their application by raising fresh discussions, either as to fundamental principles or form, which might be lengthy, in view of the number of States which would be called upon to take part therein. Please accept [etc.] HERRIOT 85 Not printed. 86 For texts of conventions concluded at the Second International Peace Conference,

2. I now request you to inform your Government that His Majesty’s Government, while warmly appreciating the friendly and humanitarian motives which have prompted these

proposals, have decided to await further international discussion on this question before formulating their considered views on the Report of The Hague Commission. I have [etc.] AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN 88 Not printed.

Negotiations on behalf of the World War Foreign Debt Commission for the settlement of debts owed the United States by foreign governments89

Belgium [58] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) Washington, March 26, 1925.

[64] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)

“In reply to your letter of January 18th, I have much pleasure in informing you, on receipt of telegraphic advice from my Government to that purpose, that the Belgian Government willingly grants the request from the United States Treasury that advances which it has made or which would be made to Belgium for food and relief purposes during the period which has elapsed since the cessation of hostilities, will receive treatment as favorable as that accorded to advances which may be made to my Government by the British or French Governments for reconstruction purposes.” The letter of April 22, 1919, from Mr. Rathbone to Mr. Symons was in part as follows: “I take pleasure in informing you that the Secretary of the Treasury is prepared from time to time to establish further credits in favor of your Government to be availed of from time to time against obligations of your Government in a corresponding amount at such times and to such extent as shall be determined by the Secretary of the Treasury up to the amounts hereafter indicated, for the purposes hereinafter set forth and on the understanding herein expressed.92 “The amounts of the credits which the Secretary of the Treasury is prepared to establish in favor of your Government, as aforesaid, (subject to reduction as hereinafter stated) and the purposes for which the same are to be availed of, are as follows: “(a) $2,150,000 or such lesser amount as may be sufficient with the unexpended credit balance in favor of your Government for relief purposes in the amount of $28,300,000, to provide for the amounts which shall become due from your Government to the Commission for Relief in Belgium in connection with the April program of said Commission and to defray the cost of the purchase in the United States of not exceeding 80 tons of wheat and 10 tons of lard, and shipping charges in respect thereof to the extent such payment is made to the United States Shipping Board on ships under the control of the United States Shipping Board; “(b) $1,000,000 or such lesser amount as may be sufficient to provide for such purchases of your Government in the United States up to June 1, 1919, for military supplies as may from time to time be approved by the Treasury;

“(c) An additional sum sufficient to pay the interest due on May 15, 1919, on obligations of your Government held by the United States.92 “The advances which may be made by the Secretary of the Treasury to your Government against these credits will be made on the faith of the assurances given to the Secretary of the Treasury by the Belgian Minister in his letter dated February 5, 1919, that advances made or to be made by the United States to the Belgian Government for food and relief purposes after the cessation of hostilities would receive treatment as favorable as that accorded to advances which might be made to the Belgian Government by the British or French Governments for reconstruction purposes, and on the understanding that in accordance with the determination of the Supreme Economic Council in Paris all advances made to your Government after November 11, 1918, by any of the allied governments and powers associated in the war for food, relief and reconstruction purposes would be made a first lien or charge on the amounts received by your Government from the enemy countries for reparation or indemnity. “As under the terms of the armistice the cost of the maintenance of the Belgian army of occupation since November 11, 1918, is to be paid by Germany, and as it is understood that the only part of this cost for which cash is received now is the part for which expenditures are incurred in marks, the balance constituting a claim against Germany to be liquidated out of its additional payments to Belgium in priority to payments for reparation, the Secretary of the Treasury is not prepared to make further advances to your Government except upon its assurance that the Belgian Government will repay to the Government of the United States the amount of advances made to your government after November 11, 1918, by the United States Treasury to provide supplies for the Belgian army, out of the first moneys received by the Government of Belgium from Germany under the terms of the armistice.” The letter from Mr. Symons dated May 14, 1919, replying to the above-mentioned letter of April 22, 1919, from Mr. Rathbone, was as follows: “I have the honor to inform you that I have received a cable message from the Minister of Finances of Belgium confirming the acceptance by the Belgian Government of the conditions established for further advances to Belgium by the United States Government as set forth in your letter of April 22nd.”

The letter dated June 15, 1919, from Mr. van den Ven to Mr. Davis contained the following statement: “In reply to your letter to the Belgian Minister of Finance of April 29, and to your letters to me of May 12 and May 28, I am requested to inform you that the Belgian Government agrees to repay to the United States Government the amount of advances made by the United States since November 11, 1918 for the purchase of supplies necessary to the maintenance of the Belgian army of occupation out of the first moneys which Germany will pay to Belgium under the terms of the Armistice to cover the cost of the maintenance of the Belgian army of occupation.”

The letter from Mr. van den Ven to Mr. Davis dated July 8, 1919, was as follows: “In answer to your letter to me of the 21st of June, the Belgian Government agrees entirely to your understanding of the terms of my letter of June 15th. The agreement referred to in this letter equally includes moneys paid by Germany to Belgium to cover the cost of maintaining the Belgian army of occupation, whether such moneys will be paid under the terms of the armistice or of the Treaty of Peace. “The Belgian Government accepts, moreover, that the first moneys received by Belgium from Germany under the terms of the armistice or the Treaty of Peace to cover the cost of the maintenance of the Belgian army of occupation shall be alloted to the Governments of the United States, Great Britain and France in proportion to the advances made by each of these three Governments to Belgium since the armistice in support of the Belgian army of occupation.” The understanding pursuant to which the Government of the United States continued after the armistice to make advances to the Government of Belgium is clearly set forth in the above quoted extracts from the contemporary correspondence which establish beyond question the duty of Belgium to repay its post-armistice borrowings out of its receipts from Germany, and to accord to the United States no less favorable treatment in connection with payments on account of such borrowings than is accorded to other creditor governments. On August 18, 1921, the Secretary of State of the United States addressed a note to the Belgian Ambassador at Washington93 referring to the assurances given by the Belgian Government in the course of the above-mentioned correspondence, stating that it was the information of the United States that certain cash payments on reparation account

had been or were about to be made to Belgium, and requesting information as to what steps the Belgian Government was taking towards the allocation of the proper proportion of these cash reparation payments to apply on the advances made by the United States pursuant to the understandings in question. No reply was received to this communication, and on October 22, 1921, a further note on this subject was addressed to the Belgian Chargé d’Affaires.93 No reply was received to this second communication, and on January 3, 1922, a third note was addressed to the Belgian Embassy93 requesting an explanation of the position of the Belgian Government with respect to the repayment of the post-armistice advances made by the United States. In a note dated January 7, 1922,93 the Belgian Ambassador replied that he had drawn the attention of his Government to the matter and that he would not fail to inform the Department of the reply of his Government when it reached him. Although more than three years have since elapsed, the Government of the United States has received no further reply to its inquiries of August 18, 1921, and the Government of Belgium, although according to the figures of the Reparation Commission it has received on reparation account considerably more than one billion gold marks in cash, and than 300 million gold marks in kind, has made no suggestion that any portion of such receipts should be applied in accordance with the above-mentioned understanding between the two Governments. In April, 1922, the Government of Belgium was informed of the creation of the World War Foreign Debt Commission and of the desire of that Commission to receive any proposals or representations which the Government of Belgium might wish to make for the settlement or refunding of its obligations to the Government of the United States,94 and in a note dated April 27, 1922,95 the Belgian Ambassador at Washington stated that he had been designated by his Government to negotiate with the World War Foreign Debt Commission with a view to arriving at a satisfactory settlement within the scope of the Act creating that Commission. The Belgian Ambassador at Washington later submitted to the World War Foreign Debt Commission certain data regarding the financial situation of Belgium, stating that his Government would pay the interest due on the notes maturing in August, 1922, but would be unable to pay the principal, and informed the Commission that he was sailing for Belgium on June 17, 1922, and that on his return he would lay before the Commission definite proposals for the consolidation of the Belgian indebtedness to the United States.95a No such proposals have, however, been received from the Belgian Government and, excepting payments which will be made by Belgium out of sums received under Article 4 of the Agreement signed in Paris on January 14, 1925,96 Belgium is at the present time making payment to the Government of the United States only on account of the interest accruing on obligations, now overdue, which were taken by the War Department in exchange for war material sold to Belgium by the Liquidation Commission of the War Department. The obligations in question are but a small part of the total indebtedness of the Government of Belgium to the Government of the United States, which on November

The Government of the United States is also informed that on December 31, 1924, the Belgian Treasury paid to the Canadian Government the sum of 2,278,558.63 Canadian dollars representing the principal amount of a credit extended by Canada to Belgium in

demand (with the exception of obligations in the principal amount of $2,284,151.40 which mature April 9, 1930). 90 Not printed.

by Belgium on condition that Belgian Government undertake at once to refund its entire indebtedness to the United States on following principles:98 “(a) In accordance with the policy prescribed by the debt funding act and the position consistently maintained by the Government of the United States, this Government looks solely to Belgium for payment of its indebtedness which on May 15, 1925, with principal and accrued and unpaid interest, aggregated over $480,000,000 and which, with the exception of about $2,000,000, is all payable on demand. Germany may not be substituted directly or indirectly for Belgium in respect of the pre-armistice debt. (b) Settlement to be submitted to the approval of Congress, may be made along the lines of the British-American debt funding agreement,99 with amortization of the principal of the debt in sixtytwo years and annual payments representing interest and installments of principal. (c) Such postponement or payment of the earlier installments of interest or modification of rates of interest as may be required by the fiscal and economic condition of Belgium.” No objection will be interposed by the Government of the United States to floating of proposed loan should it receive a communication in writing from the appropriate Belgian officials that Belgium accepts principles set forth in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of above statement and will send at earliest possible moment a commission to the United States to negotiate settlement with our Debt Funding Commission. Settlements on substantially same basis have been reached with Great Britain, Finland, Hungary, Lithuania, and Poland.1 (3) You may hand to appropriate Belgian officials informal memorandum containing quoted paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) above. (4) Please cable Department on action taken. KELLOGG 98 Quoted passage not paraphrased.

The declarations of the President of the United States during the war on the subject of the complete restoration of Belgium, the constitution [sic] developed in the course of the peace negotiations, and which demonstrated the necessity of according to my country a special treatment in satisfaction of its recognized right to such restoration, constitute a right which continues to exist whatever may have been the fate of article 232. During the progress of the conversations which are about to commence the two Governments should take this into account.

“As stated in paragraph (a) of the memorandum of May 31, the Government of the United States continues to look solely to Belgium for payment of this indebtedness, and cannot consent that Germany be substituted directly or indirectly for Belgium in respect of the pre-armistice debt. The Government of the United States is in doubt whether the Belgian Government unconditionally accepts the proposition contained in paragraph (a) of the memorandum of May 31, and does not find in the communication of the Belgian Government a pledge that the Government of Belgium will negotiate on the basis set forth in that memorandum. The Government of the United States desires more express assurance on this point. “The Government of the United States has also noted that the Belgian Government engages itself to send to Washington at a time to be fixed by agreement a mission charged to negotiate a settlement of the indebtedness of Belgium, and understands that this mission could go forward in July. The Government of the United States would be glad) if negotiations could commence at Washington at a date in July that may be convenient to the Belgian Government.” (3) If you think preferable and can obtain satisfactory communication in place of that quoted in your telegram No. 65, you may proceed on that line. It is essential, however, to receive unequivocal statement from Government of Belgium (eliminating conditions stated in its note as quoted in your telegram) that it accepts and will negotiate on basis of principles set forth in memorandum of May 31 (the capital and interest of the debt to be subject to verification) and that the Belgian mission will commence negotiations in Washington next month. Department will await your reply before taking any action on loan sought by Belgium from J. P. Morgan and Company. KELLOGG 4 Memorandum not paraphrased.

worthy of consideration but does not pretend that this constitute[s] a right or a legal claim. Belgium therefore means to give an express assurance that it will negotiate on the bases of paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) proposed in the memorandum of May 31st. The Belgian Government undertakes to recommend for the approval of the legislative power the arrangements which it hopes sincerely will result from these negotiations. PHILLIPS 5 Memorandum not paraphrased.

Czechoslovakia [67] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) Washington, April 4, 1925.

[73] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)

advances are made, it is proper that your Government should agree not to take any action by way of legislation, concessions, or agreements which might put any of the Allied or Associated Powers or their nationals in a more favorable position than the United States government or its nationals, or which will discriminate against the nationals of the United States. “I shall be glad to hear from you, so that I may communicate your reply to the Secretary of the Treasury.”

The Government of the United States has accorded the most considerate treatment to the Government of Czechoslovakia in connection with the indebtedness of the latter to the United States. Although as early as April 25, 1922, I had the honor to inform the Government of Czechoslovakia of the creation of the World War Foreign Debt Commission and of the desire of that Commission to receive any proposals or representations which the Government of Czechoslovakia might wish to make for the settlement or refunding of its obligations to the Government of the United States,8 it was not until May, 1923, that representatives of the Government of Czechoslovakia commenced negotiations with the World War Foreign Debt Commission in Washington, and although nearly two years have elapsed since the visit of the Czechoslovak Debt Commission,8a no proposals have been received by the World War Foreign Debt Commission for either the settlement or the refunding of the indebtedness of Czechoslovakia to the United States which as of November 15, 1924, amounted to

Dr. Lípa stated that above points would be incorporated in formal communication to be addressed to this Government within a week or so, and he wishes to ascertain if they would constitute a basis satisfactory to the World War Foreign Debt Commission upon which to begin negotiations, as his Government does not wish to send a formal communication in sense of the foregoing if the conditions are unacceptable. The Department has communicated substance of Chargé’s statement to Treasury Department for its comment, and would be pleased to have you report by telegraph any information discreetly available on actual intentions of Government of Czechoslovakia. GREW

the capacity to pay. It does not seek to assimilate nor to link its indebtedness with the different obligations of Allied or enemy states and recognizes that the United States Government regards the Czechoslovak debt as an obligation of a different nature from these. (c) It believes that [as] the United States Government has adopted the principle of proceeding with debt settlement in accordance with the particular situation in each debtor state, the Czechoslovak Government has no wish to appeal to the United States Government by the example of other states but desires to bring its attention to its own flagrant situation. A brief statement of this follows. It says that if in view of these circumstances we must prepare for a settlement of our debt to the United States we shall find ourselves “singularly embarrassed.” There follows an account of the financial sacrifices made by Czechoslovakia since the war in stabilizing exchange and in taxation. The hope is expressed that Czechoslovakia will not be penalized for these efforts which have assisted European reconstruction but will be able to enjoy the application of the same principles which underlay the

can readily be reached at the present time. In this connection, it may be pointed out that the service of Czechoslovak foreign loans already floated calls for annual payments larger than those which would be required under a settlement of the indebtedness to the United States along the line of the settlements already made between the Government of the United States and other debtor Governments. It may further be pointed out that, according to the basis of such settlements, the annual payments due on the entire indebtedness of Czechoslovakia to the United States would not be more than approximately one percent, of the total present Czechoslovak budget. The Government of the United States accordingly considers that the Czechoslovak Government, if it can assume the obligation to pay the service of large private loans over a considerable period of years, can forecast its future financial condition sufficiently well to enable it to enter into a suitable agreement with the World War Foreign Debt Commission. My Government, therefore, as indicated in my note of April 30, 1925, expects the Czechoslovak Government promptly to take suitable action looking towards the settlement of its indebtedness to the United States, and would be glad if the Czechoslovak Government would send to the United States at its earliest convenience a Commission duly authorized to enter into a settlement of the entire amount of the debt in question.” GREW 16 Not printed.

France [78] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

[84] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

[91] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

[98] The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State Washington, September 16, 1925.

France doesn’t intend to repudiate any contracts she has made, and her signature always will be held sacred. But she is convinced that an appeal to the sentiments of justice which grouped so many nations around her in the war will not be in vain, and she is convinced that her allies and friends will respond to the hopes she places in their conscience and their sentiments of justice and solidarity.” M. Clémentel is also reported as advancing the argument that France should receive due compensation for the fact that her soil was the common battle ground; that inasmuch as the Governments of Britain and the United States collected large sums in taxes by virtue of expenditures which France made within their borders, the total of these taxes should be deducted from the French debt; and that advances made by France to her Allies of some fifteen billion francs should be taken into consideration. France’s debts to Great Britain and the United States are spoken of as so-called political debts. 2) Senator Reed, of Pennsylvania, whose friendship for France is well known, discussed the Clémentel statement in the Senate yesterday. After stating the amount of the advances to France, Senator Reed pointed out that in order to pay the current interest which French tax payers should have paid, we have taken from our tax payers approximately eight hundred million dollars in the last 6 years. He said: “We have a full understanding of France’s difficulties. We understand how hard it is for her and for Italy and for Belgium and these other countries to collect what is coming to them from Germany, and that is why our people have not wished us to press unduly for the payment of these foreign debts; but the debtor nations have taken no steps toward refunding the debts, they have paid no interest upon it, and they have not even given authority to any of their official representatives to come to any terms with our country toward refunding. Mr. Parmentier came here in 1922 absolutely naked of authority to come to any settlement, or even to recommend any settlement to his own Government as far as we were able to learn. The French ambassador—Mr. Jusserand—has done the best that his great talent enables him to do, but he is without authority. He has done much to keep the situation placid. He deserves the gratitude of his country to an extent that I believe few of his own countrymen as yet understand, because his efforts have gone far toward preventing this question from becoming acute. But now, Mr. President, from France itself, and from Paris, and from the cabinet of the present administration, comes a step which our people can not fail to regard as being some evidence of an

official intention to repudiate that war-time debt—the publication of a balance sheet, listing the obligations of the French Republic, that absolutely omits the debt to America or the debt to Great Britain incurred during the time of the war—and I do not believe that the United States Senate ought to take an adjournment after the publication of that balance sheet without some voice being raised in protest against it. I make no threats. I do not believe that anyone in the Senate desires to make any threats. I know that I speak wholly out of friendship for France, but with an acute realization of the fact that American taxpayers are paying every day a debt that France owes. France must be told by her friends that her inaction in this matter throughout the past 5 years has puzzled those of us who look toward her most affectionately, and she should be told that this publication of last week has alarmed her friends and alarmed them very gravely. France must be made to see—and when I speak of France I speak of her because this publication comes from the French ministry, although what I say applies as well to the other countries that are still in the same position—that her present course can result only in a chilling of that affection that she has found to exist here in America throughout the past decades. It can have only that result, Mr. President, and she must be told it by her friends, and she must be told that each day of delay in achieving a refunding of that debt makes it more difficult to grant her leniency in terms of payment. Her taxpayers deserve consideration. Their sufferings must be remembered, and the terms of payment must take into account the difficulties of payment on her part, but each day that she waits makes that more difficult of achievement. And, finally, she must be told by her friends that future French loans in America would be made impossible by a repudiation of the existing debt.” 3) In reply to an inquiry from one of the correspondents at the morning press conference yesterday, I pointed out, not for quotation, that “What Mr. Clémentel had said was not an official communication to this Government; that it had not been communicated to this Government directly or indirectly. So far as its communications to us were concerned the French Government had never suggested that it repudiated its obligations or asked for their cancellation. On the contrary the French Government had always stated to us that it expected to pay although it had stated its difficulties in arranging for payment and that it would like to have easy terms. Only recently the French Ambassador had stated that France did not ask for a cancellation of its debt and when the French Commission was here some time ago, headed by Mr. Parmentier, while they were not ready to make a funding proposition they did not ask that the debt should be cancelled or repudiate its obligations. So it is my understanding that France acknowledges

her debt and intends to pay. While the United States does not wish to be oppressive, we recognize no grounds in law or equity, (there can of course be no question of our legal position), why the debt should be reduced or cancelled. The attitude of the American Government has been made clear again and again in official pronouncements. These statements had been made by the President himself. This Government had always opposed the cancellation or an international conference which would bring our debt into discussion. An analysis of the manner in which the debt was incurred would show that our position was entirely equitable. After our army went to Europe there were vast purchases in France and large obligations incurred by our Government to France which were set off against the indebtedness owed by France to us. Besides enormous sums lent France during the war an additional billion dollars was lent her after the Armistice, exclusive of the $400,000,000 for purchase of surplus army supplies after the war. It would be a very serious mistake not to recognize our debt and provide for its discharge as international credit should be maintained. The United States would not consent to any arrangement for the pooling of our debt. This Government regards the debt question as a matter for Congress, and a Commission was formed for funding the debts owed to the United States.” [Paraphrase.] 4) While this Government has not received an official communication of the Clémentel statement, it has nevertheless been widely published and cannot, therefore, be ignored. In order to make clear our position and to remove any misunderstanding in regard to a proposal for partial or entire cancellation of the debt, you will please find an early occasion to take up the matter informally with the Premier and the Minister of Finance in the light of the foregoing. They should understand that public opinion in this country reacts promptly and definitely to statements such as those of M. Clémentel which raise a question as to the French Government’s intention to pay its debt or as to the equity of such payment, and the United States Government must expect that the French Government will take an early occasion to give evidence of its intention to pay and make proper provision for refunding of its debt. Results of your conversations should be cabled and please advise also as to desirability of making formal written communication of our views. [End paraphrase.] HUGHES 21 Inventaire de la Situation Financière de la France au Début de la Treizième Législature, présenté par M. Clémentel, Ministre des Finances (Paris, Imprimerie

Nationale, 1924).

devote her patient and courageous effort. Thus will be vindicated the confidence which all the lenders of the world have placed in the word of a people which has not ceased for 10 years to give proofs of its energy and [self-denial]. The settlement of interallied debts is still in abeyance and we cannot figure out today the burden which we shall be called upon to assume on this account after a careful study in all loyalty with our great Allies who we are certain would wish to bring to this settlement the cordial spirit of solidarity which united us on the battlefield in the defense of the common [cause]. Moreover, the application of the principles of the Dawes plan which subordinates the payments of a debtor state to its capacity of payment and to the possibility of making transfers without weakening its exchange and damaging its national economy on the one hand, on the other hand the necessity of subordinating the payments to the collection of Germany’s settlements give us the certainty that a liberal moratorium and long delays will be granted to us for the payment of the debt which it shall have appeared fair and legitimate to hold us liable for. It does not appear therefore that during the coming years the equilibrium which we have laboriously established will be prejudiced.”

reparations. France on the one hand has lent, itself, considerable sums to poorer Allies and these sums amount to almost half of her external debt. She had on the other hand provided for the reconstruction of the devastated regions which constitute a heavy charge on her budget. Germany, who should have met these expenses, has not done so. French opinion could, therefore, legitimately ask that France should only pay her creditors in proportion to the payment made by her debtors. Such an opinion tended to a general compensation of interallied debts and to subordinate France’s payments for the settlement of her debts to those of Germany for the reconstruction of the devastated regions. This opinion, which appears so eminently fair, is moderate, since it places on the same footing the debts between Allies contracted in a common cause and Germany’s debt for the reparation of the ruins which she caused. It was expressed many times by the British and French Premiers; but it was not accepted by the Government of the United States. 3. However, the French Government has never repudiated the war debts of its country. But it would be very difficult to make French opinion accept a method of settlement in accordance with the principles which have always been maintained by the American Government: Integral maintenance of the nominal amount of the debt; treating this debt independently of payments by Germany. But the adoption of such principles can only be reconciled with very easy conditions of settlement. It is in particular indispensable that the amortization table should show a long moratorium and very small annuities at the start in order to permit France: one, to wait until the Dawes Plan has entered into a period of effective application; two, to settle external commercial debts and in particular the debt due by reason of the purchase of American stocks; three, to wait for the time when the expenses resulting from the war (pensions, annuity allowances for reconstruction) shall begin to decrease. It is under these conditions that French public opinion may be led to adopt such a plan as the following which is only submitted in a purely unofficial and private manner: Fixing the nominal amount of the debt to the amount of this debt in capital, that is to say at $2,933,000,000; complete moratorium for

2611 2045 1210 1210 In order to combine in a certain measure the value of the annuities and France’s capacity of payment, a principle which is in [conformity] with all the American declarations, it should be understood that on the day when Germany shall fulfill only a portion of the obligations stipulated by the Dawes Plan the portion of the French annuity corresponding to the interest on the debt would be reduced in the same proportion. The payment of a certain percentage of part of this annuity corresponding to the amortization could also be deferred and carried over to the following year. The nominal capital of the debt would remain unchanged. The same rules would apply in case only a partial German annuity should be paid to France according to one of the methods stipulated in the Experts Plan. American stocks: French public opinion realized that the nature of this debt is quite different. The French Government has always regularly paid the interest on the price agreed upon and it has no intention of asking for a reduction of this debt as the one that it requests regarding the war debt. It should be pointed out, however, that by reason of the fall of the franc the sale [of] the stocks, bought for $400,000,000 only produced an approximate figure of $220,000,000 and thus constitutes a very burdensome transaction for France. Remembering that at the time of the cession of these stocks the American representatives declared on many occasions their desire that this transaction should not result in a loss to France, the French Government hopes that the American Government will consent either to reduce the nominal amount of its credit to a price nearer the real sale price of these stocks or to grant a reduction in the rate of interest being paid on the cession price. In admitting, for example, that the rate should be fixed retrospectively at 2 percent from 1919 France would remain liable for a debt of $350,000,000 which she could amortize in 20 years by an annuity of $22,000,000. Conclusion:

Since the Armistice, France has made heavy payments abroad and in particular to the United States on account of its so-called ‘commercial’ war debt. These payments can be evaluated at approximately the following amounts (in millions of dollars): Commercial debt American stocks Total

I must emphasize the fact that Clémentel does not consider his memorandum a “definite offer” but rather a tentative personal and unofficial suggestion. HERRICK 26 Telegram in four sections.

willing to adopt suggestions I made and of which I informed Department in my No. 8,

helpful. This however would need great care in working out as nothing I assume would be more offensive to the French than the idea of an investigating committee while such a Commission would not meet opinion here unless there were included in it those who were believed to represent the insistent demand of this country. I think that before anything is done in that direction there should be opportunity for consultation with the President and definite instructions. I cannot speak officially in regard to the debt as the Department of State is really only a vehicle of communication, Congress having taken control of the subject. But I am unable, as I have said, to escape the conclusion that the sooner we get down to a direct and comprehensive discussion of the economic situation involved, meeting representatives of the French Government face to face not for the purpose simply of presenting a plan but of exposing a condition with the hope that a plan could be matured, can we be measurably successful in dealing with this problem. With kind regards [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES

I am sending you therefore a new text of my memorandum of December 30 in which the following changes have been made: (1) France’s entire debt towards the United States would be fixed at its total in capital, that is to say, at about $3,340,000,000 (the value of American stocks included). (2) This debt would be extinguished by annual payments corresponding to the following table: Number of annuities: Rate of interest: Value of annuities: (in millions of dollars) ½ percent, ½ percent, 1 percent, 1½ percent, 2 percent, (3) The French Government is willing to agree that the rhythm of the amortization in capital of the debt should not be contingent upon the payments which France is to receive from Germany. The portion of the annuities representing the amortization would therefore be paid integrally and regularly to the United States whatever may be the degree of execution of the Dawes Plan. Only the payment of the portion of the annuities corresponding to the interest of France’s debt would remain dependent upon the payments made by Germany and the possibility of the transfer of these payments. If it appears to you possible to transmit this memorandum privately and unofficially to the Government of the United States it should be understood that it takes the place of the first memorandum which should be considered as canceled. Very sincerely yours, (Signed) Etienne Clémentel.”

permit France: To wait until the Dawes Plan has entered into a period of effective application and the expenses resulting from the war (the pensions, annuity allowances for reconstruction) shall begin to decrease. It is under these conditions that French public opinion may be led to adopt such a plan as the following: Fixing the nominal amount of the debt to the amount of this debt in capital, that is to say, at $3,340,000,000 (the value of American stocks included); rate of interest and amortization in conformity with the following table: (Here insert table quoted in foregoing letter.) In order to combine in a certain measure the value of the annuities and France’s possibilities of payment, a principle which is in conformity with all the American declarations, it should be understood that if Germany were to fulfill only a part of the obligations prescribed by the Dawes Plan or if only a portion of the German annuity should be paid to France in accordance with one of the methods provided for in the Experts’ Plan, the portion of the French annuity corresponding to the interest of the debt should be reduced in the same proportion. But France would undertake to pay regularly and integrally to the United States the portion of the annuities representing the amortization, whatever may be the degree of execution of the Dawes Plan.” Portion of old text bearing upon American stocks is omitted from the new memorandum. The new memorandum indicates that the suggested changes which I mentioned in my

Accordingly in spite of the fact that the new memorandum does not embody all that is to be desired, nevertheless I earnestly hope that in view of the conciliatory changes in comparison with first proposal it may serve as a starting point. In that case I do not believe that it would be difficult to induce the present government to consent to taking steps along some of the lines suggested by Mr. Hughes in his letter of February 6th, 1925 to me. Complete text of new memorandum by next pouch.33 HERRICK 29 Telegram in two sections. 30 Letter not printed.

(2) I fear that if no settlement is made in next few months, or at least if no substantial progress is made, public feeling in United States may grow that France does not have serious intention of paying, and that feeling thus created will make suitable arrangement in light of all the circumstances exceedingly difficult to reach. The Government of the United States would prefer not to send a formal communication in the matter to France at this time, and hopes that it will not be necessary to do so. For this reason you will appreciate importance of putting matter before French Government in such manner that advisability of taking action suggested will be fully understood. It is preferable to elicit overture from France, if possible, in order to avoid appearance of pressure from this Government which might produce unfortunate reaction from French public opinion. M. Clémentel’s second personal and unofficial memorandum to you (as I have already indicated above) would not appear to be any more acceptable as a basis for negotiation than his first, which Secretary Mellon did not find to offer a practical basis upon which negotiations might be begun. It appears instead to be desirable to use the communication made to Mr. Jusserand by Secretary Mellon in December as starting point for the present discussions and to have your representations upon it. While it is confidently believed that at that time the Ambassador did not fail to advise his Government of the statement made to him by Secretary Mellon, it is desired that you hand to the proper French authorities, when you have your conversation with them, a memorandum containing the statement communicated to Mr. Jusserand by Secretary Mellon on December 1, 1924. (3) Please repeat foregoing to Embassy in Great Britain, with report of action you take, for Ambassador Houghton’s information. KELLOGG

about 4 years. I referred to the qualifying words in Secretary Mellon’s statement, and said that although I had been given no interpretation of their exact meaning, they did not, in my opinion, seem to exclude any of the principles which he had set forth; as to payments on the principal, France was already paying 20 millions yearly, and that British agreement started with 23 millions, which was no great difference. He is going to discuss matter with the Government this morning and will come to see me this afternoon. For my own personal information I should appreciate an expression of Secretary Mellon’s view on principles set forth by Franklin- Bouillon. I do not mean by this to ask for statement of what Debt Commission will be willing to accept, but only to ascertain principal lines on which I must work to evoke from French Government a proposal which Debt Commission would be willing to consider as a basis for beginning of negotiations. Repeated to American Embassy, London. HERRICK 35 Telegram in two sections. 36 Member of the Chamber of Deputies. 36 Member of the Chamber of Deputies.

The foregoing statement is the sole basis for newspaper stories about a circular note to debtor governments. Department has not sent any such note and none is thought of. At press conference of May 18 one correspondent inquired if there was any authority for reports that nine countries had been approached. Secretary said he did not make that statement and that he could not say nine countries had been approached. Another correspondent said that a newspaper article had indicated that there had been a circular note. Secretary replied that there had not been any, and that whatever had been done through conversations with Ministers and Ambassadors had been done separately, not all at same time. Repeat the foregoing to American Embassies Belgium and Italy, and Legations Czechoslovakia, Greece, Latvia, Rumania, and Yugoslavia. KELLOGG 37 See Combined Annual Reports of the World War Foreign Debt Commission, pp. 106,

The Ambassador of France at Washington and Mr. Lacour-Gayet, Inspector of Finances, Financial Attaché of the Embassy of the Republic at Washington, will also form part of that mission. The mission embarked at Havre on the 16th of this month on the ship Paris, which, barring accident, should arrive in New York on the evening of the 22d.42 Be pleased to accept [etc.] E. DAESCHNER 41 File translation revised. 42 For the negotiations between the Caillaux mission and the World War Foreign Debt Commission, see Combined, Annual Reports of the World War Foreign Debt Commission, p. 44.

Greece [99] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Greece (Goold) Washington, July 31, 1925.

inform my Government that it might publicly announce the intention of the Greek Government to take up the regulation or funding of its indebtedness to the United States.45 As stated above, however, no definite proposals to this effect have as yet been submitted by the Government of Greece. In this connection I am authorized to state that my Government would be prepared, after consultation with the other powers which are parties to the 1918 agreement, to examine the question of relieving the Government of Greece from its present obligation to obtain the consent of the United States to the pledging of any new security for external loans, if the Government of Greece should make satisfactory arrangements for the funding of its debt to the United States. I have also been instructed to point out that if the Government of Greece will promptly initiate debt funding negotiations, the World War Foreign Debt Commission would not be disposed to insist that the indebtedness of Greece be repaid in full within fifteen years from November

time when the Mission would proceed to the United States. In this connection I pointed out to the Minister that Congress would be assembling shortly, that several of the members of the Debt Funding Commission were also members of Congress and that, in addition, the Christmas and New Year holidays were not far distant. If the Mission did not come to this country promptly there might be considerable delay in taking up the matter, which would only react unfavorably to Greece, since, as the Minister appreciated, the Department would not be disposed to view with favor Greek loan flotations until the debt matter was settled. In this connection I referred to the fact that the Greek indebtedness to the United States was relatively small and that the question ought to be a very simple one to deal with. To this the Minister replied that, quite the contrary, the Greek matter was by far the most difficult of all and, while he did not explain—and I asked for no explanation—in his allusion to the difficulty he undoubtedly had in mind the claims which Greece might set up under the 1918 Credit Agreement with Greece. I told the Minister that I would communicate with him in case the Debt Funding Commission had any comment to make upon the informal communication which he had made to the Department regarding the new negotiators. A[LLEN] W. D[ULLES]

Italy [103] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

49 Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs, Department of State.

Latvia [106] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania (Coleman) Washington, July 20, 1925.

Rumania [107] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Rumania (Jay)

[113] The Minister in Rumania (Jay) to the Secretary of State

[120] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Rumania (Riggs)

As of November 15, 1924, the principal amount of the indebtedness of the Government of Rumania to the Government of the United States was

We could not forget the help that the United States of America gave us during the war and along with this moral debt of gratitude we are fully conscious of the interest which the eventual cooperation of a power like the United States of America presents in view of our present economic development. If we signed at London the arrangement relative to the “relief bonds,” it was not at our request—as it would appear from your note of March 18th. On the contrary, in view of our present difficulties, we would have wished to postpone this arrangement. But we had finally to consent to it on account of its international character. Indeed, these “relief bonds” represented essentially relief debts contracted under the auspices of an international organization with Allied and neutral countries. (Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland.) Nevertheless, we did not accept it until it was established that it did not imply any obligation concerning war debts. For us, hostilities did not, unfortunately, end on November 11, 1918. During the whole year of 1919 we had to defend our frontiers against the Hungarian and Russian Bolshevists. On the other hand, abandoned in the midst of the struggle by Russia, we found ourselves completely isolated from our Allies, so that our real war debts to America were only contracted during the year 1919. Under these conditions we think that these debts should not be assimilated with the “relief bonds,” which were made the object of the London arrangement. Rumania, as she has already declared on many occasions, has no thought of evading her obligations. She asks the Government of the United States of America simply not to demand of her any arrangement entailing the settlement of her debts with all her Allies —which would be, in the present circumstances, beyond her possibilities and forces. Besides, the obligation to settle this question now by premature sacrifices, would hinder to such a point our recovery that the very people who would have to suffer most would be our creditors, whose best guarantee is our general financial and economic consolidation. For this reason we hope that, far from seeing in our attitude a lack of good intentions toward the United States—a lack of good intentions which nothing would justify—the Government of the United States of America will be good enough to see therein simply a necessity imposed by our present situation. With a view to the economic reconstruction of Europe, the United States of America has lately given its help to various countries. We cannot believe that it will refuse to

Rumania the pursuit of its work of reconstruction to which she is consecrating all her efforts for the very purpose of being able in the future to meet her obligations. Besides, as he declared to Mr. Kellogg, Mr. Vintila Bratiano, our Minister of Finance, or one of his authorized representatives, would like to go to the United States in order to explain to the American Government our situation and to furnish it the reasons for the requests above indicated. Please accept [etc.] I. G. DUCA 61 Not printed. 61 Not printed. 62 File translation revised. 63 Minister Jay presented the note on March 20.

greater in amount than its corresponding indebtedness to the several Governments concerned in the London arrangement. The Government of the United States does not demand for itself treatment more favorable than that which has been accorded by Rumania to its other creditors on account of relief and reconstruction loans, but the loans made by the Government of the United States are certainly no less entitled to repayment than the loans made by the other Governments in question for similar purposes and the Government of the United States feels constrained to repeat that it is unable to agree that Rumania should make no payments on account of its relief and reconstruction indebtedness to it, while making payments to other Governments on account of an indebtedness toward them incurred for similar purposes. The principle at issue, in the opinion of the Government of the United States, is one susceptible of satisfactory settlement without the delay and expense incident to the visit to Washington of a Rumanian Debt Mission. Furthermore, the Government of the United States feels that no useful purpose could be served by the visit of such a mission if, as indicated in the Rumanian Government’s note of [March 30] it should be authorized merely to offer an explanation of the failure of the Rumanian Government to present a debt funding proposal. The position of the Government of the United States is clearly set forth in the concluding paragraph of the note of March 20, 1925, from the American Minister at Bucharest, and as stated therein, the Government of the United States expects promptly to receive from the Government of Rumania an appropriate proposal for the funding of the indebtedness of the latter to the United States.’” [Paraphrase] When you present the above note you should make as effective use as possible of the

KELLOGG 64 Not printed; see despatch No. 745 and its enclosure, supra.

Yugoslavia [122] The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to the Secretary of State

[127] The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to the Secretary of State

translation of this reply,78 which will be observed to state that no credit for the payment of interest on the $12,000,000 advance appears in the Budget Law because this advance was a war loan and it did not appear to be desirable that such loans should appear in the Budget as no definitive decision had yet been taken in regard to them and as interest on them was not effectually paid. The letter further states that interest credits on the $25,000,000 and $15,000,000 advances were entered in the Budget because these advances had been concluded after the Armistice but it expresses the opinion that these credits should also not have been entered as these two advances in reality belonged to the same category of war loans. The letter adds however that the foregoing is without prejudice to any decisions which may be taken with regard to the question of Inter- Allied war debts which must be treated and resolved separately. It will be observed that the letter then states that due note has been taken of my communication to the effect that the $12,000,000 advance bears interest. This is in reply to the Legation’s Note to this effect written in accordance with the Department’s

Subsequently in conversation, Dr. Stojadinovitch has substantially repeated to me the contents of this letter and regarding the reply to Mr. Boal’s Note has stated that this matter was one of considerable difficulty and required more consideration. He intimated that as the Yugoslav Government’s finances stood at present, any interest payments would practically be impossible, but he intended, as already reported, to raise the taxation of the peasants in his Budget for the next fiscal year which he would present to the new Parliament which is to meet about April 18th. In regard to this plan, however it should be noted that it depends upon whether Dr. Stojadinovitch then remains in office which itself depends upon a Radical victory. It may nevertheless be said that practically any Cabinet which may come into power after the elections, will sooner or later find itself obliged to raise peasant taxation which without any undue hardship should increase the Government revenues very substantially. At present, as also reported, the taxation of the peasants, who form 85 percent of the population, is almost nil.

billion gold Francs, had now practically been determined, he was about to send to the French Minister here a form of bond which he would be willing to sign in order thus to fund the Government’s war debt to France. It will be remembered that the Government owes no postwar debt to France. As to the war and post war debts to England, Dr. Stojadinovitch stated that there was still too great a difference between the amount claimed by that country and the amount which his Government had ascertained to be due to allow of the funding of this debt at present by signing any bonds. The British war debt he estimated also at about one billion gold Francs and the post war debt at approximately 2,000,000 pounds Sterling. From Dr. Stojadinovitch’s statements I understand that the difficulty in determining the amount of the British debt is still chiefly the old one involving the amount and cost of various military supplies received from the British authorities at Salonica. Dr. Stojadinovitch gave me to understand however that the giving of bonds whether to France or to England involved no question of paying interest on them, which was left for subsequent discussion. I have [etc.] H. PERCIVAL DODGE 74 Not printed. 75 Not printed; Pierre de L. Boal was then Chargé at Belgrade.

equality with other lending governments in respect to advances and credits of a similar nature granted by them to Serbia. (Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury to the

I should, therefore, be glad if Your Excellency would be good enough to confirm my Government’s understanding that, pending the refunding or satisfaction of the indebtedness in question, no action will be taken by the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes with respect to any of its indebtedness heretofore or hereafter incurred which will result in placing the United States in a less favorable position as a creditor than that which it now occupies.” HUGHES 85 Not printed.

already elapsed since Mr. Marinkovitch’s promise. Dr. Stojadinovitch replied that the British Government were pressing him to propose some plan for the payment of the

that its meaning was intended to be exactly responsive to my Note. I then said that I would communicate it to my Government.

The paragraphs in the Note enclosed regarding the financial operations and foreign loans of the Yugoslav Government will be observed and are evidently intended as a further reply to the phrase in the Department’s telegram requesting confirmation to the effect that “no action will be taken by the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes prior to the refunding or discharge of the latter’s indebtedness to the United States with respect to any other indebtedness heretofore or hereafter contracted which would result in placing the United States in a less favorable position as a creditor than that which it occupies at the present time.” In connection with such

as its objective the economic recovery of its country devastated by war, the improvement of its financial position and the balancing of its budget. The Royal Government hopes that the results obtained and to be obtained in this manner in the administration of public finances will permit of the economic recovery of the country necessary for its normal life and for the liquidation of the war debts. The Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes ventures to express its profound conviction that the Government of the United States of America will recognize the justness of the principle in virtue of which the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes deserves to obtain facilities for the liquidation of its war debts as well as those which may be accorded to other allied and associated states. Accept [etc.] M. NINTCHITCH BELGRADE, May 14, 1925. 90 Not printed. 91 Neither printed. 92 Revised translation supplied by the Yugoslav Government; filed separately under file No. 026 Foreign Relations/1449.

Interest of the United States in the disposition of the proposed liberation bonds of the Austro-Hungarian succession states94

[137] The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State

[144] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

request for the issue of the bonds; (c) that the bonds should be delivered to the Reparation Commission as mandatory of the Governments concerned. It is to be noted that the Reparation Commission decision does not take into account any questions which may subsequently arise with respect to the territory of Fiume. His Majesty’s Government understood from information received from the British representative on the Reparation Commission that that body has no official cognizance of the annexation of the territory of the Free City by Italy and that it was accordingly thought best to leave the matter open by making a reservation of a general nature about this territory. In these circumstances the British Embassy would propose that when notifying the Reparation Commission in the sense of (a), (b) and (c) the Ambassadors Conference should at the same time inform them officially of the annexation of Fiume to Italy under the provisions of the Italo-Yugoslav agreement of January 27,

appears to be no substantial source, therefore, from which the United States could satisfy its claims in absence of special arrangement with Austria or Hungary, which might meet with objection from Allied Powers, except from proceeds of the liberation bonds. Value of these bonds is to be credited on Austro-Hungarian reparation account, and if distributed among powers the receiving powers will be debited on reparation

4. Czechoslovakia’s liberation bonds have value as to same degree, as have also bonds of Poland. Probable that other states will have reparation claims so large as to outweigh their liberation bond issue. 5. I think that we have an interest in the distribution of these liberation bonds on account of our claims. I suggest that we take no action in the Conference of Ambassadors until March and then request that delivery of bonds should be made to Reparation Commission as trustee with instructions to it to make no disposition of the said bonds or of their proceeds except in agreement with the United States. In Conference of Ambassadors we could indicate that we had unsatisfied claims against Austria and Hungary and in consequence could claim share in amounts distributed. 6. In past negotiations on participation in German reparation payments we were criticized for delay in not advising the Allies that we intended to collect damages from Germany. I think it good tactics, therefore, in present matter to state our position in advance. As far as I am able to gather from present conditions apart from use of Austrian-Hungarian property in the United States and possible separate financial arrangements with Austria and Hungary, I am inclined to believe that the proceeds of the reparation [liberation?] bonds offer the most promising outlook for some payment in near future. It is desirable, therefore, to make statement. Logan HERRICK 3 Telegram in two sections.

While the Department does not believe that there is any occasion for you to embark upon any discussion of scope of authority accorded Conference of Ambassadors as such, you will observe from minutes of various discussions in Supreme Council which finally resulted in setting up of Conference of Ambassadors that Conference is one of representatives of Governments sitting in interim between meetings of Supreme Council; that Governments concerned are left entirely free to determine who shall represent them on the Conference; and that authority of the Conference extends only so far as those Governments shall specifically authorize. Since the Government of the United States: in this matter enjoys certain rights irrespective of its ratification or nonratification of the treaties of peace, the decision is one to be determined solely by the four Governments concerned. Form and manner of reaching decision is for them alone to decide; and while this Government may not have any objection; if matter is discussed between representatives of the four Governments who sit on Conference of Ambassadors, it must be understood clearly that it is not Conference of Ambassadors as such which takes decision but Governments concerned acting through their duly authorized representatives. You will also recall that the Government of the United States in May 1921 was invited to be represented on Supreme Council, and accepted the invitation; and that Mr. Harvey, the American Ambassador in Great Britain, was designated to represent this Government on Supreme Council whenever questions in which the Government of the United States was directly concerned should arise for discussion.16 Inasmuch as Conference of Ambassadors is dependent upon Supreme Council and holds its authority from the Governments, the right of Government of the United States to participate fully whenever a matter should come up for discussion in which this Government has a direct interest is not open to question. KELLOGG

Refusal by the United States to consent to the adherence of the Soviet Union to the Spitzbergen treaty of February 9, 192018 18 For previous correspondence concerning the adherence of the Soviet Union to the treaty, see Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 1 ff. [149] The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State Washington, April 7, 1925.

[154] The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State Washington, August 17, 1925.

Nevertheless the language of the draft agreement handed by Mr. Grew to Mr. de Laboulaye on July 15 last,21 and forwarded to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, calls in its turn for a reservation which is considered to be essential. It bears on the style of designation of the Government of the Union. The American draft speaks of the regime “now functioning in Russia and known as the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics”. This designation is open to two objections: 1. One of a judicial nature: A regime cannot be party to a treaty; 2. A more serious objection of political character: The American designation carries a somewhat disparaging sense, and it is to be feared that under those conditions some of the signatory powers that have recognized the Government of the Union may hesitate to affix their signatures to a document which they might believe likely to wound the susceptibilities of the Soviets. The French Government therefore suggests, subject to any other minor change without, however, bearing on the substance, that there be substituted for the sentence “that some of them recognize the regime now functioning in Russia and known as the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics” the sentence “now acknowledging the existence in Russia of the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics”. I therefore have the honor to submit to Your Excellency the enclosed draft arrangement22 which takes into account as far as possible the wishes of the Government of the United States and seems to my Government to contain a formula that will be acceptable to all the powers. Be pleased [etc.] E. DAESCHNER 19 File translation revised.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of April 7, 1925, in further relation to the question of the adherence of Russia to the Treaty of February 9, 1920, concerning Spitzbergen. You state that your Government concurs in the views of this Government that the adherence of Russia to the Treaty should be effected through an agreement calling for ratification, but that it perceives objection to the designation “the regime now functioning in Russia and known as the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics” which is used in the draft agreement handed to Mr. de Laboulaye by Mr. Grew on July 15, 1924. This Government has given careful consideration to the views of the French Government in the matter as expressed in your note of April 7, 1925, and I now enclose a draft of the proposed agreement which it is believed is in harmony with the views of the French Government as set forth in your note. Accept [etc.] JOSEPH C. GREW

[Enclosure] Proposed Draft of Agreement Relative to the Adhesion of Russia to the Spitzbergen Treaty The United States of America, the British Empire, Denmark, France, Italy, Japan, Norway, the Netherlands, and Sweden, signatories to the Treaty concluded in Paris on February 9, 1920, concerning Spitzbergen, having found that some of them have recognized what is known as the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics, as the Government of Russia, and that those who do not so recognize that Union are, under the following conditions, not opposed to the adherence of Russia to the Treaty through that agency: Have agreed, notwithstanding the stipulation in the first paragraph of Article 10 of the Treaty, to permit Russia to adhere to the said Treaty even though all of the High Contracting Parties have not at this time recognized what is known as the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics, on condition and with the definite understanding that the absence of objection to such adherence of Russia on the part of any of the High Contracting Parties, shall not be interpreted in any way as implying any recognition whatsoever of that Union as the Government of Russia, by any High Contracting Party which has not recognized it as the Government of Russia. The present agreement shall be ratified by all of the High Contracting Parties. Each High Contracting Party shall in the shortest possible time send its ratification to the French Government which will see to its being notified to His Majesty the King of Norway and to the other High Contracting Parties. The ratifications shall remain on

deposit in the Archives of the French Government. The present Agreement shall go into effect for each High Contracting Party on the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification. Done at Paris . . . . . . . . . . 1925, in duplicate originals, one of which will be transmitted to the Government of His Majesty the King of Norway, and the other deposited in the Archives of the Government of the French Republic, by which Government an, authenticated copy thereof will be delivered to each of the other High Contracting Parties signatory to the said Treaty of February 9, 1920, or an adherent thereto.

Be pleased [etc.]

E. Dagscuner

23 File translation revised. “4 Not printed.

MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: By a note dated July 13, I had the honor to inform Your Excellency that the French Government could not retain the word “entity” in the draft for the wording of the clause relative to the adherence of Russia to the treaty concerning Spitzbergen, and suggested that the phrase “political organism” be put in its place. Since then, informal conversations between Mr. Haupt and one of the members of the Embassy have brought out the fact that the Federal Government would prefer the phrase “political organization.” My Government, to which I reported that wish, sees no objection to that suggestion. Under those conditions I should be thankful to Your Excellency if you would kindly let me know whether the United States Government accepts the draft with that change therein that was enclosed in my note of April 7 last. Be pleased [etc.] E. DAESCHNER 27 File translation revised.

The above-quoted paragraph clearly accords to Russian nationals and companies the same rights as nationals of the High Contracting Parties, such preferential treatment to be enjoyed by them until the recognition of a Russian Government shall permit Russia to adhere to the Treaty. As Your Excellency’s Government is aware, the Government of the United States has not recognized the regime now functioning in Russia, and in these circumstances the Government of the United States regrets that it cannot see its way, in view of the express terms of the Treaty, to consent to the adherence thereto by the regime now functioning in Russia. Moreover, since the rights of Russian nationals and companies in Spitsbergen are expressly safeguarded under the provisions of the present Treaty, the Government of the United States fails to find that it is necessary or desirable to consider at this time the modification of the existing Treaty with a view to permitting the adherence thereto by the regime now functioning in Russia. Accept [etc.]

Fran B. Keroce 2° Note of October 5 Not printed.

Assent by President Coolidge to provisions in the Polish-Swiss arbitration treaty for invoking the assistance of the President of the United States under certain contingencies [157] The Polish Minister (Wróblewski) to the Secretary of State Washington, April 15, 1925.

have addressed to the other a request for arbitration, the following procedure shall be followed: Each Party shall name two arbitrators of which one must be taken from the list of members of the Permanent Court of Arbitration and chosen to the exclusion of its own nationals. The arbitrators so designated shall together choose the Chairman of the tribunal. In case of an equal division of votes the selection of the Chairman shall be entrusted to the President of the United States, if he so consents. Acting on instructions from my Government, I beg to inquire if it is agreeable in principle to the President of the United States that the Parties should so provide for invoking the assistance of the President in the circumstances described in Articles 3 and It is understood that an identic note is being presented by the Swiss Minister on behalf of his Government. Accept [etc.] W. WRÓBLEWSKI 31 An identic note dated April 16 was received from the Swiss Minister. 32 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. L, p. 261.

You inform me that, acting under instructions from your Government, you inquire if it is agreeable in principle to the President of the United States that the parties should so provide for invoking the assistance of the President in the circumstances described in Articles 3 and 14. It appears therefrom that, under a certain contingency, the Chairman of the Permanent Conciliation Commission shall be designated, at the request of the parties, by the President of the United States of America if he so consents; and also that, under a certain contingency, the selection of the Chairman of the Tribunal of Arbitration which may be established pursuant to the Convention shall be entrusted to the President of the United States, if he so consents. I have to inform you that the President desires me to thank the Government of Poland, through your good offices, for the courtesy and compliment implied in your inquiry, and to assure you that it is entirely agreeable in principle to him that the parties to the treaty should so provide for invoking the assistance of the President in the circumstances described in Articles 3 and 14. An identic note is being transmitted to the Swiss Minister at this capital for the information of his Government. Accept [etc.] J. V. A. MACMURRAY

33 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Swiss Minister.

Unsuccessful efforts to have American customs attachés accorded diplomatic status [159] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State

[178] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

[185] The Minister in Greece (Laughlin) to the Secretary of State

[Enclosure] The British Embassy to the Department of State AIDE-MÉMOIRE

bring their activities and methods under closer and more responsible control. Mr. Chamberlain assumes, however, that it is not intended by the United States Government to give to these officers a diplomatic status or to ask foreign Governments to afford recognition to them as diplomatic officers. From recent conversations and correspondence in London and in Washington, Mr. Kellogg will be aware that His Majesty’s Government felt obliged, as long ago as June, 1923, to raise objections to the activities of these officers in British territory in so far as those activities involved enquiries into costs of production. Mr. Chamberlain feels confident that the Secretary of State will agree with him that the activities of Customs or other revenue investigators cannot be regarded as falling within the scope of diplomatic duties.

In cases where the customs appraiser is not satisfied as to the valuation entered and has not available data upon which he can base a valuation, he will find it necessary to cause an investigation to be made abroad to ascertain these data. For the purpose of this instruction, these will be divided into ordinary “market value” and “cost-of-production” investigations, numbered 1 and 2 herein. To make such investigations, the United States Treasury Department has assigned a number of customs attachés to foreign posts. These customs attachés in the foreign field are the authorized representatives of the Secretary of the Treasury and function as instrumentalities of the appraising operation, and make particular investigations upon the request of the customs authorities of the United States Treasury and in connection with the admission of goods which have been entered at the United States customs. These officials also make original investigations of “market” value when they have any reason to believe, from information lodged with them or from their own observations, that undervaluation exists in any particular instance or industry. If such an inquiry should extend to cost of production, it will be governed by the special instructions from the Treasury Department referred to herein. An extract from a memorandum submitted by the Treasury Department on this subject follows: “In making these investigations, the customs attachés of the United States Treasury Department abroad are always disposed to give to manufacturers and shippers the fullest information as to correct invoicing of their merchandise or anything else about which they may make inquiry or request assistance.” 1. The customs attachés abroad, when it is necessary to investigate the foreign value or export value of certain goods, customarily call upon the firm which has made the shipment and request data as to sales price for home consumption and/or exportation to the United States. In the course of this investigation it is usually necessary to request the shipper to exhibit his records of other sales of the same or similar goods on approximately the date when the consignment in question was exported. Such records tend to establish the actual foreign value or export value at the time of exportation, which is the valuation prescribed by the Tariff Act of 1922 as the valuation to be considered in the application of the tariff. (Sec. 402–b and c). A foreign shipper presumably would not refuse to make available to the customs attaché the above-mentioned information unless he misunderstood the terms of the Tariff Act of 1922. It may be emphasized here that in the “market value” investigation the Customs Attaché does not usually request data as to the cost of production; he merely requests the exhibition of documentary evidence that the valuation declared in a particular consular invoice upon a shipment of goods to the United States is not lower than upon sales in the exporting country for home consumption or for export to the United States. In case the valuation declared by the shipper with respect to the shipment to the United States has been made in good faith, there would seem to be no

valid reason for the shipper’s refusing to demonstrate the existence of such good faith by exhibiting a record of sales in his home market. If, however, the shipper refuses to make such documentary proof available to the Customs Attaché there are only two courses open to the appraiser at the port of entry. He may resort to the United States value, which in almost every case, will be higher than the export or the foreign value, and, in some cases, will be difficult of ascertainment. In case there were an appeal from the appraiser’s valuation, the case would come before the Board of General Appraisers for review. This Board sits as a court and its records and proceedings are public. This court would normally require affirmative proof of the foreign value or export value, which would necessitate the production of the exporter’s books and records or of extracts therefrom in court. In such a case the data to which the shipper had denied the Customs Attaché confidential access would be made available to the public and would lose their confidential character. The other alternative, in case of a refusal or failure of a shipper to allow an examination of his books to determine the foreign value or export value, is for the Secretary of the Treasury to prohibit the importation into the United States of merchandise manufactured, produced, sold, shipped or consigned by the foreign shipper. Section 510 of the Tariff Act of 1922 is as follows: INSPECTION OF EXPORTER’S BOOKS.— “If any person manufacturing, producing, selling, shipping, or consigning merchandise exported to the United States fails, at the request of the Secretary of the Treasury, or an appraiser, or person acting as appraiser, or a collector, or a general appraiser, or the Board of General Appraisers, as the case may be, to permit a duly accredited officer of the United States to inspect his books, papers, records, accounts, documents, or correspondence, pertaining to the market value or classification of such merchandise, then while such failure continues the Secretary of the Treasury, under regulations prescribed by him, (1) shall prohibit the importation into the United States of merchandise manufactured, produced, sold, shipped or consigned by such person, and (2) may instruct the collectors to withhold delivery of merchandise manufactured, produced, sold, shipped or consigned by such person. If such failure continues for a period of one year from the date of such instructions the collector shall cause the merchandise, unless previously exported, to be sold at public auction as in the case of forfeited merchandise.” Under an opinion of the Attorney General of the United States the Treasury Department considers that the provisions of this section of the Tariff Act of 1922 are mandatory

upon the Secretary of the Treasury and the prohibition of further importation has been to put it into effect after the Customs Attaché has reported a refusal on the part of the foreign shipper to make the necessary data available. In addition to the above specific provision of law, there is a general principle that, if, for any reason, a legal basis for the appraisement of imported merchandise can not be ascertained to the satisfaction of the appraising officers, such merchandise shall not be appraised and delivered until a legal basis of appraisement can be ascertained. 2. There sometimes arise, however, cases in which it is impossible for either the foreign value, the export value, or the United States value of goods to be ascertained, notwithstanding the apparent good faith of the shipper in attempting to furnish data to substantiate the value as declared for United States customs entry. Such cases usually involve goods which are shipped in a partly manufactured state to the United States for further manufacture and incorporation into a finished machine or product in this country, and which are not sold for home consumption in the country of exportation.

are engaged in the production or manufacture of merchandise of the same class or kind. A number of foreign governments have formally and informally intimated that the investigations carried on by Customs Attachés into the cost of production of foreign merchandise constitute an invasion of the sovereignty of the country in which they are attempted, unless prior permission has been accorded for such an investigation by the government concerned. The Department is not prepared to insist as a matter of right that the United States Customs Attachés be accorded facilities for such investigations into the cost of production. However, it is believed that foreign governments will appreciate the practical advisability of furthering the proper activities of Customs Attachés in this connection in view of the clear provisions of Section 510 of the Tariff Act of 1922 which, as has been noted before, are considered to be mandatory upon the Secretary of the Treasury. In other words, if it is impossible for the appraising officers of the United States Customs Service to arrive at one of the four kinds of valuation enumerated in Section 402 (a), it becomes necessary for the Secretary of the Treasury to exclude the goods in question. However, in order that no misunderstanding may arise on the part of any foreign government to the effect that an American Customs Attaché is attempting to carry out provisions of American law on the territory of a foreign state without the permission of the government thereof, it has been arranged that in future no Customs Attaché will undertake to approach a foreign shipper or manufacturer in regard to the cost of production of his goods without the prior general permission of the appropriate authorities of the government in whose territory such shipper or manufacturer is located. This general permission would appear to be implied from the recognition by a foreign government of the Customs Attachés at the time that the notification of their status and the statement of their duties are made by the diplomatic mission. In the event that, in reply to the notification by the diplomatic mission of the status and duties of the Customs Attachés, any foreign government signifies its refusal to permit these officials to carry out investigations into the cost of production, the chief of the mission will notify the Customs Attaché to that effect and will inform the Department transmitting copies of the correspondence containing such refusal. Under such circumstances, Customs Attachés are instructed not to attempt cost-of-production investigations in the country in question. In countries where Customs Attachés have been recognized by the local government, in each specific case where the ascertainment of the cost of production is necessary, the Customs Attaché will inform the Chief of the American Diplomatic Mission thereof and the latter is hereby instructed to notify the government to which he is accredited that the Customs Attaché will approach the firm in question with a view to ascertaining the cost of production.

The Customs Attaché will simultaneously call upon the firm in question and request facilities for making the necessary investigation. In case the firm refuses to permit the Attaché to carry out such an investigation, the latter will inform the Chief of the American Diplomatic Mission, who, in turn, will take up the question with the government, pointing out again the purpose for which the investigation is to be made, and that exclusion from the United States of the firm’s goods under Section 510 may result as a consequence of the refusal. In the event that representations to the foreign government do not result in overcoming any firm’s objections to the investigation by the Customs Attaché, it will not be attempted further and the Customs Attaché will refer the case back to the American Customs authorities with an appropriate notation of the refusal. It is believed that no fixed procedure can advantageously be outlined by the Department for the guidance of American diplomatic missions in bringing such requests to the notice of foreign governments. It would appear that in each country there might be worked out by the Mission and the appropriate foreign government a procedure that would satisfy the requirements of that government without necessitating the active intervention of the Mission in each individual case. It is left to the discretion of the individual Chiefs of Mission, after consultation with the Customs Attaché, and to the exigencies of situations in particular countries to determine the procedure to be followed. It is the Department’s object to ensure that no investigation into the cost of production will be undertaken by Customs Attachés of the Treasury without the prior general permission of the foreign government concerned, and, in certain countries where the activities of Customs Attachés have been or may be questioned by the governments thereof, without prior notification to the foreign government of each specific cost of production investigation. The general plan outlined above, providing for notification to the foreign government of each cost-of-production investigation that it is planned to undertake, is subject to modification or suppression by the Chief of the Diplomatic Mission, in his discretion, in those countries where the Customs Attachés’ activities have not been questioned. In such countries, it may appear to the Chief of Mission not to be desirable to raise any question in the minds of the authorities of the country to which he is accredited. Under these circumstances, no action in regard to this instruction need be taken, aside from the general notification of the status and duties of the Customs Attachés, unless some subsequent question as to their activities is raised by the government. It is fully realized that there may be objection on the part of certain foreign governments and by certain foreign manufacturers to disclosing one or another element of the cost-of-production investigation. For instance, it has been felt by foreign manufacturers that valuable trade secrets were being requested by Customs Attachés which, if they became known to the competitors of the firm, might well prove

disastrous to the latter’s prosperity. In regard to this quite natural fear, it may be said that the Customs Attachés stationed abroad are men of long service and proved reliability in the United States Customs Service. Their reports are strictly confidential and are never accessible to any American or foreign individual or firm, nor are they even available to other departments of the United States Government or to bureaus of the United States Treasury Department other than the Customs Division thereof. Under article 1323 of the Customs Regulations of 1923 the divulgence of information of this character subjects the guilty party to dismissal or criminal prosecution or both. The record of the United States Customs Service for preserving the confidentiality of data given to it in confidence has been excellent and it may be safely assumed that cases of the betrayal of such confidence, should any such case unfortunately occur, will be punished with the utmost severity. In making investigations into the cost of production abroad, where such investigations have been permitted by the government concerned, the Customs Attachés have been given specific written instructions, a copy of which is transmitted herewith.38 It will be observed that these instructions make it possible for the Customs Attachés’ reports to contain the data necessary for valuation purposes without disclosing all the individual items which go to make up such cost. Thus, it is contemplated that only the Customs Attaché himself will have information as to labor cost, finishing cost, etc., which the manufacturer may be hesitant to divulge. It has been alleged in certain foreign countries that the Customs Attachés, in requesting data from foreign shippers, have threatened the exclusion of their goods from the United States unless such data were furnished. In this connection it may be pointed out that Customs Attachés are under strict instructions to make no such threats. They are authorized, however, to explain the provisions of Section 510 of the United States Tariff Act, in order that the foreign shippers may understand the possible result of their refusal or the inability of the customs appraiser to obtain a legal basis for the appraisement of the merchandise. It is pertinent to call attention to the fact that the methods of valuation established by the Tariff Act of 1922,—including the provision for the cost of production—were arrived at after the most careful study by the Congress of the United States as alternatives to the “American Valuation” of goods for customs purposes. As has been explained above, the United States Treasury must enforce the existing tariff law, and as a practical matter, it does not appear probable that an amendment of Section 510 of that law will be seriously considered in the near future. Consequently, it should be made clear to foreign officials, who question the propriety of investigations abroad by United States Customs Attachés, that a failure on their part to cooperate with these Attachés in their duties under the Tariff Act will in some cases operate to preclude shipments to the United States.

Under the Canadian tariff regulations, Canadian investigators have conducted investigations into the books and records of American manufacturers. This Government has not objected to such investigations, since it has appeared to it only fair that American exporters, desiring to enter a foreign market, should comply with the tariff and other regulations of that market. For this Government to prohibit proper activities of Canadian investigators would be to injure American exporters by depriving them of their trade with Canada in those cases where investigation of books is demanded by the Canadian Customs authorities. TARIFF COMMISSION REPRESENTATIVES Your attention is especially directed to the fact that the United States Tariff Commission is entirely separate from the United States Treasury Department. It was

provided for in Title I of this Act, wholly or in part the growth or product of the United States and of like or similar articles wholly or in part the growth or product of competing foreign countries, shall find it thereby shown that the duties prescribed in this Act do not equalize said differences, and shall further find it thereby shown that the said differences in cost of production in the United States and the principal competing country can not be equalized by proceeding under the provisions of subdivision (a) of this section, he shall make such findings public, together with a description of the articles to which they apply, in such detail as may be necessary for the guidance of appraising officers. In such cases and upon the proclamation by the President becoming effective the ad valorem duty or duty based in whole or in part upon the value of the imported article in the country of exportation shall thereafter be based upon the American selling price, as defined in subdivision (f) of section 402 of this Act, of any similar competitive article manufactured or produced in the United States embraced within the class or kind of imported articles upon which the President has made a proclamation under subdivision (b) of this section. The ad valorem rate or rates of duty based upon such American selling price shall be the rate found, upon said investigation by the President, to be shown by the said differences in costs of production necessary to equalize such differences, but no such rate shall be decreased more than 50 per centum of the rate specified in Title I of this Act upon such articles, nor shall any such rate be increased. Such rate or rates of duty shall become effective fifteen days after the date of the said proclamation of the President, whereupon the duties so estimated and provided shall be levied, collected, and paid on such articles when imported from any foreign country into the United States or into any of its possessions (except the Philippine Islands, the Virgin Islands, and the islands of Guam and Tutuila). If there is any imported article within the class or kind of articles, upon which the President has made public a finding, for which there is no similar competitive article manufactured or produced in the United States, the value of such imported article shall be determined under the provisions of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subdivision (a) of section 402 of this Act. (c) That in ascertaining the differences in costs of production under the provisions of subdivisions (a) and (b) of this section, the President, in so far as he finds it practicable, shall take into consideration (1) the differences in conditions in production, including wages, costs of material, and other items in costs of production of such or similar articles in the United States and in competing foreign countries; (2) the differences in the wholesale selling prices of domestic and foreign articles in the principal markets of the United States; (3) advantages granted to a foreign producer by a foreign government, or by a person, partnership, corporation, or association in a foreign country; and (4) any other advantages or disadvantages in competition. Investigations to assist the President in ascertaining differences in costs of production under this section shall be made by the United States Tariff Commission, and no

proclamation shall be issued under this section until such investigation shall have been made. The commission shall give reasonable public notice of its hearings and shall give reasonable opportunity to parties interested to be present, to produce evidence, and to be heard. The commission is authorized to adopt such reasonable procedure, rules, and regulations as it may deem necessary. The President, proceeding as hereinbefore provided for in proclaiming rates of duty, shall, when he determines that it is shown that the differences in costs of production have changed or no longer exist which led to such proclamation, accordingly as so shown, modify or terminate the same. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize a transfer of an article from the dutiable list to the free list or from the free list to the dutiable list, nor a change in form of duty. Whenever it is provided in any paragraph of Title I of this Act, that the duty or duties shall not exceed a specified ad valorem rate upon the articles provided for in such paragraph, no rate determined under the provision of this section upon such articles shall exceed the maximum ad valorem rate so specified. (d) For the purposes of this section any coal-tar product provided for in paragraphs 27 or 28 of Title I of this Act shall be considered similar to or competitive with any imported coal-tar product which accomplishes results substantially equal to those accomplished by the domestic product when used in substantially the same manner. (e) The President is authorized to make all needful rules and regulations for carrying out the provisions of this section. (f) The Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to make such rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for the entry and declaration of imported articles of the class or kind of articles upon which the President has made a proclamation under the provisions of subdivision (b) of this section and for the form of invoice required at time of entry. The investigations authorized above are in their nature statistical inquiries directed to the ascertainment of the differences between costs of production in the United States and in foreign countries, the purpose being to enable the President to put into effect changes in classification of articles or in rates of duty under the United States Tariff Act of 1922. The investigations are not concerned with individual importations, and they do not involve the imposition of any penalties under the Tariff Act for refusal to disclose information. Foreign manufacturers, so far as the Tariff Act is concerned, may or may not disclose their costs of production to Tariff Commission investigators, as they may see fit.

However, in view of the fact that the findings of the Tariff Commission as to foreign costs of production may lead to a recommendation to the President that the United States Customs duty on certain classes of foreign goods be raised or lowered under authority of Section 315, foreign manufacturers may consider it advantageous to cooperate with these investigators. The confidentiality of information concerning individual costs of production and trade secrets of any foreign producer or merchant is protected by Section 708 of the Act of September 8, 1916, which makes it a crime, punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both, for any member of the Tariff Commission, or for any employee, agent, or clerk thereof, or for any other officer or employee of the United States to divulge, or to make known in any manner whatever not provided for by law, to any person, the trade secrets or processes of any person, firm, copartnership, corporation or association embraced in any examination or investigation conducted by the commission. Representatives of the Tariff Commission do not enjoy the status of attachés of American diplomatic missions. American diplomatic and consular officers are directed, however, in compliance with the Executive Order of April 4, 1924, to cooperate in all proper ways with these officials, and, upon request, to introduce them to the appropriate foreign authorities. GENERAL Chiefs of Diplomatic Missions and Consuls General who receive this instruction are directed to advise the American consular officers in their territory of the duties and status of the Customs Attachés and of the Tariff Commission representatives. American consular officers will be expected to give full cooperation to these officials in the performance of their duties. FRANK B. KELLOGG 36 i. e., those in countries in Europe with which the United States maintained diplomatic relations, and in China and Japan.

neighbor state. If the propriety of such extraterritorial extension of law is admitted, it is obvious that international trade might be subject to intolerable interference even before it crosses the border of the state where it originates. (2) The cost of production investigations are an inquisition into the affairs of French manufacturers contrary to all precedent. No French Parliament could stand which passed a law authorising French tax officials to inquire into the books of French citizens to the degree to which American agents are authorized to do so not in their own but in a foreign country. (3) Is it to be supposed that United States citizens would submit to similar inquisitorial legislation passed by France? Investigations of this sort are authorised in American law in connection with income tax and other legislation, but such inquiries are within the national territory, and have not even there been extended to cost of production. An attempt to enforce a foreign law in France as a condition for the right to sell in the United States is indefensible. (4) It is useless to try to differentiate between the actions of one set of American officials and another. The representatives of the Treasury Department demand the opening of books and the disclosures of production costs because they say they want to assure honest valuations for goods imported into the United States. If this were the only use which would be made of the information, the inquiries might be less objectionable. But the representatives of the Tariff Commission are in Europe to get information as to the cost of production in different countries in order that the American tariff can be adjusted in such a way that any advantage reaped by a foreign producer through cheaper labor, cheaper raw materials, or cheaper methods of manufacture may be counterbalanced by the tariff rate adopted in the United States. The information they want they try to secure through threat that if not given, the tariff will go up. The information they seek, if given, will be used to check the import trade which they are investigating. Is it to be supposed that the information given one set of officers for one purpose will not find its way into the hands of the other set of officers and be used by them for another purpose? (5) The investigations are, in addition, objectionable because they discriminate between French producers. If all the information asked were given, an efficient plant manufacturing at low cost would find itself at a disadvantage in American trade as compared to a less efficient plant. II. FRENCH ACTION PROPOSED

The cotton and woolen associations, and perhaps others, have counselled their members to report any attempt to force the giving of information to the associations, which will take the matter up with the French Government. They encourage noncompliance with the demands made. The “Conseillers du Commerce Extérieur” have at a number of meetings discussed the character of the investigations carried on. Protests have reached them from a number of trade syndicates, some of which have proposed that, at least, the application of the American law be made less brusk by agreement to allow the trade syndicates to report on the cost of production, their conclusions being accepted, and the individual merchant being freed from interference. (This does not seem to be a satisfactory way out. CLLJ.) III. ESTIMATE OF THE EFFECT OF THE LEGISLATION Obviously, the American officers sent to enforce the laws to which the French take exception have no option. It may also be urged that this is a “good law”, in that it protects the income of the United States.

The legislation certainly does not promote friendly international relations. The opposition aroused seems to be addressed primarily against the activities of the agents of the Tariff Commission and incidentally against the representatives of the Treasury. Perhaps the activities of the latter might have been accepted if there had been no feeling aroused that the information given was to be used to the disadvantage of French exports in the fixing of future tariff rates—but even that is doubtful. French exporters and French Government officials question the propriety of the action taken by certain of the representatives of the Tariff Commission, and have protested against them. The criticism which some of these representatives have aroused comes not only from individual firms, but from the trade syndicates. It is a fair question whether legislation by France attempting to do the same thing in America which our officials have attempted to do in France would be accepted without vigorous protest by the American business public. Take an example: There is now a fairly large export of aluminium ingots from the United States to France. There is also an important French aluminium industry. Suppose a French official attempted to get from the American Aluminum Company their costs of production, assuming that he acted under French law. What would his reception be? This is an extreme example, since the American Aluminum Company has refused to give any information on this subject even to the United States Government. But the reaction toward the inquiry would be the same even in branches of industry where control is not so completely in the hands of a small group. The practical effect of the activities under the existing American legislation is to dry up sources of commercial information formerly open to the representatives of the United

States Government in this country. Trade syndicates whose members have been affected by the investigations now refuse cooperation, alleging that the reason for doing so is that they feel that any information given may be used to their disadvantage. Cotton, wool and silk manufacturers and the electrical equipment interests are examples of groups which have been less communicative through the bad feeling aroused. But aside from details, it can generally be assumed in human relations that a certain standard of action is “good” if one would welcome the application of that standard to himself. I doubt whether French legislation of this sort would receive a cordial reception in the United States. 40 Not printed.

facts deemed necessary to a proper appraisement, examination and classification of the merchandise. This information is embodied in reports submitted to the Secretary of the Treasury for reference to appraising and other customs officers at ports of importation in the United States. They advise foreign exporters and shippers as to the United States Tariff Law and invoice requirements. By direction of the Secretary of the Treasury, upon request from appraising officers, or upon their own motion when they have reason to believe that fraud or undervaluation exists, they make special investigations in the above subjects as well as other violations of the Customs Revenue Laws and improper invoicing of merchandise, and, when necessary, inquire into the cost of production of merchandise. The facts ascertained and reported by them are also used in connection with the enforcement of the statutes of the United States intended to prevent dumping of foreign merchandise into the United States at less than a fair value. In case you deem it advisable you may furnish to the appropriate authorities the more comprehensive and detailed description of the activities of Customs Attachés that is contained in the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, 1925, with reference to this subject. In any event, you will point out that no inquiry into cost of production will be undertaken by Customs Attachés without the prior general or specific permission of the interested government. In view of the considerable number of these Attachés assigned to a district comprising several countries and the consequent necessity of attaching the whole number of such Attachés to the Diplomatic Mission in each country in this district, it is not believed to be necessary that these officials be carried on the diplomatic lists of each country in which they may occasionally perform duties. Although these officials will be provided with American Diplomatic Passports and will hold the status of Attachés of the American Diplomatic Mission, their duties, as noted above, do not normally bring them into contact with foreign governments, but rather with foreign individuals and business firms. Consequently, it would appear to be sufficient if the principal Customs Attachés only were placed on the diplomatic lists of foreign governments, provided that such governments recognize for practical purposes the official status of the Assistant Customs Attachés who are on the staff of the principal Customs Attaché. If, however, any foreign government should prefer to place both the Customs Attaché and the Assistant Customs Attachés on its diplomatic list, there would appear to be no objection thereto. In the event that, due to the exigencies of the Customs Service, a Customs Attaché who has not been regularly assigned to Austria should be assigned there for temporary duty, he will not begin to perform such duty pending notification to you and by you to the Austrian Government of his presence and official status. Instructions in this sense will be issued by the Secretary of the Treasury. For your information, it is pointed out that the legislation directing that these Customs officials be attached to American Diplomatic Missions came about through the difficulties which they have hitherto experienced on account of a lack of understanding

on the part of foreign governments of their status and duties under the American laws under which they are operating. There is quoted in this connection a portion of a letter from the Treasury Department: “The purpose of this proposed amendment is to give the Customs representatives abroad a privileged official status which will enable them to obtain information now denied to them, facilitate their travelling throughout the countries to which they are assigned, and also to escape the burdens of foreign taxation that are now so great as to threaten the continuance of this work in foreign countries. …44 It is not intended to seek diplomatic or social preferment for these representatives.” Your best efforts are desired in explaining to the appropriate Austrian authorities the duties of the Customs Attachés. To this end, you are authorized to make full use of the information contained in the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, 1925. You will take all appropriate means to remove misunderstandings that may arise and to cooperate in all proper ways to make the work of the Customs Attachés both useful to this Government, and unobjectionable to the Austrian Government. It is suggested that you keep in close and constant touch with the Customs Attachés and with their activities, and that you take all appropriate means to insure that their duties are performed in a manner consistent with their status as attachés of your Legation. FRANK B. KELLOGG 41 The same instruction, mutatis mutandis, was sent on April 21 to the Embassies in

43 Bulgaria, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Rumania, Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, and Switzerland. The instructions to the Missions in Belgium, France, Portugal, and Spain stated that Messrs. S. E. Armstrong, customs attaché, and Edgar M. Barber, Henry M. Clapp, and Paul H. Watson, assistant customs attachés, would be attached to them with headquarters at 55 Rue de Rivoli, Paris; the Legation in China was informed that Messrs. Martin B. Nicholson, customs attaché, and Martin G. Scott, assistant customs attaché, would be attached to it with headquarters at Shanghai; the instructions to the Missions in Denmark, Finland, Germany, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, and Sweden informed them that Messrs. F. X. A. Eble, customs attaché, and Charles H. Aschenbach, John Cameron, Paul Hermes, Max Richert, Charles S. Turrill, and Max Teuscher, assistant customs attachés, were attached to them with headquarters at 17, von der Heydt Strasse, Berlin; Messrs. George R. Coxe and John P. Griebel, assistant customs attachés, and Lucien Picard, customs clerk, were also attached to the Embassy in Germany for duty in Bavaria, Baden, and Württemburg. 44 Omission indicated in the original instruction.

The following brief comment is made upon the Memorandum transmitted with your despatch No. 5038. (1) Is sufficiently covered in the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, which points out that Customs Attachés make investigations only in connection with goods which have actually been entered at the American customs. Their activities are in no sense designed to elicit economic or other information which is not directly connected with the verification of valuations of dutiable goods which have been declared to the American Government. (2) The infrequency and the purpose of the cost of production investigations made by Customs Attachés are fully explained in the Circular Instruction of April 2. With reference to the question of principle raised in point three, your attention is drawn to the fact that this Government has not objected to investigations by Canadian Customs officers in the United States. With regard to point four, the distinction between Customs Attachés and Tariff Commission representatives is clearly drawn in the Department’s circular instruction of April 2, and should be emphasized to the French Government. With regard to Section II of the Memorandum, relating to the action proposed by France, it may be observed that the Treasury has ruled that affidavits and certificates by trade associations, etc., as to market value or cost of production do not satisfy the requirements of American law, and that, therefore, the Secretary of the Treasury has no legal authority to accept such substitutes for examination of records by accredited representatives of this Government. In view of the interest that has been taken in this matter by the International Chamber of Commerce, it is suggested that you make available to Mr. Basil Miles46 the substance of the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, and the pertinent parts of this instruction in order that the American representatives at future meetings of the International Chamber of Commerce may be fully advised as to the provisions of the Tariff Act of 1922 affecting Customs Attachés and Tariff Commission representatives, and of the policy of this Government of putting these provisions into effect. You are authorized to cooperate with Mr. Miles in all proper ways to impress the International Chamber of Commerce with the sincere efforts which have been made by this Government to remove, as far as possible, the causes of the misunderstandings which have arisen abroad on account of this law.

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Enclosure—Translation] The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State47 WASHINGTON, May 26, 1924. MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: I had the honor to draw Your Excellency’s attention in my note of February 11, 1922,48 to the objectionable features of the activities of a representative of the Treasury Department, Mr. F. W. McReynolds, who conducted in France financial inquiries and would inspect the books of business firms. In a communication dated March 2348 of the same year, Your Excellency was pleased to let me know that Mr. McReynolds had been asked to stop his work and that this procedure would be discontinued. In spite of this further inquiries have been made in France by representatives of the United States Tariff Commission, Messrs. Ernster, Hermes and Simpson in particular, and my Government found itself constrained to bring to the notice of the American Embassy at Paris in a note dated September 19, 1923,48 the objectionable features of inquiries conducted apart from the official channels by officials whose mission was not even made known to the French Government. The representatives of the Treasury Department are nevertheless carrying on their inquiries and even would, as they did before, claim the right to examine the accounts of our commercial firms. In compliance with instructions just received from my Government and referring to the previous correspondence on the same subject, I have the honor to draw Your Excellency’s attention to the difficulties which such proceedings are likely to arouse. Not to enforce our laws on our own territory is impossible. Now, with a view to protecting the merchants and avoiding any possible disclosure which in some cases might bring ruin upon him, the law of France only permits of books being examined in judicial and revenue cases. And so the French Government cannot possibly grant to foreign officials powers that it cannot itself claim. Be pleased [etc.] JUSSERAND 45 The note was signed by the French Ambassador.

46 American administrator at the Paris headquarters of the International Chamber of Commerce.

50 Protests against certain activities of Treasury representatives; see under Sweden, vol. II, p. 725, and under Switzerland, vol. II, p. 731.

I have now received a reply to my representation, dated June 15, 1925, a copy and translation of which I am transmitting herewith.57 The Minister of Foreign Affairs informs me in his reply that, although the Belgian Government is animated by a most sincere desire to facilitate as much as possible the application of the provisions of the American law, and that a better knowledge of the provisions of the American customs regulations could only exercise a favorable influence on the development of the economic relations between the two countries, it does not find that the activity of the Customs Attachés comes within the limits defined by international practice as to the role of the personnel of Embassies and Legations. The Minister indicates that these customs officials might more appropriately be attached to the Consulate, as the work they carry on would seem to come under the sphere of the Consulate. The Minister further points out in his note that the Belgian Government itself has not the power by law to direct investigations of cost of production in enterprise, and therefore is unable to grant permission, either general or specific, with regard to such investigations by American officials.

I have [etc.] WILLIAM PHILLIPS

The attitude thus taken by the Yugoslav Government in this matter is one, as has already been reported in a number of other matters, which is often taken by it. Although it may not see anything objectionable in the recognition of these Attachés, it is as usual suspicious, realizing that it is not well versed in such matters, and it sees no reason why it should act before its great Allies have acted. I shall continue to bring Dr. Nintchitch’s attention to this matter from time to time and I shall continue to do everything possible to accelerate his favorable decision. I beg to request that I may be informed of any favorable decisions of other Governments which would undoubtedly have a very favorable influence upon the decision of the Yugoslav Government. I have [etc.] H. PERCIVAL DODGE

The Government of the King, which is aware that this passage in your letter refers to the protest by which it took exception, a short time ago, to a decision of the Treasury Department not to authorize the importation into the United States of products of two Swedish enterprises, owing to the fact that these enterprises had declared that they could not permit a representative of the said Department to examine their books and commercial documents, appreciates thoroughly the good will shown by your Government in order to reach an agreement in the question at issue. It seems, however, to the Government of the King that the proposed arrangement is not of such a nature as to weaken the objections which it has formulated on this subject. According to the opinion of the Government of the King, the duties which would devolve on customs attachés, namely those which would consist in making investigations of private enterprises abroad, are hardly of a nature to be classed among those which, according to established usages, can be recognized as of a diplomatic character. The extension of diplomatic immunities in favor of the officials in question would have an effect the more grave inasmuch as the Government of the King, in acquiescing to the request of the Government of the United States of America, might be considered as having indirectly authorized foreign officials to examine the commercial books of Swedish houses and as tending to release on Swedish territory an activity which is not even recognized as pertaining to the authorities of the country. Under these conditions the Government of the King regrets that it is not in a position to give a favorable reply to the desire expressed by the Government of the United States of America to see its officials in question recognized as members of your Legation. Accept [etc.] TORSTEN NOTHIN 67 No. 479 not printed.

me the impression that he felt that the matter could be adjusted with a little patience. A copy of the note dispatched in accordance with this interview, dated May 28, is herewith enclosed marked Annex 2.70 It incorporates, as will be perceived, statements contained in Department circular instruction of April 2, 1925. I have recently—a formal reply from the Foreign Office being still outstanding,—taken occasion to bring up the matter again orally. The official with whom I talked after a little hesitation told me in confidence that while it was true that the formal replies from the Departments of Finance and Commerce had not been received, the greatest obstacle now was a political one. It had been brought to the attention of the Austrian Government that other nations were raising serious objections to the diplomatic recognition of American Customs Representatives. England, Italy, Switzerland, Spain, and the Scan-dinavian States, I recall among others whom he specifically mentioned in this connection. Germany, he said, was hesitating and uncertain as to what answer it would return. He gave me the distinct impression that some of the resident Chiefs of Missions, at least here in Vienna, had discussed the matter at the Austrian Foreign Office, probably in the interest of uniformity of action. As a case in point, Italy was mentioned, where it was said that it was found impossible to invest American Treasury representatives with powers and functions which, it was alleged, no corresponding Italian official had. It was of course recognized that an American Treasury official or Customs Representative would have no power to enforce his requests, but the mere fact that he was dignified with diplomatic status would put him in a place of vantage and be misunderstood by Italian manufacturers, who in many cases would assume that they must comply with requests made under such circumstances. I mention this merely as an illustration to show that some communication has passed between Vienna and Rome, whether the intermediary was the resident Italian Minister or the Austrian Minister at Rome I do not, of course, know. Austria, my informant said, was a small country, and wished to avoid being put in the position of being perhaps the only country to accord such recognition. He particularly inquired whether any other country had acted favorably upon a similar request. I assume that I might have mentioned Canada, but it did not seem to me, under the circumstances, that such an example would especially help. Finally, I was begged to regard the information given me as strictly confidential. The official with whom I talked has the rank of Minister Plenipotentiary. I took occasion to allude casually to the fact that in Vienna and Berlin, as well as in Paris and London, many obscure Soviet commercial representatives were carried on the diplomatic list. The force of this was frankly recognized. Apart from the fact that it might be conspicuous as presenting an isolated instance, the Minister thought that the diplomatic recognition of American Customs Representatives was not, in and of itself, so objectionable. Their functions and duties under diplomatic protection presented, however, a more serious question. So long as these Representatives acted without formal recognition, here at least their presence would be winked at and ignored. To accord them formal recognition might be embarrassing.

I shall not fail, of course, to keep this matter to the fore. There is no real hostility here, at least in the Foreign Office. On the other hand, up to a certain point a spirit of accommodation is evident. If any other nation, especially any European nation, has taken favorable action, I trust the Department will notify me,—preferably by cable.71 To cite a concrete case, or concrete cases, will greatly help. If I cannot do so, I despair of the final outcome. I have [etc.] ALBERT H. WASHBURN 69 Not printed. 69 Not printed. 70 Not printed. 71 On August 20 the Minister was informed that Hungary and Rumania had accorded diplomatic status to customs attachés. On December 23 the Minister was instructed that the Department was “inclined to consider the informal statements by officials of the [Austrian] Ministry for Foreign Affairs, reported in your despatch No. 775, as equivalent to a refusal of diplomatic status” (instruction No. 407, not printed; file No.

diplomatic status,—they have no dealings with Swiss authorities and their activities are confined entirely to private inquiries and dealings with private individuals; second, that if recognition were accorded to the Customs Attachés a precedent would be created under which it would be difficult to refuse diplomatic status to officials of other governments, no matter how far fetched their claims might be. He said that the Federal Council had in the past repeatedly refused to recognize as members of foreign legations officials engaged on special work bearing on education, agriculture, labor problems, etc.; that if our request were to be complied with the Swiss Government would be deluged with similar requests from other governments, and that although it was very distasteful to them to refuse our request it was considered wiser to do so in the hope of avoiding future difficulties. Monsieur Motta stated that he and his colleagues on the Federal Council had been much impressed by Mr. Boal’s presentation of the subject, that it was clearly understood that it was our intention to create a helpful agency to facilitate business transactions and that there had never been any intention of setting up an inquisitorial agency. He added, however, that Swiss business houses were under a definite impression that our Customs Representatives were intent on intolerable interference in their affairs and that he feared this impression could not be eradicated so long as the present procedure was maintained. He expressed the hope that some other method might be found which would maintain the advantages which we desired to grant while avoiding the objections which he had pointed out. The written reply promised by Monsieur Motta was delayed for some time because of minor changes in the text which were desired by the Federal Council, but it has now been received and is forwarded in copy and translation herewith.89 It will be observed that the reasons given in the note are not identical with those given me verbally by Monsieur Motta. They are, first, that the functions of these agents have no bearing upon the relations between our two governments; and second, that the desired recognition would vest them with powers which, under Swiss law, are not enjoyed even by Swiss officials. I have [etc.] HUGH GIBSON 87 Not printed. 88 Second secretary of legation in Switzerland. 87 Not printed. 89 Not printed.

You will further note that the Treasury will request the Congress to repeal the provisions of the Act of January 13, 1925, which, for practical purposes, have been nullified by the refusal of foreign governments to accord diplomatic status to “Customs Attachés”. The Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, 1925, remains in effect, and it is expected that the cooperation described therein, between Diplomatic Missions and representatives of the Customs Service will continue. You are directed to give all proper assistance to these officials, bearing in mind that their obligation to carry out the provisions of the Tariff Act of 1922 is in no way impaired by the refusal of any foreign government to accord to them diplomatic status. You will take every appropriate occasion to explain to the appropriate foreign officials the duties of the Customs officials, as described in the Tariff Act, and the Department’s Instruction of April 2, 1925, and to remove any misunderstandings that may exist. In reply to a request of the Treasury Department that instructions be issued to American Diplomatic Missions directing them to obtain for “Customs Attachés” laissez passer, etc., as well as to endeavor to arrange exemption from police registration requirements and income taxation, the Department said: “The Department deems it inadvisable to issue specific instructions to its Diplomatic Missions directing them to request ‘laissez passer’, etc., for your officials, since these special customs facilities are given by foreign governments only as special courtesies. The Department prefers to leave this matter to the discretion of the Diplomatic Missions concerned. It is suggested that each of your representatives take up this question with the American Diplomatic Mission with which he is in closest touch. “The question of the liability of your representatives to police registration regulations and to income taxation abroad is dependent upon the domestic laws of individual countries. The Department, and American Diplomatic Missions, will continue to make every effort to obtain for your representatives such exemption as may properly be requested in specific cases as they arise.” This instruction is for your information only. The status of “Customs Attachés”, from the point of view of American law, has not been changed. In those countries where they have been recognized as members of the Diplomatic Mission, they will continue to be so regarded pending a modification of the Act of January 13, 1925. JOSEPH C. GREW

90 i. e., those in countries in Europe with which the United States maintained diplomatic relations, and in China and Japan. 91 Not printed.

International convention for the unification of certain rules relating to bills of lading [190] International Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules Relating to Bills of Lading, Concluded at Brussels, August 25, 1924 Done at Brussels, in a single copy, August 25, 1924. Treaty Series No. 931

Treaty Series No. 931 [Document 190] International Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules Relating to Bills of Lading, Concluded at Brussels, August 25, 192494 [Translation] The President of the German Republic, the President of the Argentine Republic, His Majesty the King of the Belgians, the President of the Republic of Chile, the President of the Republic of Cuba, His Majesty the King of Denmark and Iceland, His Majesty the King of Spain, the Chief of the Estonian State, the President of the United States of America, the President of the Republic of Finland, the President of the French Republic, His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Possessions Beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, His Serene Highness the Regent of the Kingdom of Hungary, His Majesty the King of Italy, His Majesty the Emperor of Japan, the President of the Republic of Latvia, the President of the Republic of Mexico, His Majesty the King of Norway, Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands, the President of the Republic of Peru, the President of the Republic of Poland, the President of the Portuguese Republic, His Majesty the King of Rumania, His Majesty the King of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, His Majesty the King of Sweden and the President of the Republic of Uruguay, Having recognized the utility of laying down in common accord certain uniform rules relating to bills of lading, have decided to conclude a Convention to that effect and have designated as their Plenipotentiaries, namely: The President of the German Republic: His Excellency Mr. von Keller, Minister of Germany at Brussels. The President of the Argentine Republic: His Majesty the King of the Belgians: Mr. L. Franck, Minister of Colonies, President of the International Maritime Committee; Mr. A. Le Jeune, Senator, Vice President of the International Maritime Committee;

Mr. F. Sohr, Doctor of Law, Secretary General of the International Maritime Committee; Professor at the University of Brussels. The President of the Republic of Chile: His Excellency Mr. Armando Quezada, Minister of Chile at Brussels. The President of the Republic of Cuba: His Majesty the King of Denmark and Iceland: His Majesty the King of Spain: His Excellency the Marquis of Villalobar and Guimarey, Ambassador of Spain at Brussels. Chief of the Estonian State: His Excellency Mr. Pusta, Minister of Estonia at Brussels. The President of the United States of America: His Excellency Mr. William Phillips, Ambassador of the United States of America at Brussels. The President of the Republic of Finland: The President of the French Republic: His Excellency Mr. M. Herbette, Ambassador of France at Brussels. His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Possessions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India: His Excellency the Right Honorable Sir George Grahame, G. C. V. O., K. C. M. G., Ambassador of His Britannic Majesty at Brussels. His Serene Highness the Regent of the Kingdom of Hungary: Count Olivier Woracziczky, Baron of Pabienitz, Chargé d’Affaires of Hungary at Brussels. His Majesty the King of Italy:

Mr. J. Daneo, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Italy at Brussels. His Majesty the Emperor of Japan: His Excellency Mr. M. Adatci, Ambassador of Japan at Brussels. The President of the Republic of Latvia: The President of the Republic of Mexico: His Majesty the King of Norway: Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands: The President of the Republic of Peru: The President of the Republic of Poland and the Free City of Danzig: His Excellency Count Jean Szembek, Minister of Poland at Brussels. The President of the Portuguese Republic: His Majesty the King of Rumania: His Excellency Mr. Henri Catargi, Minister of Rumania at Brussels. His Majesty the King of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes: Messrs. Straznicky and Verona. His Majesty the King of Sweden: The President of the Republic of Uruguay: Who, duly authorized therefor, have agreed on the following: ARTICLE 1 In this convention the following words are employed with the meanings set out below: (a) “Carrier” includes the owner of the vessel or the charterer who enters into a contract of carriage with a shipper.

(b) “Contract of carriage” applies only to contracts of carriage covered by a bill of lading or any similar document of title, insofar as such document relates to the carriage of goods by sea; it also applies to any bill of lading or any similar document as aforesaid issued under or pursuant to a charter party from the moment at which such instrument regulates the relations between a carrier and a holder of the same. (c) “Goods” includes goods, wares, merchandise, and articles of every kind whatsoever except live animals and cargo which by the contract of carriage is stated as being carried on deck and is so carried. (d) “Ship” means any vessel used for the carriage of goods by sea. (e) “Carriage of goods” covers the period from the time when the goods are loaded on to the time they are discharged from the ship. ARTICLE 2 Subject to the provisions of Article 6 under every contract of carriage of goods by sea the carrier, in relation to the loading, handling, stowage, carriage, custody, care, and discharge of such goods shall be subject to the responsibilities and liabilities, and entitled to the rights and immunities hereinafter set forth. ARTICLE 3 1. The carrier shall be bound before and at the beginning of the voyage to exercise due diligence to:— (a) Make the ship seaworthy; (b) Properly man, equip, and supply the ship; (c) Make the holds, refrigerating and cool chambers, and all other parts of the ship in which goods are carried, fit and safe for their reception, carriage, and preservation. 2. Subject to the provisions of Article 4 the carrier shall properly and carefully load, handle, stow, carry, keep, care for, and discharge the goods carried. 3. After receiving the goods into his charge the carrier orthe master or agent of the carrier shall, on demand of the shipper, issue to the shipper a bill of lading showing among other things:

(a) The leading marks necessary for identification of the goods as the same are furnished in writing by the shipper before the loading of such goods starts, provided such marks are stamped or otherwise shown clearly upon the goods if uncovered, or on the cases or coverings in which such goods are contained, in such a manner as should ordinarily remain legible until the end of the voyage; (b) Either the number of packages or pieces, or the quantity, or weight, as the case may be, as furnished in writing by the shipper; (c) The apparent order and condition of the goods; Provided that no carrier, master, or agent of the carrier shall be bound to state or show in the bill of lading any marks, number, quantity, or weight which he has reasonable grounds for suspecting not accurately to represent the goods actually received or which he has had no reasonable means of checking. 4. Such a bill of lading shall be prima facie evidence of the receipt by the carrier of the goods as therein described in accordance with paragraph 3 (a), (b), and (c). 5. The shipper shall be deemed to have guaranteed to the carrier the accuracy at the time of shipment of the marks, number, quantity, and weight, as furnished by him, and the shipper shall indemnify the carrier against all loss, damages, and expenses arising or resulting from inaccuracies in such particulars. The right of the carrier to such indemnity shall in no way limit his responsibility and liability under the contract of carriage to any person other than the shipper. 6. Unless notice of loss or damage and the general nature of such loss or damage be given in writing to the carrier or his agent at the port of discharge before or at the time of the removal of the goods into the custody of the person entitled to delivery thereof under the contract of carriage, such removal shall be prima facie evidence of the delivery by the carrier of the goods as described in the bill of lading. If the loss or damage is not apparent, the notice must be given within three days of the delivery. The notice in writing need not be given if the state of the goods has at the time of their receipt been the subject of joint survey or inspection. In any event the carrier and the ship shall be discharged from all liability in respect of loss or damage unless suit is brought within one year after delivery of the goods or the date when the goods should have been delivered.

In the case of any actual or apprehended loss or damage the carrier and the receiver shall give all reasonable facilities to each other for inspecting and tallying the goods. 7. After the goods are loaded the bill of lading to be issued by the carrier, master, or agent of the carrier to the shipper shall, if the shipper so demands, be a “shipped” bill of lading, provided that if the shipper shall have previously taken up any document of title to such goods, he shall surrender the same as against the issue of the “shipped” bill of lading. At the option of the carrier such document of title may be noted at the port of shipment by the carrier, master, or agent with the name or names of the ship or ships upon which the goods have been shipped and the date or dates of shipment, and when so noted, if it shows the particulars mentioned in paragraph 3 of Article 3, it shall for the purpose of this article be deemed to constitute a “shipped” bill of lading. 8. Any clause, covenant, or agreement in a contract of carriage relieving the carrier or the ship from liability for loss or damage to or in connection with goods arising from negligence, fault, or failure in the duties and obligations provided in this article, or lessening such liability otherwise than as provided in this convention, shall be null and void and of no effect. A benefit of insurance in favor of the carrier or similar clause shall be deemed to be a clause relieving the carrier from liability. ARTICLE 4 1. Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be liable for loss or damage arising or resulting from unseaworthiness unless caused by want of due diligence on the part of the carrier to make the ship seaworthy and to secure that the ship is properly manned, equipped, and supplied and to make the holds, refrigerating and cool chambers, and all other parts of the ship in which goods are carried fit and safe for their reception, carriage, and preservation in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 3. Whenever loss or damage has resulted from unseaworthiness, the burden of proving the exercise of due diligence shall be on the carrier or other person claiming exemption under this article. 2. Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be responsible for loss or damage arising or resulting from: (a) Act, neglect, or default of the master, mariner, pilot, or the servants of the carrier in the navigation or in the management of the ship; (b) Fire, unless caused by the actual fault or privity of the carrier; (c) Perils, dangers, and accidents of the sea or other navigable waters; (d) Act of God;

(e) Act of war; (f) Act of public enemies; (g) Arrest or restraint of princes, rulers, or people or seizure under legal process; (h) Quarantine restrictions; (i) Act or omission of the shipper or owner of the goods, his agent, or representative; (j) Strikes or lockouts or stoppage or restraint of labor from whatever cause, whether partial or general; (k) Riots and civil commotions; (l) Saving or attempting to save life or property at sea; (m) Wastage in bulk or weight or any other loss or damage arising from inherent defect, quality, or vice of the goods; (n) Insufficiency of packing; (o) Insufficiency or inadequacy of marks; (p) Latent defects not discoverable by due diligence; (q) Any other cause arising without the actual fault or privity of the carrier, or without the fault or neglect of the agents or servants of the carrier, but the burden of proof shall be on the person claiming the benefit of this exception to show that neither the actual fault or privity of the carrier nor the fault or neglect of the agents or servants of the carrier contributed to the loss or damage. 3. The shipper shall not be responsible for loss or damage sustained by the carrier or the ship arising or resulting from any cause without the act, fault, or neglect of the shipper, his agents, or his servants. 4. Any deviation in saving or attempting to save life or property at sea or any reasonable deviation shall not be deemed to be an infringement or breach of this convention or of the contract of carriage, and the carrier shall not be liable for any loss or damage resulting therefrom.

5. Neither the carrier nor the ship shall in any event be or become liable for any loss or damage to or in connection with goods in an amount exceeding 100 pounds sterling per package or unit or the equivalent of that sum in other currency unless the nature and value of such goods have been declared by the shipper before shipment and inserted in the bill of lading. This declaration if embodied in the bill of lading shall be prima facie evidence but shall not be binding or conclusive on the carrier. By agreement between the carrier, master, or agent of the carrier and the shipper another maximum amount than that mentioned in this paragraph may be fixed, provided that such maximum shall not be less than the figure above named. Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be responsible in any event for loss or damage to, or in connection with, goods if the nature or value thereof has been knowingly misstated by the shipper in the bill of lading. 6. Goods of an inflammable, explosive, or dangerous nature to the shipment whereof the carrier, master, or agent of the carrier has not consented with knowledge of their nature and character may at any time before discharge be landed at any place or destroyed or rendered innocuous by the carrier without compensation, and the shipper of such goods shall be liable for all damages and expenses directly or indirectly arising out of or resulting from such shipment. If any such goods shipped with such knowledge and consent shall become a danger to the ship or cargo, they may in like manner be landed at any place or destroyed or rendered innocuous by the carrier without liability on the part of the carrier except to general average, if any. ARTICLE 5 A carrier shall be at liberty to surrender in whole or in part all or any of his rights and immunities, or to increase any of his responsibilities and liabilities under this convention provided such surrender or increase shall be embodied in the bill of lading issued to the shipper. The provisions of this convention shall not be applicable to charter parties, but if bills of lading are issued in the case of a ship under a charter-party they shall comply with the terms of this convention. Nothing in these rules shall be held to prevent the insertion in a bill of lading of any lawful provision regarding general average. ARTICLE 6 Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding articles, a carrier, master, or agent of the carrier and a shipper shall in regard to any particular goods be at liberty to enter into any agreement in any terms as to the responsibility and liability of the carrier for

such goods, and as to the rights and immunities of the carrier in respect of such goods, or concerning his obligation as to seaworthiness so far as this stipulation is not contrary to public policy, or concerning the care or diligence of his servants or agents in regard to the loading, handling, stowage, carriage, custody, care, and discharge of the goods carried by sea, provided that in this case no bill of lading has been or shall be issued and that the terms agreed shall be embodied in a receipt which shall be a nonnegotiable document and shall be marked as such. Any agreement so entered into shall have full legal effect: Provided that this article shall not apply to ordinary commercial shipments made in the ordinary course of trade, but only to other shipments where the character or condition of the property to be carried or the circumstances, terms, and conditions under which the carriage is to be performed are such as reasonably to justify a special agreement. ARTICLE 7 Nothing herein contained shall prevent a carrier or a shipper from entering into any agreement, stipulation, condition, reservation, or exemption as to the responsibility and liability of the carrier or the ship for the loss or damage to, or in connection with, the custody and care and handling of goods prior to the loading on, and subsequent to the discharge from, the ship on which the goods are carried by sea.

ARTICLE 8 The provisions of this convention shall not affect the rights and obligations of the carrier under any statute for the time being in force relating to the limitation of the liability of owners of seagoing vessels. ARTICLE 9 The monetary units mentioned in this convention are to be taken to be gold value. Those contracting states in which the pound sterling is not a monetary unit reserve to themselves the right of translating the sums indicated in this convention in terms of pound sterling into terms of their own monetary system in round figures. The national laws may reserve to the debtor the right of discharging his debt in national currency according to the rate of exchange prevailing on the day of the arrival of the ship at the port of discharge of the goods concerned. ARTICLE 10

The provisions of this convention shall apply to all bills of lading issued in any of the contracting States. ARTICLE 11 After an interval of not more than two years from the day on which the convention is signed, the Belgian Government shall place itself in communication with the governments of the high contracting parties which have declared themselves prepared to ratify the convention, with a view to deciding whether it shall be put into force. The ratifications shall be deposited at Brussels at a date to be fixed by agreement among the said governments. The first deposit of ratifications shall be recorded in a procès-verbal signed by the representatives of the powers which take part therein and by the Belgian Minister for Foreign Affairs. The subsequent deposits of ratifications shall be made by means of a written notification, addressed to the Belgian Government and accompanied by the instrument of ratification. A duly certified copy of the procès-verbal relating to the first deposit of ratifications, of the notifications referred to in the previous paragraph, and also of the instruments of ratification accompanying them, shall be immediately sent by the Belgian Government through the diplomatic channel to the powers who have signed this convention or who have acceded to it. In the cases contemplated in the preceding paragraph the said Government shall inform them at the same time of the date on which it received the notification.

ARTICLE 12 Nonsignatory States may accede to the present convention whether or not they have been represented at the International Conference at Brussels. A State which desires to accede shall notify its intention in writing to the Belgian Government, forwarding to it the document of accession, which shall be deposited in the archives of the said Government. The Belgian Government shall immediately forward to all the States which have signed or acceded to the convention a duly certified copy of the notification and of the act of accession, mentioning the date on which it received the notification. ARTICLE 13

The high contracting parties may at the time of signature, ratification, or accession declare that their acceptance of the present convention does not include any or all of the self-governing dominions, or of the colonies, overseas possessions, protectorates, or territories under their sovereignty or authority, and they may subsequently accede separately on behalf of any self-governing dominion, colony, overseas possession, protectorate, or territory excluded in their declaration. They may also denounce the convention separately in accordance with its provisions in respect of any self-governing dominion, or any colony, overseas possession, protectorate, or territory under their sovereignty or authority. ARTICLE 14 The present convention shall take effect, in the case of the States which have taken part in the first deposit of ratifications, one year after the date of the procès-verbal recording such deposit. As respects the States which ratify subsequently or which accede, and also in cases in which the convention is subsequently put into effect in accordance with Article 13, it shall take effect six months after the notifications specified in paragraph 2

ARTICLE 16 Any one of the contracting States shall have the right to call for a fresh conference with a view to considering possible amendments. A State which would exercise this right should notify its intention to the other States through the Belgian Government, which would make arrangements for convening the conference. Done at Brussels, in a single copy, August 25, 1924.

For Germany: KELLER. For the Argentine Republic: For Belgium: LOUIS FRANCK. ALBERT LE JEUNE. SOHR. For Chile: ARMANDO QUEZADA. For the Republic of Cuba: For Denmark: For Spain: The Marquis of VILLALOBAR. For Estonia: PUSTA. For the United States of America: WILLIAM PHILLIPS. For Finland: For France: MAURICE HERBETTE. For Great Britain: GEORGE GRAHAME. For Hungary:

WORACZICZKY. For Italy: GIULIO DANEO. For Japan: M. ADATCI. Subject to the reservations formulated in the note relative to this treaty and appended to my letter dated August 25, 1925, to His Excellency Mr. Emile Vandervelde, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium. For Latvia: For Mexico: For Norway: For the Netherlands: For Peru: For Poland and the Free City of Danzig: SZEMBEK. For Portugal: For Rumania: HENRY CATARGI. For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes: Dr. MILORAD STRAZNICKT. Dr. VERONA. For Sweden: For Uruguay: PROTOCOL OF SIGNATURE

In proceeding to the signature of the international convention for the unification of certain rules relating to bills of lading, the undersigned plenipotentiaries have adopted the present protocol which will have the same validity as if the provisions thereof were inserted in the very text of the convention to which it refers. The high contracting parties may give effect to this convention either by giving it the force of law or by including in their national legislation in a form appropriate to that legislation, the rules adopted under this convention. They may reserve the right: 1. To prescribe that in the cases referred to in paragraph 2 (c) to (p) of Article 4, the holder of a bill of lading shall be entitled to establish responsibility for loss or damage arising from the personal fault of the carrier or the fault of his servants which are not covered by paragraph (a); 2. To apply Article 6 insofar as the national coasting trade is concerned to all classes of goods without taking account of the restriction set out in the last paragraph of that article. Done at Brussels, in a single copy, August 25, 1924. For Germany: KELLER. For the Argentine Republic: For Belgium: LOUIS FRANCK. ALBERT LE JEUNE. SOHR. For Chile: ARMANDO QUEZADA. For the Republic of Cuba: For Denmark: For Spain:

The Marquis of VILLALOBAR. For Estonia: PUSTA. For the United States of America: WILLIAM PHILLIPS. For Finland: For France: MAURICE HERBETTE. For Great Britain: GEORGE GRAHAME. In proceeding to the signature of the present Convention, His Excellency made, in the name of his Government, the declaration of which the terms are reproduced in an annex to the present Procés-Verbal. For Hungary: WORACZICZKY. For Italy: GIULIO DANEO. For Japan: For Latvia: For Mexico: For Norway: For the Netherlands: For Peru: For Poland and the Free City of Danzig:

SZEMBEK. For Portugal: For Rumania: HENRY CATARGI. For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes: Dr. MILORAD STRAZNICKY. Dr. VERONA. For Sweden: For Uruguay: [Annex 1] I, the Undersigned, His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador at Brussels, on affixing my signature to the Protocol of Signature of the International Convention for the unification of certain rules relating to Bills of Lading, on this 15th day of November 1924, hereby make the following declarations by direction of my Government: I declare that His Britannic Majesty’s Government adopt the last reservation in the additional Protocol of the Bills of Lading Convention. I further declare that my signature applies only to Great Britain and Northern Ireland. I reserve the right of each of the British Dominions, Colonies, Overseas Possessions and Protectorates, and of each of the territories over which His Britannic Majesty exercises a mandate to accede to this Convention under Article 13. GEORGE GRAHAME His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador at Brussels BRUSSELS, this 15th day of November 1924. [Annex 2] IMPERIAL EMBASSY OF JAPAN NOTE ANNEXED TO THE LETTER OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE AMBASSADOR OF JAPAN TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF BELGIUM, ON AUGUST 25, 1925 At the moment of proceeding to the signature of the International Convention for the unification of certain rules relating to Bills of Lading, the undersigned, Plenipotentiary

of Japan, makes the following reservations: a) To Article 4: Japan reserves to itself until further notice the acceptance of the provisions in (a) of paragraph 2 of Article 4. b) Japan is of the opinion that the Convention does not in any part apply to national coasting trade: consequently, there should be no occasion to make it the object of provisions in the Protocol. However, if it be not so, Japan reserves to itself the right freely to regulate the national coasting trade by its own law. M. ADATCI BRUSSELS, August 25, 1925.

Convention between the United States and other powers for the protection of industrial property, signed November 6, 1925 [191] The Netherlands Minister (De Graeff) to the Secretary of State Washington, January 7, 1925.

Treaty Series No. 834 [Document 193] Convention Between the United States and Other Powers for the Protection of Industrial Property, Signed at The Hague, November 6, 192595 [Translation] The President of the German Reich; the President of the Republic of Austria; His Majesty the King of the Belgians; the President of the United States of Brazil; the President of the Republic of Cuba; His Majesty the King of Denmark; the President of the Dominican Republic; His Majesty the King of Spain; the President of the Republic of Estonia; the President of the United States of America; the President of the Republic of Finland; the President of the French Republic; His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India; His Serene Highness the Governor of Hungary; His Majesty the King of Italy; His Majesty the Emperor of Japan; His Majesty the Sultan of Morocco; the President of the United Mexican States; His Majesty the King of Norway; Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands; the President of the Polish Republic, in the name of Poland and the Free City of Danzig; the President of the Portuguese Republic; His Majesty the King of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes; His Majesty the King of Sweden; the Federal Council of the Swiss Confederation; the States of Syria and Greater Lebanon; the President of the Czechoslovak Republic; His Highness the Bey of Tunis; the President of the Turkish Republic, Having deemed it expedient to make certain modifications and additions in the international convention of March 20, 1883,96 for the creation of an international union for the protection of industrial

Dr. Carl Duschanek, Ministerial Councilor, Vice President of the Austrian Patent Office; Dr. Hans Fortwängler, Ministerial Councilor at that Office; His Majesty the King of the Belgians: Mr. Octave Mavaut, Director General of Industry at the Ministry of Industry, Labor, and Social Service; Mr. Albert Capitame, Advocate at the Liége Court of Appeal, former President of the Bar, Belgian Delegate at the Washington Conference; Mr. Louis André, Advocate at the Brussels Court of Appeal; Mr. Thomas Braun, Advocate at the Brussels Court of Appeal; Mr. Daniel Coppieters, Advocate at the Brussels Court of Appeal; The President of the United States of Brazil: Dr. Julio Augusto Barboza Carneiro, Member of the Economic Committee of the League of Nations; Prof. Dr. Carlos Americo Barbosa de Oliveira, Professor at the Polytechnic School, Director of the Wenceslau Braz Normal School of Arts and Crafts; The President of the Republic of Cuba: Dr. Raphael Martinez Ortiz, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Cuba at Paris; Dr. Raphael de la Torre, Chargé d’Affaires of Cuba at The Hague; His Majesty the King of Denmark: Dr. N. J. Ehrenreich Hansen, Assistant Bureau Chief at the Ministry of Industry, Commerce, and Navigation; The President of the Dominican Republic: Mr. C. G. de Haseth Cz., Consul of the Dominican Republic at The Hague;

His Majesty the King of Spain: His Excellency Mr. Santiago Mendez de Vigo, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of His Majesty the King of Spain at The Hague: Mr. Fernando Cabello y Lapiedra, Chief of the Spanish Bureau of Industrial and Commercial Property; Mr. José Garcia-Monge y de Vera, Secretary of the Spanish Bureau of Industrial and Commercial Property; The President of the Republic of Estonia: Mr. O. Aarmann, Engineer, Director of the Patent Office; The President of the United States of America: Mr. Thomas E. Robertson, Commissioner of Patents, Member of the Bar of the Supreme Court of the United States; Mr. Wallace R. Lane, former President of the American and Chicago Patent Law Associations, Member of the Bar of the Supreme Court of the United States and the Supreme Court of Illinois; Mr. Jo. Baily Brown, Pittsburgh, Member of the Bar of the Supreme Court of the United States and the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania; The President of the Republic of Finland: Mr. Yrjö Saastamoinen, Chargé d’Affaires of Finland at The Hague; The President of the French Republic: His Excellency Mr. Chassain de Marcilly, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of France at The Hague; Mr. Marcel Plaisant, Deputy, Advocate at the Paris Court of Appeal; Mr. Charles Drouets, Director of Industrial Property at the Ministry of Commerce;

Mr. Georges Maillard, Advocate at the Paris Court of Appeal, Vice President of the Technical Committee on Industrial Property; His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India: For Great Britain and Northern Ireland: Sir Hubert Llewellyn Smith, G.C.B., Chief Economic Adviser to His Britannic Majesty’s Government; Mr. Alfred James Martin, O.B.E., Assistant Comptroller of the Patent Office and Industrial Property Department of the Board of Trade; Sir Arthur Balfour, K.B.E., One of His Majesty’s Justices of the Peace; Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Industry; For the Dominion of Canada: Mr. Frederick Herbert Palmer, M.C., Canadian Government Trade Commissioner; For the Commonwealth of Australia: Lieut. Col. Charles Vincent Watson, D.S.O., V. D., Commissioner of Patents and Registrar of Trade Marks and Designs; For the Irish Free State: Count Gerald O’Kelly de Gallagh, Representative of the Irish Free State; His Serene Highness the Governor of Hungary: Mr. Elémer de Pompéry, President of the Court of Patents; His Majesty the King of Italy: Mr. Domenico Barone, Councilor of State; Mr. Gustavo de Sanctis, Director of the Bureau of Industrial Property;

Mr. Letterio Laboccetta, Engineer; Mr. Gino Olivetti, Deputy, Secretary General of the Confederation of Italian Industry; Prof. Mario Ghiron, Professor of Industrial Law at the University of Rome; His Majesty the Emperor of Japan: Mr. Saichiro Sakikawa, President of the Patent Office; Mr. Nobumi Ito; His Majesty the Sultan of Morocco: His Excellency Mr. Chassain de Marcilly, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of France at The Hague; The President of the United Mexican States: Mr. Julio Poulat, Commercial Attaché to the Mexican Legation at Paris; His Majesty the King of Norway: Mr. Birger Gabriel Wyller, Director General of the Norwegian Bureau of Industrial Property; Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands: Dr. J. Alingh Prins, President of the Council for Patents, Director of the Office of Industrial Property; Dr. H. Bijleveld, former Minister, Member of the Chamber of Deputies, former President of the Council for Patents, former Director of the Office of Industrial Property; Dr. J. W. Dijckmeester, Member of the Council for Patents; The President of the Polish Republic: For Poland:

His Excellency Dr. Stanislas Koźmiński, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Poland at The Hague; Dr. Frédéric Zoll, Professor at the University of Cracow; For the Free City of Danzig: His Excellency Dr. Stanislas Koźmiński, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Poland at The Hague; The President of the Portuguese Republic: His Excellency Mr. A. C. De Sousa Santos Bandeira, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Portugal at The Hague; His Majesty the King of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes: Dr. Yanko Choumane, President of the Office for the Protection of Industrial Property at the Ministry of Commerce and Industry; Mr. Mihailo Preditch, Secretary of that Office; His Majesty the King of Sweden: Director General E. O. J. Björklund, Chief of the Administration of Patents and Registration; Mr. K. H. R. Hjertén, Counselor of the Court of Appeal of Göta; Mr. A. E. Hasselrot, former Bureau Director at the above Administration, Adviser in matters of industrial property; The Federal Council of the Swiss Confederation: His Excellency Mr. Arthur de Pury, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Switzerland at The Hague; Mr. Walther Kraft, Director of the Federal Bureau of Intellectual Property; The President of the French Republic:

For the States of Syria and Greater Lebanon: His Excellency Mr. Chassain de Marcilly, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of France at The Hague; The President of the Czechoslovak Republic: His Excellency Mr. P. Baráček, Engineer, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Czechoslovakia at The Hague; Dr. Karel Hermann-Otavský, Professor at the University of Prague; Mr. Bohuslav Pavlousek, Engineer, Vice President of the Patent Office at Prague; His Highness the Bey of Tunis: His Excellency Mr. Chassain de Marcilly, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of France at The Hague; The President of the Turkish Republic: Mehmed Essad Bey, Chargé d’Aifaires of Turkey at The Hague. Who, having communicated to each other their respective full powers, which were found to be in good and due form, have agreed upon the following articles: ARTICLE 1 The contracting countries constitute themselves into a union for the protection of industrial property.

The scope of the protection of industrial property includes patents, utility models, industrial designs and models, trade-marks, commercial names and indications of origin, or appellations of origin, as well as the repression of unfair competition. Industrial property is to be understood in the broadest meaning and is to be applied not only to industry and commerce as such, but likewise to agricultural industries (wines, grain, tobacco leaves, fruit, cattle, etc.) and extractive industries (minerals, mineral waters, etc.). The term “patents” includes the various types of industrial patents granted by the laws of the contracting countries, such as patents of importation, improvement patents, patents and certificates of addition, etc.

ARTICLE 2 Nationals of each of the contracting countries shall, in all other countries of the Union, as regards the protection of industrial property, enjoy the advantages that their respective laws now grant, or may hereafter grant, to their own nationals, without any prejudice of the rights specially provided by the present convention. Consequently they shall have the same protection as the latter, and the same legal remedy against any infringement of their rights, provided they observe the conditions and formalities imposed on subjects or citizens. Nevertheless no condition as to the possession of a domicile or establishment in the country where protection is claimed can be required of those who enjoy the benefits of the Union for the enjoyment of any industrial-property rights. The provisions of the legislation of each of the contracting countries relative to judicial and administrative proceedings and to competent authority, as well as to the choice of domicile or the appointment of an authorized agent, which may be required by the laws on industrial property are expressly reserved. ARTICLE 3 Nationals of countries not forming part of the Union who are domiciled or who have real and effective industrial or commercial establishments in the territory of any of the countries of the Union, shall be assimilated to the nationals of the contracting countries. ARTICLE 4 (a) Any person who has duly applied for a patent, the registration of a utility model, industrial design or model, or trade-mark in one of the contracting countries, or his legal representative or assignee, shall enjoy, subject to the rights of third parties, for the purposes of registration in other countries, a right of priority during the periods hereinafter stated. (b) Consequently, subsequent filing in any of the other countries of the Union before the expiration of these periods shall not be invalidated through any acts accomplished in the interval, either, particularly, by another filing, by publication of the invention, or by the working of it, by the sale of copies of the design or model, or by use of the trade-mark. (c) The above-mentioned periods of priority shall be twelve months for patents and utility models, and six months for industrial designs and models and trade-marks. These periods shall start from the date of filing of the first application in a country of the Union; the day of filing is not counted in this period.

If the last day of the period is a dies non in the country where protection is claimed, the period shall be extended until the next working day. (d) Any person desiring to take advantage of the priority of a previous application must make a declaration giving particulars as to the date of such application and the country in which it was made. Each country will determine for itself the latest date at which such declaration must be made. The particulars referred to shall be stated in the publications issued by the competent authority, and in particular in the patents issued and the specifications relating thereto. The contracting countries may require any person making a declaration of priority to produce a copy of the application (with the specification, drawings, etc.) previously made. The copy, certified as correct by the authority receiving this demand, shall not require any legal authentication, and in any circumstances can be filed at any time within the period of three months from the lodging of the last application. They may also require that the declaration shall be accompanied by a certificate by the proper authority showing the date of application, and also by a translation. No other formalities may be required for the declaration of priority at the time of application. Each of the contracting countries shall decide for itself what consequences shall follow the omission of the formalities prescribed by the present article, but such consequence shall in no case be more serious than the loss of the right of priority. At later stages, further proof in support of the application may be required. (e) Where an application is filed in a country for the registration of an industrial design or model by virtue of a right of priority based on the registration of a utility model, the period of priority shall not exceed that fixed for industrial designs and models. Furthermore, it is allowable to deposit in a country a utility model by virtue of rights of priority based on a patent application, and vice versa. (f)If an application for a patent contains claims for multiple priority, or if examination discloses that the application contains more than one invention, the competent authorities must at least allow the applicant to divide it, subject to the conditions of internal legislation,! reserving as date of each divisional application the date of the initial application and, if there is occasion for it, the benefits of the right of priority. ARTICLE 4 BIS Patents applied for in the various contracting countries by nationals of the Union shall be independent of the patents obtained for the same invention in other countries, whether such countries be or be not parties to the Union.

This stipulation must receive a strict interpretation; in particular, it shall be understood to mean that patents applied for during the period of priority are independent, both as regards the grounds for refusal and for revocation, and also as regards their normal duration. This stipulation shall apply to all patents already existing at the time when it shall come into effect. The same stipulation shall apply, in the case of the accession of new countries, to patents in existence, either on one side or the other, at the time of accession. ARTICLE 5 The introduction by the patentee into the country where the patent has been granted of objects manufactured in any of the countries of the Union shall not entail forfeiture. Nevertheless, each of the contracting countries shall have the right to take the necessary legislative measures to prevent the abuses which might result from the exercise of the exclusive rights conferred by the patent; for example, failure to use. These measures will only provide for the revocation of the patent if the granting of compulsory licenses shall not suffice to prevent such abuses. In all cases the patent will not be subject to such measures before the expiration of at least three years from the date of its grant and if the patentee produces just excuses.

The protection of designs and industrial models cannot be liable to cancellation by reason of the introduction of objects corresponding to those protected. Articles shall not be required to bear any indication of registration for recognition of this right. If in a country the use of a registered trade-mark is compulsory, the registration cannot be canceled until after a reasonable period, and only then if those interested cannot justify the causes of their inaction. ARTICLE 5 BIS A period of grace of at least three months will be granted for the payment of taxes prescribed for the maintenance of industrial-property rights, together with a surcharge if the internal legislation of a country so provides.

For patents of invention the contracting countries undertake moreover either to prolong that extended period to six months at least, or to provide for the restoration of a patent which has lapsed owing to the nonpayment of fees, it being understood that these provisions are subject to the conditions prescribed by internal legislation. ARTICLE 5 TER In each of the contracting countries the following shall not be considered as infringing the rights of the patentee: (1) The use on board ships of other countries of the Union of anything the subject matter of his patent in the body of the ship, in the machinery, tackle, apparatus, and other accessories when such ships enter temporarily or accidentally the waters of the country, provided that such thing is employed there exclusively for the needs of the vessel. (2) The use of anything the subject matter of the patent in the construction of or functioning of the engines of locomotion for air or land of the other countries of the Union, or of the accessories of these engines, when these enter the country temporarily or accidentally. ARTICLE 6 Every trade-mark duly registered in the country of origin shall be admitted for registration and protected in the form originally registered in the other countries of the Union. Nevertheless, the following marks may be refused or canceled: (1) Those which are of such a nature as to prejudice rights acquired by third parties in the country in which protection is applied for.

(2) Those which have no distinctive character, or which consist exclusively of signs or indications which serve in trade to designate the kind, quality, quantity, destination, value, place of origin, or date of production, or which have become customary in the current language, or in the bona fide and unquestioned usages of the trade of the country in which protection is sought. In arriving at a decision as to the distinctiveness of the character of a mark, all the circumstances of the case must be taken into account, and in particular the length of time that such a mark has been in use. (3) Those which are contrary to morality or public order.

It is to be understood that a mark cannot be considered as contrary to public order for the sole reason that it does not conform to some legislative requirement concerning trade-marks, except in circumstances where this requirement itself relates to public order. The following shall be deemed the country of origin: The country of the Union where the applicant has an actual and genuine industrial or commercial establishment; and if he has not such an establishment, the country of the Union where he has his domicile; and if he has not a domicile in the Union, the country of his nationality in the” case where he is under the jurisdiction of a country of the Union. In no case shall the renewal of the registration of a trade-mark in the country of origin involve the obligation of renewal of the registration of the mark in other countries of the Union in which the mark has been registered. The benefits of priority shall subsist in trade-mark applications filed in the period allowed by article 4, even when the registration in the country of origin is only completed after the expiration of such period. The provisions of paragraph 1 do not preclude the right of requiring from an applicant a certificate, in due form, as to the registration of his mark, issued by the competent authority of the country of origin, but no legal authentication of such certificate shall be required. ARTICLE 6 BIS The contracting countries undertake to refuse or invalidate, either administratively if their legislation so permits, or at the request of an interested party, the registration of a trade-mark which constitutes a reproduction or imitation liable to create confusion with a trade-mark considered by the competent authority of the country of registration to be well known there as being already a mark of a national of another contracting country and used for products of the same or a similar kind.

A period of at least three years must be granted in order to claim the cancellation of these marks. The period shall start from the date of registration of the mark. No period shall be established to claim the cancellation of fraudulently registered marks. ARTICLE 6 TER

The contracting countries undertake to refuse or invalidate registration, and to prohibit by appropriate means the use, failing authorization from the competent authority, whether as trade-mark or as components of such, of all coats of arms, flags, and other state emblems of contracting countries, official control and guarantee signs and stamps adopted by them, and all imitation from an heraldic point of view. The prohibition of official control and guarantee signs and stamps shall apply only in cases where marks which comprise them are intended to be used on merchandise of the same or a similar nature. For the application of these provisions the contracting countries agree to communicate reciprocally, through the intermediary of the International Bureau of Berne, the list of state emblems and official control and guarantee signs and stamps which they desire, or will desire, to place, wholly or with certain reservations, under the protection of the present article, as well as all subsequent modifications added to the list. Each contracting country shall place the communicated list at the disposal of the public in due course. Each contracting country may, within a period of twelve months from the receipt of the notification, and through the intermediary of the International Bureau of Berne, transmit its possible objections to any other country concerned. For state emblems which are well known the provisions of paragraph 1 shall be applicable only to marks registered after the signature of this convention. For state emblems which are not well known, and for official signs and stamps, these provisions shall be applicable only to marks registered more than two months after the receipt of the notification provided for in paragraph 3. In the case of bad faith, countries shall have the right to cancel even the marks registered before the signature of the present convention and embodying state emblems, signs, and stamps. Nationals of each country who are authorized to make use of state emblems, and signs and stamps of their country, may use them even if there be a similarity with those of another country. The contracting countries undertake to prohibit the unauthorized use in trade of state coats of arms of other contracting countries when such use would be liable to cause confusion as to the origin of the product. The preceding provisions will not prevent the countries’ exercising the right to refuse

containing without authority coats of arms, flags, decorations, and other state emblems or official signs and stamps adopted by a country of the Union. ARTICLE 7 The nature of the goods on which the trade-mark is to be used can in no case form an obstacle to the registration of the trade-mark. ARTICLE 7 BIS The contracting countries undertake to allow the filing of, and to protect, trade-marks belonging to associations the existence of which is not contrary to the law of the country of origin, even if such associations do not possess an industrial or commercial establishment. Nevertheless, each country shall be the sole judge of the particular conditions on which an association may be allowed to obtain protection for its marks. ARTICLE 8 A trade name shall be protected in all the countries of the Union without the obligation of filing or registration, whether or not it form part of a trade-mark. ARTICLE 9 All goods illegally bearing a trade-mark or trade name shall be seized on importation into those countries of the Union where this mark or name has a right to legal protection. Seizure shall be effected equally in the country where the mark or name was illegally applied, or in the country to which the article bearing it has been imported. The seizure shall take place at the request either of the proper Government department or of any other competent authority, or of any interested party or actual or legal person, in conformity with the domestic law of each country. The authorities are not bound to effect the seizure in transit. If the law of a country does not admit of seizure on importation, such seizure shall be replaced by prohibition of importation or by seizure within such country. If the law of any country does not admit either of seizure upon importation, or of prohibition of importation, or of seizure within the country, and until such time as this

legislation shall be accordingly modified, these measures will be replaced by the remedies assured in such cases to nationals by the law of such country. ARTICLE 10 The stipulations of the preceding article shall be applicable to every product which may falsely bear as indication of origin the name of a specified locality or country when such indication shall be joined to a trade name of a fictitious character or used with the intent to defraud. Any producer, manufacturer, or trader engaged in the production, manufacture, or trade of such goods and established either in the locality falsely designated as the place of origin, or in the district where the locality is situated, or in the country falsely designated, shall be deemed in all cases a party concerned, whether such person be actual or legal. ARTICLE 10 BIS The contracting countries are bound to assure to nationals of the Union an effective protection against unfair competition. Every act of competition contrary to honest practice in industrial or commercial matters constitutes an act of unfair competition. The following particularly are to be forbidden: (1) All acts whatsoever of a nature to create confusion by no matter what means with the goods of a competitor. (2) False allegations, in the course of trade, of a nature to discredit the goods of a competitor. ARTICLE 10 TER The contracting countries undertake to assure to the nationals of other countries of the Union appropriate legal remedies to repress effectively all acts set forth in articles 9, 10, and 10 bis. They undertake, moreover, to provide measures to permit syndicates and associations representing the industry or the trade interested, and of which the existence is not contrary to the laws of their country, to take action in justice or before the administrative authorities, in view of the repression of the acts set forth in articles 9, 10, and 10 bis, so far as the law of the country in which protection is claimed permits it to the syndicates and associations of that country.

ARTICLE 11 The contracting countries shall, in conformity with the legislation of each country, accord temporary protection to patentable inventions, to utility models, and to industrial designs or models, as well as to trade-marks in respect of products which shall be exhibited at official, or officially recognized, international exhibitions held in the territory of one of them. This temporary protection shall not prolong the periods provided by article 4. If later the right of priority is sought, the competent authority of each country may date the period from the date of the introduction of the product into the exhibition. Each country may require, as proof of the identity of the object exhibited, and of the date of the introduction, such proofs as it may consider necessary. ARTICLE 12 Each of the contracting countries agrees to establish a special Government service for industrial property, and a central office for communication to the public of patents, utility models, industrial designs or models, and trade-marks. This service shall publish an official periodical paper. ARTICLE 13 The international office, established at Berne under the name of International Bureau for the Protection of Industrial Property, is placed under the high authority of the Government of the Swiss Confederation, which is to regulate its organization and supervise its working. The official language of the International Bureau is French. The International Bureau centralizes information of every kind relating to the protection of industrial property and collates and publishes it. It interests itself in all matters of common utility to the Union and edits, with the help of documents supplied to it by the various Administrations, a periodical paper in the French language, dealing with questions regarding the object of the Union. The numbers of this paper, as well as the documents published by the International Bureau, are circulated among the Administrations of the countries of the Union in the proportion of the number of contributing units as mentioned below. Such further copies as may be desired, either by the said Administrations or by societies or private persons, will be paid for separately.

The International Bureau shall at all times hold itself at the service of members of the Union, in order to supply them with any special information they may need on questions relating to the international system of industrial property. The Director of the International Bureau will furnish an annual report on its working, which shall be communicated to all the members of the Union.

The expenses of the International Bureau will be borne by the contracting countries in common. Unless fresh sanction is given, they must not exceed the sum of 120,000 Swiss francs per annum. This sum may be increased in cases of necessity by a unanimous decision of one of the conferences provided for by article 14. To determine the part which each country should contribute to this total of expenses the contracting countries and those which may afterwards join the Union shall be divided into six classes, each contributing in the proportion of a certain number of units, namely: First class 25 units Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth These coefficients will be multiplied by the number of countries in each class, and the sum of the result thus obtained will supply the number of units by which the total expense has to be divided. The quotient will give the amount of the unit of expense. Each of the contracting countries will designate, at the time of its accession, the class in which it wishes to be placed. The Government of the Swiss Confederation is to superintend the expenses of the International Bureau, to advance the necessary funds, and to render an annual account which will be communicated to all the other Administrations. ARTICLE 14 The present convention shall be submitted to periodical revisions with a view to the introduction of amendments calculated to improve the system of the Union. For this purpose, conferences shall be held successively in one of the contracting countries between the delegates of the said countries.

The Administration of the country in which the conference is to be held will make preparation for the transaction of that conference, with the assistance of the International Bureau. The Director of the International Bureau will be present at the meetings of the conferences, and will take part in the discussions, but without the privilege of voting. ARTICLE 15 It is agreed that the contracting countries respectively reserve to themselves the right to make separately, as between themselves, special arrangements for the protection of industrial property, in so far as such arrangements do not contravene the provisions of the present convention.

ARTICLE 16 The countries which have not taken part in the present convention shall be permitted to adhere to it upon their request. The accession shall be notified through the diplomatic channel to the Government of the Swiss Confederation, and by the latter to all the other Governments. It shall entail, as a matter of right, accession to all the classes, as well as admission to all the advantages, stipulated in the present convention, and shall take effect one month after the dispatch of the notification by the Government of the Swiss Confederation to the other countries of the Union, unless a subsequent date has been indicated by the acceding country. ARTICLE 16 BIS The contracting countries have the right of acceding to the present convention at any time on behalf of their colonies, possessions, dependencies, and protectorates, or territories administrated by virtue of a mandate from the League of Nations, or any of them. For this purpose they may either make a general declaration, including all their colonies, possessions, dependencies, and protectorates, and the territories referred to in paragraph 1, in the accession, or may expressly name those included, or may confine themselves to indicating those which are excluded therefrom. This declaration shall be notified in writing to the Government of the Swiss Confederation and by the latter to all the other Governments.

Under the same conditions, the contracting countries may denounce the convention on behalf of their colonies, possessions, dependencies, and protectorates, or for the territories referred to in paragraph 1, or for any of them. ARTICLE 17 The execution of the reciprocal engagements contained in the present convention is subordinated, in so far as necessary, to the observance of the formalities and rules established by the constitutional laws of those of the contracting countries which are bound to procure the application of the same, which they engage to do with as little delay as possible. ARTICLE 17 BIS The convention shall remain in force for an unlimited time, till the expiration of one year from the date of its denunciation. This denunciation shall be addressed to the Government of the Swiss Confederation. It shall affect only the denouncing country, the convention remaining in operation as regards the other contracting countries. ARTICLE 18 The present act shall be ratified and the ratifications deposited at The Hague not later than the 1st of May, 1928. It shall come into force, between the countries which will have ratified it, one month after such date. However, if before May 1, 1928, it should be ratified by at least six countries, it will come into force between those countries one month after the Government of the Swiss Confederation has notified them of the filing of the sixth ratification, and for the countries which should subsequently ratify, one month after the notification of each of these ratifications. This act shall replace, as regards relations between the countries which ratify it, the

Done at The Hague, in a single copy, the 6th day of November, 1925. For Germany: VIETINGHOFF v. SPECHT KLAUER ALBERT OSTERRIETH For Australia: C. V. WATSON For Austria: Dr. CARL DUSCHANEK Dr. HANS FORTWÄNGLER For Belgium: CAPITAINE LOUIS ANDRÉ THOMAS BRAUN D. COPPIETERS For the United States of Brazil: J. A. BARBOZA CARNEIRO CARLOS AMERICO BARBOSA DE OLIVEIRA For Canada: FREDERICK H. PALMER For Cuba: R. DE LA TORRE For Denmark: N. J. EHRENREICH HANSEN For the Free City of Danzig: ST. KOŹMIŃSKI For the Dominican Republic: C. G. DE HASETH CZ. For Spain: SANTIAGO MENDEZ DE VIGO FERNANDO CABELLO LAPIEDRA JOSÉ GARCIA MONGE For Estonia: O. AARMANN For the United States of America: THOMAS E. ROBERTSON WALLACE R. LANE JO. BAILY BROWN For Finland: YRJÖ SAASTAMOINEN For France: CH. DE MARCILLY MARCEL PLAISANT CH. DROUETS GEORGES MAILLARD For Great Britain and Northern Ireland: H. LLEWELLYN SMITH A. J. MARTIN A. BALFOUR For Hungary: ELEMÉR DE POMPÉRY For the Irish Free State: G. O’KELLY DE GALLAGH

For Italy: DOMENICO BARONE LETTERIO LABOCCETTA MARIO GHIRON For Japan: S. SAKIKAWA N. ITO For Morocco: CH. DE MARCILLY For the United Mexican States: JULIO POULAT For Norway: B. WYLLER For the Netherlands: J. ALINGH PRINS BIJLEVELD DIJCKMEESTER For Poland: ST. KOŹMIŃSKI FRÉDÉRIC ZOLL For Portugal: BANDEIRA For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes: Dr. YANKO CHOUMANE MIHAILO PRÉDITCH For Sweden: E. O. J. BJÖRKLUND H. HJERTÉN AXEL HASSELROT For Switzerland: A. DE PURY W. KRAFT For Syria and Greater Lebanon: CH. DE MARCILLY For Czechoslovakia: BARÁČEK Prof. Dr. KAREL HERMANN-OTAVSKÝ Engineer BOHUSLAV PAVLOUSEK For Tunis: CH. DE MARCILLY For Turkey:

Acceptance by the United States of invitation to attend the Third International Telegraph Conference at Paris in 192599 99 The first international telegraph conference was held at St. Petersburg in 1875, the second at Lisbon in 1908; see Documents de la Conférence Télégraphique Internationale de Lisbonne (Berne, Bureau International de l’Union Télégraphique, 1909). [194] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Daeschner) Washington, July 17, 1925.

It will be observed that the Telegraph Convention provides that the “Tariffs and Regulations” shall be revised at the administrative conferences, whereas the International Radiotelegraph Convention provides for the revision of the “Convention and the Regulations”. It is, therefore, evident that it was intended that the periodic conferences to revise the Radiotelegraph Convention and Regulations annexed to it might add to the subjects which are dealt with in the present Convention. The limitations upon the work of the Telegraph Conference were recognized by the International Telegraph Bureau at Berne when it issued its circular telegram No. 99/12 dated July 12, 1924, requesting Governments to submit their proposals. This telegram reads as follows: “French Service reports that as unanimity could not be secured for meeting of mixed conference about which the offices were told in Circular No. 744, of June 12, 1922, the French Government invites countries in the Telegraphic Union to an International Telegraphic Conference at Paris in the spring of 1925. The exact date of opening will be given later. The International Bureau, therefore, begs the several services to kindly forward to it within four months their propositions for that conference based exclusively on the telegraph regulations now in force. Circular letter follows.” (Underscoring added.)

“By reason of that call, on the one hand, and in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 11 of Article LXXXIV of the Lisbon Regulations on the other hand, the International Bureau has the honor to beg you jointly with the French Service, kindly to forward to it, up to and not later than November 15, next, the additions or modifications that your office would like to introduce in the International Service Regulations (Revised at Lisbon) and the tariffs now in force. (Underscoring added)3 “With a view to preventing any misunderstanding we lay stress on the fact that the propositions to be brought before the Conference, through the International Bureau, shall not, as stated in the circular above mentioned, No. 744, rest on documents already mailed to the Offices dealing with the drafts worked out by the Preliminary Conference at Washington.”4

in the circumstances, your Government would probably be prevented from being ready to attend the Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington in the autumn.7 On March 4, 1925, the Congress of the United States passed an Act, which was approved by the President, authorizing this Government to make provision for holding the International Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington.8 Two copies of this Act of Congress are enclosed for your information. In your note dated March 23, 1925,9 you referred to the plan of this Government to call the International Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington and suggested that, as the date for the opening of the International Telegraph Conference had been postponed until September 1, 1925, it would be advisable to postpone the date of the meeting of the International Radiotelegraph Conference to the spring of 1926. In response to

these new provisions and proposed to make Special Articles of them. These new Articles have been printed in the IVth Part of this Document.” As the circular telegram dated July 12, 1924, issued by the International Telegraph Bureau at Berne, pointed out that the proposals to be submitted by the respective administrations for consideration at the International Telegraph Conference at Paris were to be “based exclusively on the telegraph regulations now in force” and as the circular letter dated July 15, 1924, issued by the Bureau jointly with the French Administration, requested the administrations to forward “the additions or modifications that your office would like to introduce in the International Service Regulations (Revised at Lisbon) and the tariffs now in force”, it is surprising to find that the administrations concerned have submitted a large number of propositions dealing with the regulation of communication by means of radio and that the Berne Bureau printed these proposals relating to radio in the Document. I feel that it is of great importance to emphasize the fact that, in determining what subjects shall be discussed at the conferences, care should be exercised to have the discussions limited to subjects that properly fall within the scope of the conference. At present there are two wholly independent conventions, each dealing with a separate general subject, first, the Telegraph Convention, dealing with communication by means of wire, and, second, the Radiotelegraph Convention, dealing with communication by means of radio. Since the Paris Conference is to be held first, I am strongly of the opinion that it should not concern itself with subjects which properly would come before the Radiotelegraph Conference to be held at Washington. And in as much as your Government has agreed to the holding of the International Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington, I have no doubt that your Government is of the same opinion that radio matters should be taken up at the Washington Conference and that the printing of these proposals relating to radio does not involve their consideration at the Paris Conference. From such examination as it has been possible to make of the Document issued by the International Telegraph Bureau at Berne, it seems clear that if the Conference at Paris takes up the consideration of all of the subject matter contained in the above mentioned Document it will take into consideration a great many matters which, in fact, relate only to the use of radio and, in so doing, will invade the field that should properly be reserved for study and discussion at the Washington Conference. This observation applies particularly to Part IV of the Document. A study of the five questions which you submitted makes this fact clearer and, with the exception of the fourth question, I beg to suggest that your Government should, in the light of the foregoing comments, consider carefully the propriety of taking them up at the Telegraph Conference at Paris.

The first proposal stated in the enclosure with your note is that the Paris Conference consider the advisability of the use of high efficiency [speed] apparatus on radiotelegraphic communications having a large business [considerable traffic]12 to dispose of. Apparently this refers to the installation of automatic sending machines, perforators, direct writers, printers and similar equipment in the large radio stations. If this understanding is correct, it would appear that the installation of such apparatus is purely a wireless telegraph matter for consideration at the Washington Conference and having no direct connection, either as a matter of regulation or in its technical aspects, with the revision of the Regulations annexed to the Telegraph Convention. Similarly, with respect to the proposal that the Paris Conference discuss the question of the fixing of radiotelegraph rates between fixed points, I wish to point out that consideration of rates on messages handled between fixed points by radiotelegraph would not fall properly within a conference to consider the revision of the Regulations annexed to the International Telegraph Convention and the Tables of International Telegraph Tariffs established under Article XV of the Convention and Service Regulation XXIV. If consideration of this question is proposed, it is believed that it should be dealt with at the Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington. With regard to the proposal that the Paris Conference shall consider changes to be made in the transmitting regulations to make the rules applicable to wireless and wire communication uniform, it would seem that this proposal should be understood to apply to those articles of the International Telegraph Convention and Regulations which are incorporated in the International Radiotelegraph Convention and Regulations by Article 17 of the Radiotelegraph Convention and Article L of the Regulations annexed to it. These articles read as follows: ARTICLE 17 OF CONVENTION

extended to nine months in the case of radiograms; (2) The provisions of Article XVI, paragraph 2, shall not be considered as authorizing gratuitous transmission, through radio stations, of service telegrams relating exclusively to the telegraph service, nor the free transmission over the telegraph lines of service telegrams relating exclusively to the radio service; (3) The provisions of Article LXXIX, paragraphs 3 and 5, shall not be applicable to radio accounts. As regards the application of the provisions of the Telegraph Regulations, coastal stations shall be considered as offices of transit except when the Radio Regulations expressly stipulate that such stations shall be considered as offices of origin or of destination.” Although it is recognized that, in the discussion of the Articles of the Telegraph Convention and the Regulations mentioned in the above quoted articles, it would be very desirable to consider their effect on communication by radio, I desire to make it clear that I understand that it is not contemplated that changes in the Regulations annexed to the Radiotelegraph Convention will be brought up for discussion at the Paris Conference. The transmitting regulations for radio appear to be a subject of especial interest to the representatives of the Governments who will participate in the Washington Conference. In the interest of uniformity it is suggested that the Telegraph Conference at Paris might desire to consider communication by radio to the extent that any transmitting regulations for wire should be so framed as not to preclude the possibility of their adoption by the Washington Conference and thus being made applicable to radio should the Radiotelegraph Conference deem it desirable to do so. Respecting the fourth proposal to discuss at the Paris Conference the use of the word “fil” on European telegrams when the sender does not wish the message forwarded by wireless, I am of the opinion that this matter is a proper subject for consideration at the Paris Conference and, if the action taken on the subject is limited to the European regime, it would not be of direct concern to the United States. In regard to the fifth proposal that the Conference at Paris shall consider the drafting of regulations respecting telegrams without address sent by radio, I desire to make it clear that, if this statement refers to the broadcasting of information by radio, I am of the opinion that the regulation of this new means of communication is purely a radio matter with which it would seem that a telegraph conference should not properly concern itself. The new problems raised by this new means of communication seem to be closely related to the use of radio and I believe it would be more appropriate to consider this subject at the Washington Conference. Respecting your inquiry whether the United States would agree to the postponement of the Radiotelegraph Conference until the spring of 1926, I am pleased to state that this Government will be happy to make the necessary arrangements to hold the International Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington in the spring of 1926, and

formal invitations for this Conference will be issued at an early date.13 The agenda for the Washington Conference is being studied and, although I cannot at this time furnish you a detailed statement of the subjects that I believe should be considered at the Conference, it is believed that, in addition to the revision of the present Convention and Regulations, the Conference should consider the transmission by radiotelegraph of communications between fixed points, the broadcasting of communications, and communications by radiotelephony, and other related subjects which the developments of the art since 1912 make it advisable to consider. In view of the considerations set forth in this note, I confidently encourage the hope that you will find it possible at an early date to assure me that, as I have suggested above, questions relating to radio will not be considered at the Paris Conference so that I may be in a position promptly to inform the interested agencies of this Government with a view to making the necessary arrangements looking to the participation of the United States in the Conference at Paris. Accept [etc.] FRANK B. KELLOGG 1 Not printed. 1a Documents de la Conference Télégraphique Internationale de Paris, 1925 (Berne, Bureau International de l’Union Télégraphique, 1925), tome i.

With the exception of Mr. Kelly, Lieutenant Commander James, and Mr. Redmond, the above named representatives will sail from New York on the Steamship America on

[For the proceedings of the Conference see, Documents de la Conference Télégraphique Internationale de Paris, 1925 (Berne, Bureau International de l’Union Télégraphique, 1925).] 15 Supplied by the editor.

Extension of invitations to the Third International Radiotelegraph conference at Washington in 192716 16 The First International Radiotelegraph Conference met at Berlin in 1906; see Foreign Relations , 1912, pp. 444 ff., and Documents de la Conference Radiotélégraphique Internationale de Berlin, 1906, Publiés par le Département des Posts de l’Empire d’Allemagne (Berlin, 1906). The Second Conference met at London

[201] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Officers Washington, March 15, 1926.

In the circumstances I am instructed to state that the Government of the United States believes that at the forthcoming conference to be held at Washington the following subjects should be taken up for consideration: 1. Revision of the Convention and Regulations signed at London July 5, 1912. 2. Preparation of new articles and modification of present articles of convention and regulations so that they will be applicable to and regulate (a) Comnmnication by radio between fixed points; (b) Radiotelegraph broadcasting, including press messages; (c) Radio telephony, including broadcasting; (d) Allocation of frequencies to classes of service, such as fixed stations, mobile stations, broadcasting stations, etc. (e) Elimination of interference as far as practicable. (f) Distress messages so as to take cognizance of increased uses and classes of service. (g) Radio aids to navigation. (h) All other international uses of radio. A more complete program amplifying the statements above made will be forwarded by my Government as soon as possible for your consideration and an expression of your views. [Here follow instructions to repeat invitation to the American missions in Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Free City of Danzig, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Monaco, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, San Marino, Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland.]20

In repeating invitation to mission accredited to government having dominions, mandates, colonies or possessions for which ratification or adherence has been deposited, state that invitation contained in third paragraph should be amended to include these dominions, mandates, colonies and possessions. Set forth in your message repeating the invitation the dominions, mandates, colonies or possessions of

Government Printing Office, 1912).

6. He points out that although the proposals will be submitted to the bureau by February 1st it would scarcely be possible to have them embodied and circulated in a unique publication before May 31st. This calculation is based on the assumption that publications as in past similar cases are to be only in French. If English copies are also required there would be an additional delay of two months. WINSLOW 24 Not printed.

Opposition of the Department of State to participation by the League of Nations in international conferences of American states [202] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) Washington, January 15, 1925.

In reply you are informed that the Department understands that it is not Doctor Rowe’s intention to visit Rio at this time but rather to visit the Central American States on returning to the United States after the termination of the Third Pan American Scientific Conference at Lima. The Department however desires that you should, should you perceive no reason for not doing so, make known to Doctor Pacheco informally and confidentially the Department’s views regarding the participation of the League of Nations, or Sections thereof, in American conferences. It should be understood that no disparagement or criticism of the League of Nations is intended when it is observed that the International Conference of American States, and the subsidiary, technical and specialized Pan American Conferences, are organized upon a distinct and separate basis. The scope of the League of Nations is intended to be world wide and a number of American States are members of the League and are thus able to express their points of view on matters of world wide import which come before the attention of the Council and the Assembly of the League respectively. The Pan

American Conferences exist because of the distinct interests of the American States which, without antagonism to any world relationship, makes it desirable for them to confer with respect to the problems which especially relate to the States of this hemisphere. There is, of course, not the slightest opposition to cooperation with the technical service of the League of Nations through the exchange of reports and information, and reciprocal advantage may thus appropriately be taken of statistics and reports of investigation. Participation of representatives of the League of Nations in the International Conferences of American States and the more important non-technical subsidiary conferences resulting therefrom would however bring to the Conferences the view points and policies of States who are members of the League of Nations and are not American States and thus fundamentally alter the nature of the Conferences themselves. The law of nations is of universal application. Consequently it is not suggested that there exists an American international law as distinct from that which necessarily prevails throughout the society of civilized states. There are, however, legal problems which are peculiar to the States of the American continents. In the formulation and advocacy of proposals designed to make clear the application of the principles of international law to those problems there are reasons for their particular consideration by American States; for they have a distinctive interest in a cause peculiarly their own. Thus the labors of the Congress of Jurists, like those of the International Conferences of American States, possess a special character demanding the maintenance of the integrity of the Congress as an exclusively American institution. CHARLES E. HUGHES 27 Not printed. 28 Brazilian Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The Tacna-Arica question: The arbitrator’s award and the establishment of the Plebiscitary Commission29 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 364 ff. Among the Chilean governmental publications relating to the award and plebiscite are: Tacna-Arica Arbitration: The Case of the Republic of Chile, etc. [Washington (?), 1923]; The Appendix to the Case of the Republic of Chile, etc. [Washington (?), 1923]; The Counter-Case of the Republic of Chile, etc. [Washington (?), 1924]; The Appendix to the Counter-Case of the Republic of Chile, etc. [Washington (?), 1924]; and Notes on the Peruvian Case and Appendix, Submitted with the Counter Case of the Republic of Chile, etc. [Washington (?), 1924]. Among the Peruvian governmental publications relating to the award and plebiscite are: Arbitration between Peru and Chile: The Case of Peru, etc. (Washington, 1923); Appendix to the Case of Peru, etc. (Washington, 1923); The Counter Case of Peru, etc. (Washington, 1924); and Appendix to the Counter Case of Peru, etc. (Washington, 1924). Also El Arbitraje de Tacna y Arica: Actas de las Comisión Plebiscitaria, 2 vols. (Lima, Imprenta Torres Aguirre, 1928); Documentos relativos al plebiscite de Tacna y Arica, 6 vols. (Lima, Casa. Editora “La Opinion Nacional”, 1926); and El proceso de Tacna y Arica (1925–1927): reseña de las principalis sucesos, etc. (Lima, Casa Editora “La Opinion Nacional”, 1927). Although it is not printed as a government publication, the following should be added to the foregoing publications: Memoria presentada al Supremo Gobierno por el Miembra-Representante de Chile en las Comisión Plebiscitaria (Arbitraje de Tacna y Arica), etc. (Santiago, Soc. Imp. “Universo”, 1926). [203] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

[210] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) Washington, April 14, 1925—noon.

[217] The President of the Plebiscitary Commission (Pershing) to the Secretary of State

[265] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)

The Government of Chile may submit to the Arbitrator such arguments in reply as may seem appropriate for its defence. “2. In case the holding of the plebiscite should be declared in order, the Arbitrator is empowered to determine the conditions thereof. “3. Should the Arbitrator decide that a plebiscite need not be held, both Parties, at the request of either of them, shall discuss the situation brought about by such award. “It is understood, in the interest of peace and good order, that in such an event and pending an agreement as to the disposition of the territory, the administrative organization of the provinces shall not be disturbed. “4. In the event that no agreement should ensue, both Governments will solicit, for this purpose, the good offices of the Government of the United States of America. “5. Included in the arbitration likewise are the claims pending with regard to Tarata and Chilcaya, according to the determination of the final disposition of the territory to which Article 3 of the Treaty refers. “This Agreement is an integral part of the Protocol to which it refers.” Ratifications of the Protocol and Supplementary Act having been exchanged, the President of the United States of America accepted the office of Arbitrator, and the Cases and Counter Cases of the respective Parties have been submitted in accordance with a schedule of arbitral procedure proposed by the Parties and approved by the Arbitrator. The record, comprising nearly six thousand pages, having been carefully examined, the Arbitrator now renders the following Opinion and Award. TREATY OF ANCON

“After the expiration of that term a plebiscite will decide by popular vote whether the territory of the above-mentioned provinces is to remain definitely under the dominion and sovereignty of Chile or is to continue to constitute a part of Peru. That country of the two, to which the provinces of Tacna and Arica remain annexed shall pay to the other ten million pesos of Chilean silver or of Peruvian soles of equal weight and fineness. “A special protocol, which shall be considered an integral part of the present treaty, will prescribe the manner in which the plebiscite is to be carried out, and the terms and time for the payment of the ten millions by the nation which remains the owner of the provinces of Tacna and Arica.”*

THE ARBITRATOR’S DUTY The Protocol and Supplementary Act, which must be read together, provide not only for arbitration but in a specified contingency for the good offices of the Government of the United States, but these contingent good offices have nothing to do with the duty which the terms of submission cast upon the Arbitrator. That duty is— 1. To decide whether in the present circumstances a plebiscite shall or shall not be held to determine the definitive sovereignty of the territory in question as between Chile and Peru. 2. If the Arbitrator decides in favor of a plebiscite to determine the conditions of that plebiscite, including the terms and time of the payment to be made by the nation succeeding in the plebiscite as provided in Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon. 3. If the Arbitrator decides against the plebiscite to take no further action as Arbitrator, except that— 4. Whether the decision be for or against a plebiscite, the Arbitrator is to decide the pending questions with respect to Tarata and Chilcaya arising respectively on the northern and southern boundaries of the territory. FIRST—THE QUESTION OF THE PLEBISCITE The first question is whether in the present circumstances a plebiscite shall or shall not be held.

The territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica is understood to be about nine thousand square miles in area and to have a population of between thirty and forty thousand. It belongs to the desert region of the Pacific coast. There are some mineral resources but these do not appear to be extensive. The valleys proceeding from the mountains on the east give opportunities for agriculture. In one of these valleys lies the city of Tacna, which was the capital of the Peruvian province of that name. The city of Arica, the capital of the other Peruvian province mentioned in Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon, is a port on the Pacific ocean about forty miles from Tacna, with which it is connected by railroad. Arica is the terminal of the railroad running to La Paz, Bolivia, and has commercial importance. At the time of the signing and ratification of the Treaty of Ancon, Chile was already in possession of the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica, here in question, as a result of the War of the Pacific. By the terms of the Article it was agreed that she should continue in possession of this territory for a period of ten years and that during this period it should be “subject to Chilean laws and authority.” It was further agreed that “after the expiration of that term” a plebiscite should be held to decide whether the territory should “remain definitely under the dominion and sovereignty of Chile” or should “continue to constitute part of Peru,” i. e., whether the territory should be permanently Chilean or permanently Peruvian. The paragraph then goes on to provide, “that country of the two” to which the provinces of Tacna and Arica “remain annexed” shall pay the other ten million Chilean pesos or Peruvian soles. Finally, the Article provides for the negotiation by the two countries of “a special protocol” which will prescribe, first, “the manner in which the plebiscite is to be carried out” and second, “the terms and time for the payment of the ten millions.” The question whether a plebiscite shall or shall not be held depends upon the question whether the second and third paragraphs of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon are still in effect. If these provisions have not expired by lapse of time, if they have not been abrogated or discharged by the conduct of the Parties so that performance can no longer be demanded, the plebiscite should be held because that is the agreement. If that agreement for any reason is no longer binding, then the plebiscite should not be held unless a new agreement for that purpose is made. As the question thus relates to the construction, operation and obligation of this part of the treaty, the province of the Arbitrator is more narrow than the range of the arguments which have been presented. It is neither the duty nor the privilege of the Arbitrator to pass upon the causes or the conduct of the War of the Pacific, or upon the justice of the terms of peace, or upon the relations of either Party to the Republic of Bolivia, or upon the wisdom of the provisions of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon, or upon the economic effects of the treaty, or upon alleged general equities of the present situation, or upon any questions whatever which are aside from the meaning and efficacy of the agreement itself.

The correct interpretation of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon, as a whole, and it might almost be said, of every word thereof, has been ably and ingeniously debated between the Parties for years, and is again ably and ingeniously discussed in their Cases and Counter Cases. Into the refinements of this debate it is not necessary to go, inasmuch as they do not, in the opinion of the Arbitrator, affect the considerations which are controlling in the determination of the issues in this arbitration. LAPSE OF TIME At the outset, it should be observed that the second and third paragraphs of Article 3 do not provide for the termination of their obligations by lapse of time. The Article contains no provision for forfeiture. It fixed no period within which the plebiscite must be taken. The plebiscite was to be had “after the expiration of that term,” that is, after the ten years but no limit was defined. It was to be taken pursuant to a special agreement which it was left to the Parties to make. But no time was fixed within which the special protocol for the plebiscite was to be negotiated. Whatever may have been the reasons for leaving the matter thus at large, the fact remains that it was left without prescribed limit of time and the obligations of the Parties under the treaty must be determined accordingly. If it be suggested that such an agreement—an agreement to agree with no time specified and no forfeiture provided—is unsatisfactory or meaningless, a three-fold answer presents itself, first, that the Arbitrator is not empowered to alter the treaty or to insert provisions, however salutary they might be in his judgment viewing the matter retrospectively, which the High Contracting Parties did not see fit to include; second, that the Treaty of Ancon was a peace treaty—the parties were engaged in a devastating war. Apparently the Parties in 1883–1884 thought it better to agree that they would agree at some unspecified time in the future than to agree to disagree in the present. They may well have taken into account the fact that failure to agree upon the terms of a plebiscite when the matter came up again for adjustment would leave unsettled one of the great issues of the War of the Pacific, and they may have believed that inasmuch as a reopening of hostilities on this account after a lapse of at least ten years was improbable and an amicable agreement would be in the interest of both parties, it was at once unnecessary and inadvisable to prescribe a time limit for the negotiations. Finally, the present arbitration is the best evidence that the agreement, elastic as it was, was not without force, since these great States, in response to its provisions, having failed again and again during the course of years to make the contemplated protocol, have now submitted to arbitration the question of the plebiscite and its conditions. It may further be observed that the Parties at the time of the making of the treaty must have realized that they could have no assurance of the result of a plebiscite which was not to be held until after the expiration of ten years. That result was left to hope and conjecture. It might be that wise and beneficial administration might dispose the voters

to favor the continuance of existing authority while oppressive administration or measures hostile to the welfare and traditions of the people might have an opposite effect. The character of the future administration and its effect, whatever its character, upon the disposition of the voters could not be safely predicted. The Parties nevertheless agreed to postpone the plebiscite long enough to make the result uncertain. And the point of the agreement was that neither Chile nor Peru was to be assured of definitive control but that the decision should be left to popular vote.

It is apparent that there are no physical obstacles to the holding of a plebiscite at the present time. So far as the necessary arrangements for a plebiscite are concerned, it cannot be said that it must be abandoned because it has become in the nature of things impracticable to hold it. Nor has there been an agreement between the Parties to terminate the provisions of Article 3. It is the contention of Peru, maintained with earnestness and eloquence, that Chile wilfully prevented the timely holding of a plebiscite and that her action in the course of her administration of the territory constituted a perversion of the conditions essential to the plebiscite as contemplated by the treaty; in short, that Chile by preventing the performance of Article 3 has discharged Peru from her obligations thereunder, and hence that a plebiscite should not now be held and that Chile should be regarded as a trespasser in the territory in question since the year 1894. This contention raises two principal questions: First, with respect to the conduct of Chile in relation to the efforts to reach an agreement for a plebiscite; and, second with respect to her Administration of the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica. THE FAILURE TO AGREE—DELAYS IN NEGOTIATIONS It has not been contended that the plebiscite should have been held before the expiration of the ten-year period. The nature of the obligation imposed by Article 3 must be derived from its terms. Until the special agreement was made there could be no plebiscite. As the Parties agreed to enter into a special protocol, but did not fix its terms, their undertaking was in substance to negotiate in good faith to that end, and it would follow that a wilful refusal of either Party so to do would have justified the other Party in claiming discharge from the provision. But, as the Parties did not in the treaty prescribe the conditions of the plebiscite and left these to be the subject of a future agreement, it is manifest that with respect to the negotiations looking to such an agreement they retained the rights of sovereign States acting in good faith. Neither Party waived the right to propose conditions which it deemed to be reasonable and appropriate to the holding of the plebiscite, or to oppose conditions proposed by the

other Party which it deemed to be inadvisable. The agreement to make a special protocol with undefined terms, did not mean that either Party was bound to make an agreement unsatisfactory to itself provided it did not act in bad faith. Further, as the special protocol was to be made by sovereign States, it must also be deemed to be implied in the agreement set forth in Article 3 that these States should act respectively in accordance with their constitutional methods, and bad faith is not to be predicated upon the refusal of ratification of a particular proposed protocol deemed by the ratifying authority to be unsatisfactory. In order to justify either Party in claiming to be discharged from performance, something more must appear than the failure of particular negotiations or the failure to ratify particular protocols. There must be found an intent to frustrate the carrying out of the provisions of Article 3 with respect to the plebiscite; that is, not simply the refusal of a particular agreement proposed thereunder, because of its terms, but the purpose to prevent any reasonable agreement for a plebiscite. While there should be no hesitation in finding such intent, or bad faith, if established, and in holding the Party guilty thereof to the consequences of its action, it is plain that such a purpose should not be lightly imputed. Undoubtedly, the required proof may be supplied by circumstantial evidence, but the onus probandi of such a charge should not be lighter where the honor of a Nation is involved than in a case where the reputation of a private individual is concerned. A finding of the existence of bad faith should be supported not by disputable inferences but by clear and convincing evidence which compels such a conclusion. It is unnecessary to review in detail the history of the negotiations between the Parties. To determine whether Peru has sustained her burden of proof with respect to the course of negotiations requires a painstaking examination of the diplomatic exchanges between the two countries which fill hundreds of pages in the record. This examination has been made and its results can be stated in a brief compass. SUMMARY OF NEGOTIATIONS Formal negotiations to arrive at the terms of the special protocol for a plebiscite were begun in 1892’ and were diligently prosecuted for several months in formal conferences, the debates in which covered the principal questions which had arisen between the two governments, including the boundary questions which have been submitted in the present arbitration, and resulted in the Jimenez- Solar exchanges of January 26, 1894, which, however, left open the most vital conditions of the plebiscite. The negotiations were continued, but the ten-year period expired without further progress being made, and they were then interrupted, and the gains already made were largely lost by a cabinet crisis in Chile and the death of the President of Peru. In the early part of 1895, civil disturbances in Peru resulted in the establishment of a Provisional Board of Government with which the Chilean Minister opened negotiations in August, 1895, which were carried through numerous conferences and ended by an exchange of notes in February, 1896, disclosing the respective views which had been

found to be irreconcilable. There followed an interval in which the matter was not pressed by either government, the reasons for which were set forth in a joint memorandum of August 14, 1897, in which also each government expressed its desire to have a definite solution. Thereafter Señor Billinghurst, Vice President of Peru, was sent on special mission to Santiago to negotiate the protocol. As a result the so-called Billinghurst-Latorre protocol was signed on April 16, 1898. The Executives of the two countries thus reached an agreement upon all points except two, namely, the qualifications of the voters at the plebiscite and whether the voting should be public or secret, and it was agreed that these questions should be left to the arbitration of the Queen of Spain. In Peru, the protocol was approved. In Chile, the Committee of Foreign Affairs of the Senate reported on the Protocol unfavorably by a divided vote, but the Senate nevertheless approved it on August 1, 1898. A majority of the Committee of Foreign Relations of the Chilean Chamber of Deputies first voted in favor of the Protocol but later reported adversely and the Chamber of Deputies failed to give its approval. The ground especially asserted was that the points proposed to be left to arbitration should be settled directly between the two governments and the records were returned to the Executive so that new negotiations might be had “for the purpose of carrying into effect Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon.” While there was extreme disappointment in Peru at this result, neither Peru nor Chile regarded the rejection of the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol as a justification for terminating the negotiations under the treaty. Meanwhile a serious dispute had arisen over the methods of Chilean administration in Tacna and Arica. Peru’s vigorous complaints led to a diplomatic debate which reached an impasse and Senor Chacaltana, Peru’s Minister to Chile, was recalled in March, 1901. The representation was not renewed until 1905. In February of that year, the Minister of Foreign Relations of Peru addressed a direct diplomatic communication to the Chilean Minister of Foreign Relations protesting against the Treaty of 1905 between Chile and Bolivia providing among other things for the construction of a railway at Chile’s expense from Arica to La Paz, and giving Bolivia commercial privileges. Peru protested against this treaty as an infringement of her sovereign rights, Chile responded giving the Chilean theory in justification and concluded by inviting Peru to resume negotiations. In his reply of April 25, 1905, the Peruvian Foreign Minister said that his Government was “highly pleased to accept Your Excellency’s invitation to negotiate the fulfillment of the Treaty of Ancon in respect of the provinces of Tacna and Arica.” Ministers were accredited but the record does not disclose the negotiations had.

On March 25, 1908, the Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs, Senor Puga Borne, in an elaborate note addressed to the Peruvian Minister at Santiago, proposed a series of five conventions relating respectively to commerce, merchant marine, a connecting railroad,

the plebiscite and the indemnity, and set forth his views as to the manner of holding the plebiscite. The Peruvian Minister, Senor Seoane, declined to combine the plebiscitary protocol with other matters. He refuted the suggestion which had been made that “according to modern precedents the plebiscite incorporated in the history of international law constitutes a formula for disguised cession” and presented at length Peru’s position as to the terms of the plebiscite. Later it was agreed that the negotiations should proceed at Lima. Thereafter occurred the so-called wreath incident. The Chilean Minister at Lima expressed a desire to place a bronze wreath on the mausoleum erected to the memory of the Peruvian soldiers who died in the war with Chile. This proposal was first accepted but later this acceptance was withdrawn and the Chilean Minister immediately returned home. In the absence of diplomatic representation of either country at the capital of the other, there ensued a period of direct negotiations between the Foreign Ministers of the two countries. These negotiations began in August, 1909, with a note by the Chilean Foreign Minister complaining of certain language used by the President of Peru in his message to Congress in relation to the question of Tacna and Arica. The Peruvian Minister replied in justification and in another note took up the questions connected with Chilean administration, which will be discussed later. In October, 1909, Chile presented certain definite proposals as to the conditions of a plebiscite, these being founded on the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol and covering the points which by that protocol were to be referred to arbitration. Peru replied in November, 1909, with a memorandum of counter-proposals modifying in certain important respects the Chilean plan. Correspondence ensued setting forth the answer of Chile to Peru’s complaints as to the conduct of administration in the Territory of Tacna and Arica and Peru rejoined. In a note of March 3, 1910, the Chilean Foreign Minister recurred to the idea that the plebiscites in international law were but disguised formulas for annexation and applied this to the case of Tacna and Arica saying that the provisions in question of the Treaty of Ancon were devised “as the only means designated by history of satisfying the territorial demands of Chile without deeply wounding a national sentiment of Peru.” “Nevertheless,” the Chilean Foreign Minister added, his Government “has sought in the holding of the plebiscite the satisfaction of its legitimate exigencies, and it only asks that the act be essentially popular and that it be effected without violating for a single instant, by interrupting them, its rights as a sovereign in the territories of Tacna and Arica.” The Chilean Foreign Minister then set out in considerable detail proposed conditions for the plebiscite,—providing that it should be held within six months after the exchange of ratifications of the protocol, and setting forth the manner in which a Directive Board and Registration and Receiving Committees should be appointed and act, the qualification of voters and the canvass of the votes.

of the withdrawal of Peru’s representative by calling attention to the fact that it came almost immediately after his detailed proposals for a plebiscite. Diplomatic relations were not resumed. In September, 1912, Senor Billinghurst became President of Peru. Evidently as a result of informal negotiations, there occurred on November 10, 1912, an exchange of telegrams between the Foreign Ministers of the two countries, called the Huneeus-Valera telegrams.33 These were identic and provided:

plebiscite cannot therefore be regarded as being in itself a breach of the treaty. The Parties, by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon, having left to a future agreement the conditions of the plebiscite, must be deemed to have thereby agreed that each Party should have the right to make proposals, and to object to the other’s proposals, so long as they acted in good faith. From an examination of the history of the negotiations the Arbitrator is unable to find any proper basis for the conclusion that Chile acted in bad faith. The record fails to show that Chile has ever arbitrarily refused to negotiate with Peru the terms of the plebiscitary protocol. On the contrary, the record shows affirmatively that Chile not only has accepted Peru’s invitations to proceed with the negotiations but has herself initiated negotiations. Such causes of delay as a cabinet crisis, a revolution, the illness of a minister, the death of a president—political contingencies which did not lie beyond the contemplation of the Parties—cannot be charged to either side as constituting a wilful refusal to proceed with negotiations. The argument based on the failure of Chile to ratify the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol of 1898 must proceed on the assumption either that Chile was bound to ratify that particular agreement or that Chile’s conduct in relation thereto establishes absence of good faith in the prosecution of the negotiations pursuant to the treaty. Neither position can be maintained. The Billinghurst-Latorre protocol provided that two important conditions of the plebiscite, namely, the qualifications of voters and the secrecy of the vote should be submitted to the arbitration of the Queen of Spain. Chile had not promised to agree to such an arbitration and acted within her rights in seeking a direct agreement upon these points. Nor does Chile’s conduct in relation to the protocol afford ground for a finding of bad faith. The Executive of Chile negotiated the protocol and the Chilean Senate approved it. As already stated, the Committee of the Chilean Chamber of Deputies first approved the protocol and then changed its recommendation and the Chamber of Deputies acted on the adverse report of the Committee. The Legislature of Chile under the constitutional system of Chile had the same right to refuse to approve the protocol as the Executive had to negotiate it and no unfavorable inference can be drawn from the exercise by the Legislature of its constitutional prerogative in the circumstances described. The disposition of the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol cannot be regarded as due to anything other than the normal processes of constitutional government in relation to a matter of transcendent public interest, nor did Peru even under the stress of disappointment make the rejection of the protocol a basis for refusing to go on with negotiations for the fulfillment of the Treaty of Ancon. In considering the obligations of that treaty, regard must be had as well to the freedom which the Parties enjoyed under that treaty, by virtue of the fact that the conditions of the plebiscite were left to a future agreement, as to the duty which the treaty imposed. It must be concluded that Chile was no more bound to ratify the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol than Peru was bound to accept later the proposals made by Chile.

The Arbitrator is of the opinion that so far as the negotiations for the special protocol are concerned neither Party can be charged with bad faith and that there is no ground for the conclusion that Chile’s, action in respect to these negotiations has resulted in the abrogation of the second and third paragraphs of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon or absolved Peru from the obligation to proceed to their fulfillment. CHILEAN ADMINISTRATION IN TACNA AND ARICA It follows from what has been said that the provisions in question of the Treaty of Ancon must be regarded as still in effect unless the course of Chile in the administration of Tacna and Arica has been of such a character as to frustrate the purposes of these provisions and hence to deprive them of force. Article 3 provided that the described territory of the Provinces of Tacna and Arica should “continue in the possession of Chile subject to Chilean laws and authority during a period of ten years” and that “after the expiration of that term” (the Peruvian translation of the text has been set forth above) there should be a plebiscite to decide whether the territory “is to remain definitely under the dominion and sovereignty of Chile or is to continue to constitute a part of Peru.” There has been a long and serious controversy between the Parties (1) as to the nature of the authority thus conceded to Chile, and (2) as to the status of the territory after the expiration of the ten-year period. Chile has maintained that she had full dominion and sovereignty subject to termination by an adverse plebiscite held under the treaty, and that pending the holding of the plebiscite this sovereignty continued. Peru has insisted that the territory remained under the sovereignty of Peru; that Chile was only a possessor with administrative authority for ten years and that at the end of that period Chile’s authority ceased. (1) It is unnecessary to discuss the arguments on the question of sovereignty. It is sufficient for the purposes of the Arbitrator to take the express words of the treaty. Under the first paragraph of Article 3, the territory was to be in Chile’s possession and “subject to Chilean laws and authority.” This provision is without express qualification. There is no condition set forth as to either laws or authority, that is, as to the character of laws or the extent of authority. “Laws and authority” clearly embrace the full legislative, executive and judicial power. The Arbitrator has no privilege to limit the power thus conferred by the treaty. If any limit is to be found it must be in the terms of the treaty itself; that is, in the provision for a plebiscite. It may be implied that the exercise by Chile of legislative, executive and judicial power should not go to the extent of frustrating the provision for a plebiscite. Further than this, it is not possible to go without derogation of the authority which the Parties agreed that Chile should have. The question whether the administration of the territory was wise or unwise, beneficial or the reverse, was not submitted by the treaty to any review and is not reviewable by the

Arbitrator. The administration of government in all countries exhibits in varying degrees the infirmities of human nature and affords abundant room for controversy as to the wisdom and justice of measures, but the Parties in their treaty did not attempt to create limitations even of a general character. (2) Article 3 made no provision as to what should happen after the expiration of the ten-year period and pending the holding of a plebiscite. As the plebiscite was not to be held until the term had expired, it must be deemed to have been within the contemplation of the Parties that there might be an interval before the result of the plebiscite could be ascertained. But no express provision was made for this contingency. It seems unreasonable to suppose that the Parties intended that after the expiration of the ten years Chile should surrender possession to Peru, that then the plebiscite should be held, and that, if it were decided in favor of Chile, the possession should then be restored to Chile. Such a disruption and reconstitution of administrative authority would involve practical difficulties which it is hardly to be thought that the Parties intended to create. Chile was in possession of the territory when the treaty was made and was to continue in possession for ten years, and after that period a plebiscite was to be held to determine whether the territory was “to remain definitely” under her dominion and sovereignty. The fair construction is that Chile was to retain possession pending the holding of a plebiscite and that thus retaining possession her administrative authority continued. This would be subject, of course, to the continuance in effect of the provisions of the treaty, and with the implied undertaking on the part of Chile that she would not prevent the holding of a plebiscite and would negotiate in good faith to make the contemplated special protocol to establish the conditions of the plebiscite. This seems to have been the understanding at the outset, for in the Memorandum delivered by the Minister of Foreign Relations of Peru to the Minister of Chile on March 9, 1894, it appeared that the Chilean Minister desired to include among the bases of a protocol “that the territories should remain during the plebiscite in the same state as that in which they are to-day” and that the Peruvian Foreign Minister responded “that it would be unnecessary to say so, for, only in order to change the person of the occupant, would an express declaration be necessary.” If this was the situation immediately after the ten-year period expired, there is no warrant for holding that the failure to agree on the special protocol for the plebiscite produced a change unless there was bad faith in the conduct of the negotiations, and this charge, as already stated, cannot be sustained. The Arbitrator finds the conclusion inescapable that the territory continued “subject to Chilean laws and authority” pending the negotiations for the special protocol. The question then is whether this authority has been used in such a way as to frustrate the purpose of the agreement for the plebiscite.

The conduct, of which Peru complains and which was the subject of numerous and elaborate protests evoking serious controversy, is charged to have been the execution of a policy described as “Chilenization” of the territory, embracing as alleged, (a) the subsidized introduction of Chilean citizens and (b) the dispersion of the Peruvian population after 1900. A. The acts charged as constituting the subsidized introduction of Chilean citizens may be summarized as follows: (1) the creation of the Department of Tarata; (2) the removal of the court of appeals from Iquique to Tacna; (3) the removal of military headquarters from Iquique to Tacna and the concentration of Chilean military forces in the Provinces; (4) founding of newspapers for pro-Chilean propaganda; (5) the subsidizing of factories; (6) the granting of railway, irrigation and other concessions; (7) colonization; and (8) the arrangements in regard to the Arica customs. As to these charges, it may be said: The creation of the Department of Tarata involves the question of the extent of the territory covered by Article 3, a question which will be considered in dealing with the boundary dispute. In so far, however, as the creation of this department was a matter of the administrative organization of a portion of the territory placed by the treaty under “Chilean laws and authority”, there would be no ground for complaint as there was no restriction upon the authority of Chile to provide administrative organization of the territory. The same is true of the removal of the court of appeals from Iquique to Tacna, the removal of military headquarters from Iquique to Tacna, and the concentration of military forces in the Provinces, if such concentration took place. All these acts were clearly within the authority conferred upon Chile by the treaty. Chile denies the charge that periodicals and newspapers were founded to carry on pro-Chilean propaganda, but apart from the issue of fact the Arbitrator finds it impossible as matter of law to deny to Chile the right to establish or subsidize newspapers in territory “subject to Chilean laws and authority.” Chile admits the subsidizing of new industries in Tacna and Arica but adds that “unfortunately however these factories have been forced to discontinue operations.” Whether such factories succeeded or failed, there can be no question of Chile’s general right to subsidize industry. It is unnecessary to consider an extreme situation in which large sums of government money invested in the subsidizing of industries in Tacna and Arica might have stimulated a considerable artificial immigration of persons into the provinces, because no such showing has been made on the facts. The granting of railway, irrigation and other concessions was clearly within the authority of Chile. The life of the concessions might be limited to such time as she possessed the legislative and executive power, but this is a matter which it is not necessary for the Arbitrator to determine in this case. Such a limitation would not affect the validity of the concessions during the time of the grantor’s possession and authority. The only aspect in which the granting of railway and other concessions need to be considered as a factor in “Chilenization” is in relation to the tendency of such

enterprises to bring Chileans, particularly Chilean workmen, into Tacna and Arica. The principal enterprise of this character undertaken by Chile as disclosed by the record was the construction of the Arica-La Paz railway undertaken in accordance with the provisions of the Chilean- Bolivian Treaty of 1904.36 The record indicates that this railway resulted in the introduction into the provinces of Tacna and Arica of a number of Chilean laborers. To what extent these laborers remained in the provinces after the completion of the road in 1913 does not affirmatively appear, but there were such obvious economic reasons for the Arica-La Paz railway that it could not reasonably be inferred that the importation of Chilean labor in connection with this project was anything more than an incident to an enterprise which Chile was entitled to undertake. Undoubtedly successful concessions meant industrial development, development meant population, and increase of the population of the provinces in these circumstances naturally meant a greater proportion of persons of Chilean nationality, but Peru cannot object to the legitimate and normal development of the provinces during the period in which they remain under Chilean laws and authority, ‘there is nothing in the treaty requiring stagnation. The question of colonization is intimately related to the matter of concessions. Indeed so far as the record shows it is chiefly if not entirely in connection with the construction of public works such as the Arica-La Paz railway that Chile has achieved any measure of practical success in “colonizing” Tacna and Arica. The question of colonization was discussed between the two countries in 1900 principally upon the basis of Chile’s right to alienate public lands in connection with colonization schemes, and the evidence indicates that more or less ambitious plans for colonization were from time to time under consideration and that the colonization laws of Chile were extended to Tacna and Arica in 1909. There is, however, no adequate proof that any of these colonization plans were carried out and Chile denies that the colonization law was ever actually put into operation or that any land was purchased as therein provided or that there was any substitution under these laws of Peruvian farmers by Chilean farmers. This denial is not met by any adequate affirmative evidence. In view of this state of the record it becomes unnecessary to consider to what extent Chile could have carried out a systematic policy of expropriation and colonization of the lands in Tacna and Arica before it would have amounted to such a depopulation of the provinces and substitution of Chilean for Peruvian inhabitants as to frustrate the purpose of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon. It is sufficient to say that the evidence fails to establish any such colonization on the part of Chile as would form any basis for a conclusion that Peru had been discharged from her plebiscitary obligation. By various arrangements with Bolivia, Chile has conceded to Bolivia commercial and customs privileges in the ports of Tacna and Arica which have given rise to diplomatic protests on the part of Peru. Chile expressly concedes that “should Tacna and Arica as a consequence of the plebiscite be returned to the sovereignty of Peru, the latter would take this territory free from any incumbrances resulting from such a trade agreement.”

In these circumstances it is not perceived that Peru has any just complaint on account of any commercial and customs arrangements which Chile may have made for the regulation of the territory subject to her authority. If such arrangements benefited the territory and thereby promoted immigration this was merely a legitimate incident of the administration of the territory contemplated by the treaty. The Arbitrator therefore holds that, with respect to the specific acts adduced by Peru as tending to show the subsidized introduction of Chilean citizens, either as a matter of law these acts were within Chile’s right under the treaty during the period in which the territory is “subject to Chilean laws and authority” or there is no sufficient evidence to show that they were in fact committed. B. The acts of which Peru has complained as constituting the dispersion of the Peruvian

sacred duties; and that if in fulfilling it, the teachers had been guilty of unbecoming exaggerations, they should have been curbed according to law, but not in any other way. The matter rested with this disagreement. There is no adequate disproof of the grounds upon, which Chile acted and it does not appear that she misinterpreted her laws, which cannot be regarded as being in excess of her authority. It should be added that the record indicates that Chile has not failed to provide appropriate educational facilities for the people of the territory. There are a few complaints in the record to the effect that the authorities in the Chilean schools have discriminated against Peruvians or endeavored to force Peruvians to elect Chilean nationality, but these complaints are not sufficiently numerous or well sustained to be accepted as establishing any deliberate policy. The Expulsion of Peruvian Priests. Both Chile and Peru are Roman Catholic countries and there is no question of an attempt to introduce an alien faith. The question is essentially one of ecclesiastical patronage. As the Peruvian Minister said in his note of November 14, 1900: “In Peru, as in Chile, the Catholic Church lives and prospers under the protection of the age-old system of patronage. According to the latter, the Civil Government, in the territorial divisions which are permanently under its control, intervenes in the creation and subdivision of dioceses, or parishes, in the creation of apostolic or other vicarages, in providing ecclesiastical benefices, and in all other functions closely related to the temporal attributes of States. Patronage, furthermore, irrespective of the source from which it is derived, is a prerogative intimately associated with the exercise of national sovereignty. Its action upon certain churches continues until sovereignty over the territories in which they are located ceases, and it is not transferred except when sovereignty itself is finally and permanently transferred. In respect to Tacna and Arica, neither has Peru ceded final control and sovereignty over them, nor has Chile acquired either of these; the moment has not arrived, therefore, to consider that the attributes of Peru, as patron in respect to these churches, are at an end.”

The Chilean Foreign Minister in his answer of January 19, 1901, took issue with this position. He said: “Your Excellency recognizes that in Peru, as in Chile, the Catholic Church lives and is developed under the auspices of the secular regime of patronage. “This principle being established, it only remains to ascertain to which of the two Governments pertains the exercise of patronage for the provision of

ecclesiastical functions and benefices in the territory that Chile occupies pursuant to the stipulations of the Treaty of Ancon. “If the Treaty of Ancon placed the territories of Tacna and Arica under the dominion of the Chilean Constitution and laws, it would seem unquestionable that the President of the Republic must use there the special faculty that is bestowed on him by the Constitution of the State in Article LXXXII, section 13, which says: “‘13. To exercise the faculties of patronage in respect of churches and ecclesiastical benefices and persons in conformity with the law.’” The Peruvian Minister insisted in reply that the rights asserted were related to the permanent and definite sovereignty, and belonged to Peru. In accordance with the position of Chile based on the provision that the territory should be subject to its “laws and authority,” the Chilean Government demanded that the Peruvian priests secure permits from the Chilean authorities. The priests declined to request these permits and the Chilean Government closed the churches. The Peruvian priests, it is alleged, then “opened oratories which they called private but which were in fact public” and the Chilean Government ended the controversy by expelling the priests under an order of February 17, 1910. It appears that later in that year, the Holy See, without appearing to take sides in the growing controversy, created a Military Vicarship in charge of a Chilean Chaplain, who was afterwards promoted by the Holy See to the episcopal dignity. It is not the province of the Arbitrator to deal with any matter of ecclesiastical polity, but as the fundamental question seems to have been one of ecclesiastical patronage as above stated, there is no sufficient reason for concluding that this patronage did not pertain to the territorial authority. The wisdom or expediency of the action is not before the Arbitrator. Peruvian Newspapers. The Peruvian Case charges Chile with suspending and suppressing Peruvian newspapers but it does not satisfactorily prove this charge. In his correspondence with the Chilean Foreign Office in 1900–1901, the Peruvian Minister expressed his apprehension that the Chilean Government would yield to the wishes of subordinate officials who desired to suppress the voice of the press but he made no charge that the Government had actually interfered with the press and the Chilean Government denied that it had done so. There the matter appears to have rested so far as diplomatic exchanges are concerned until 1918 when the closing of Peruvian newspapers was listed as one of the features of the so-called Chilenization campaigns in the circular of the Peruvian Minister of Foreign Affairs of December of that year. No evidence was adduced in support of this passing reference. In like manner the Chilean

Minister of Foreign Affairs in his reply of December 6, 1918, contented himself with a parenthetical assertion of the “liberty of the press.” In the memorandum of the Peruvian Minister of Foreign Affairs of February 14, 1919, there appear extracts from a memorial which certain Peruvian citizens are said to have “just presented to the President of the Republic and which Government investigation proves to be absolutely accurate.” In the course of this memorial it is stated “this persecution was exemplified …37 by the assault and destruction of the Union Club Building in 1911 and by that of the printing offices of La Voz del Sur, El Tacora and El Morro de Arica during the same year.” While there is no sufficient evidence in the record to show that Chile has either suppressed or censored the Peruvian press of Tacna and Arica by operation of law or by action of the Chilean Government, there is satisfactory evidence to show that Peruvian newspapers were destroyed by mob violence in 1911. Although it is not possible on the evidence to charge this action to the Government of Chile, it does appear that the Peruvian newspapers have not been reestablished and the situation thus existing demands consideration in fixing the conditions of a possible plebiscite. Depriving Peruvians of the Right to Assemble and Display the Peruvian Flag. The principal incidents brought forward in support of this charge are ancient and trivial. The charge fails on the dual ground that it is not sufficiently supported by the record, and that it is not shown that any regulations which may have been made were not within the reasonable discretion of the Chilean Government in the circumstances obtaining in Tacna and Arica. Boycotting of Peruvian Labor. This is a charge which is easy to make, hard to prove, and almost equally hard to disprove affirmatively. It is made by Peru repeatedly in official documents and in the affidavits of private parties. It is denied by Chile except as to preference on public works such as the Arica-La Paz Railway. In these circumstances it has been necessary to examine in detail the individual cases in which Peru has endeavored to establish the boycotting of workmen. Among twenty-seven specific cases of expulsion, persecution, etc., which are presented in the Peruvian Case and contested in the Chilean Counter Case and which therefore afford the best basis for testing the contentions of the parties, there are two cases in which Peru has endeavored to establish the boycotting of workmen, the cases of Roberto Nalvarte and Alberto Forero Marquez, In both of these instances Peru distinctly fails to make out a case. Among the three hundred and forty cases of expulsion set forth in the Peruvian Counter Case there are some cases in which it is alleged that the affiant was deprived of employment because he was a Peruvian. Bearing in mind that these are ex parte affidavits to which Chile has had no opportunity to reply, there are very few of these affidavits which, in the opinion of the Arbitrator, make out a sufficient case prima facie and there is evidence elsewhere in the record which casts serious doubt upon some of these. In other words, there is a paltry showing of specific cases of boycotting of

Peruvian labor and these rest upon ex parte affidavits. This is too unsubstantial a foundation upon which to establish such a charge. While the evidence leaves in the mind of the Arbitrator a question whether there has not been more discrimination against Peruvian labor than the record establishes there is nothing to indicate that this discrimination has attained such proportions as to make it possible to consider it as affording any ground for a decision against a plebiscite. Conscription. Peru charges that Chile is applying her conscription laws to Peruvian citizens in Tacna and Arica as a means of driving them out of the provinces and thereby eliminating their votes in case a plebiscite is had. To this charge Chile interposes a three-fold defense to the effect first, that conscription is not an effective way to Chilenize a Peruvian recruit; second, that children of Peruvian parents born in Tacna and Arica and claiming Peruvian nationality are not in fact conscripted; and third, that Peru has not put in evidence the requirements of Chilean law with respect to the military service of Peruvians. The first defense misses the point of the charge. Peru does not charge that the conscription laws are being used to win votes for Chile through the Chilenization of the conscripts, but that they are being used to eliminate Peruvian votes because young Peruvians on being called on to register or enlist prefer to emigrate to Peru. The second defense is on the merits; it rests largely on the circular of the Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs of February 12, 1920, in which, after asserting that under the Constitution of Chile, Chilean conscription laws rightfully apply to all persons in Tacna and Arica, including Peruvians, the Minister proceeds: “Nevertheless, by special administrative disposition, all youths born in Tacna and Arica who because of their Peruvian parentage, may have indicated their preference to adhere to Peru, have been eliminated from the military service in those provinces.” As this defense asserts the applicability of the Chilean conscription laws and rests upon administrative leniency in their enforcement, it is unnecessary to consider the third defense. The claim of leniency in enforcement raises an issue of fact and requires an examination of some two hundred affidavits introduced by Peru in which the affiants claim to have been forced to leave Tacna and Arica to avoid military service or to have been expelled from Tacna and Arica because of their failure or refusal to discharge their military duty under the Chilean conscription laws. The great majority of these affidavits appear in the Peruvian Counter Case and Chile has therefore had no opportunity to meet them with evidence in rebuttal. Making due allowance for this, however, and taking into account the other evidence in the record, the Arbitrator is unable to conclude that the policy of administrative leniency proclaimed by the Chilean Government with respect to conscripts born in Tacna and Arica of Peruvian parentage who themselves claim to be Peruvians, has been consistently pursued by the administrative officers on the ground. While the affidavits indicate that the enforcement of the law has been intermittent as to time and sporadic as to places and persons, and that many young Peruvians have not been molested even in places and at times when the law was being enforced against other Peruvians, they also indicate that in a considerable number of cases, particularly in the year 1923, the Chilean conscription laws have been used not so much for the

obtaining of recruits (for so far the policy of leniency appears to have been reasonably well carried out) but with the result, if not the purpose, of driving young Peruvians from the provinces. So far as this has been done, the Arbitrator holds it to be an abuse of Chilean authority. However, while the record leaves it somewhat uncertain as to the extent of this abuse, it is clear that there is no sufficient showing either as to time or persons or places to establish such a serious situation as would discharge the plebiscitary obligations of the treaty. The intermittent and sporadic infractions which have occurred are however important in connection with the consideration of the conditions of a plebiscite. Expulsion of Peruvian Citizens. The Peruvian Case and Counter Case and the Peruvian diplomatic correspondence submitted to the Arbitrator charge repeatedly that Chile has expelled and is expelling the Peruvian population of Tacna and Arica both en masse and as individuals. The Chilean Counter Case and the Chilean diplomatic documents meet this charge with unqualified denials, except as to fifty-two persons whose expulsion is admitted and justified on the ground of “repeated violations of the laws and attempted conspiracies against the State.” Peru has submitted in support of her contentions several hundred individual cases in which she maintains that expulsion has taken place. As has been heretofore stated, twenty-seven specific instances of direct or indirect expulsion are presented in the Peruvian Case and controverted in the Chilean Counter Case. Three hundred and forty additional cases are presented in as many affidavits in the Peruvian Counter Case and there are certain other cases scattered through the documents. Each of these cases may involve either one or more individuals. Most of the evidence on both sides is in the form of ex parte affidavits of persons residing either in Tacna and Arica or lately resident there and now resident in Peru, and therefore subject to a greater or less degree to observation on account of their relation to the case and the environment under which they give their evidence. In the case of the affidavits presented in the Peruvian Counter Case Chile has had no opportunity to present evidence in rebuttal, and of course in no case has there been opportunity for the confrontation or cross examination of the witnesses. In these circumstances the natural difficulties of arriving at the truth in a contested matter of this sort are greatly increased. In view however of the number of these cases put forward and the number of cases in which Chile has had an opportunity to produce evidence in rebuttal, the Arbitrator believes that a general conclusion can be safely formed from these cases in connection with the other evidence in the record. An examination accordingly has been made of each individual case of expulsion put forward in the record. To discuss these cases individually would expand this opinion far beyond its proper limits and any other discussion beyond the statement of the Arbitrator’s conclusions would be unsatisfactory if not useless. The Arbitrator is of the opinion that as is usual in cases of this character, the truth lies between the extreme

contentions of the respective parties. The Arbitrator accepts the statement on behalf of Chile that only fiftytwo persons have been formally expelled in such a manner as to cause their cases to be formally recorded in the archives of the Ministry of Foreign Relations. But the Arbitrator can not overlook the fact that it is not necessary for the local Chilean officials to make a case of expulsion of record in order to accomplish it and that expulsions may be brought about informally by threats and intimidation without even being brought to the attention of the Chilean Government or made of record in the Ministry of Foreign Relations. In fact the evidence in the record indicates that the majority of the so-called cases of expulsion were brought about through the application or threatened application of the conscription laws and that in many of these cases there was no expulsion in any technical sense of the word. The affiant left “voluntarily” in order to escape the application of the law. The Arbitrator holds that the evidence indicates that the informal expulsions of various kinds have considerably outnumbered the formal expulsions which are admitted and justified by the Chilean agents. How many of these formal or informal expulsions were based on good cause it is impossible to say on the record presented, but it is reasonable to conclude that aside from the conscription cases there were also other cases in which justification could not be successfully established. When all this is said however, it is very far from justifying the picture of mass expulsion and depopulation painted in the Peruvian documents. The Arbitrator finds that Peru’s charges of wholesale expulsion and depopulation are not supported by the record. It is believed that Chile has underestimated the number of expulsions and that Peru has overestimated them. Taking the entire evidence into consideration, and the nature of the ultimate question presented for the determination of the Arbitrator and the principles that must be applied in its determination, as already stated, the Arbitrator is unable to find in the expulsions which have taken place any such serious and deliberate violation of Peru’s treaty rights as to justify Peru in repudiating the plebiscitary obligations of Article 3. The expulsions which have taken place are however relevant in connection with the further question submitted to the Arbitrator. General Persecution of Peruvians through mob violence and otherwise. Little need be said with respect to the question of mob violence which occupies a considerable place in the record. Unfortunately mob violence is not unknown in any country. It occurred in Chile at Iquique both in 1911 and in 1918 and Peruvians suffered. Iquique is some seventy-five miles south of the southern border of Tacna and Arica and what happened at Iquique has no direct bearing upon the matters with which this arbitration is

declarations, and the Arbitrator is constrained to hold that these charges of general persecution are not adequately supported. There are also numerous charges of petty persecution, some of which if taken individually might be sustained, but all of which put together are not sufficiently serious to affect the decision of the weighty question under consideration. Conclusion. The Arbitrator is far from approving the course of Chilean administration and condoning the acts committed against Peruvians to which reference has been made, but finds no reason to conclude that a fair plebiscite in the present circumstances cannot be held under proper conditions or that a plebiscite should not be had. The agreement which the Parties made that the ultimate disposition of the territory of Tacna and Arica should be determined by popular vote is in accord with democratic postulates. It furnished when it was made a desirable alternative to a continuance of strife and it affords today a method of avoiding the recurrence of a not improbably disastrous clash of opposing sentiments and interests which enter into the very fiber of the respective nations. In agreeing upon a determination of the embittered controversy by popular vote, the Parties had recourse to a solution which the present circumstances not only do not render impracticable but rather the more imperative as a means of amicable disposition. The Parties in the Treaty of Ancon provided no alternative mode of settlement and made no provision for limitation of time or for forfeiture. It is manifest that if abuses of administration could have the effect of terminating such an agreement, it would be necessary to establish such serious conditions as the consequence of administrative wrongs as would operate to frustrate the purpose of the agreement, and, in the opinion of the Arbitrator, a situation of such gravity has not been shown. The Arbitrator holds that the provisions of the second and third paragraphs of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon are still in effect; that the plebiscite should be held; and that the interests of both Parties can be properly safeguarded by establishing suitable conditions therefor. SECOND—THE CONDITIONS OF THE PLEBISCITE The Supplementary Act of the Protocol of Arbitration provides that “In case the holding of a plebiscite should be declared in order, the Arbitrator is empowered to determine the conditions thereof.” The Parties having failed to agree on the special protocol contemplated by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon prescribing “the manner in which the plebiscite is to be carried out” have submitted this question to the Arbitrator and the present Award is therefore to be deemed to be the substitute for the special protocol. The Treaty of Ancon contains no provision as to the conditions of the plebiscite, stating merely that it is to be a decision “by popular vote.” As the time for the plebiscite was not fixed, save that it was

not to be until after the expiration of the ten-year period, the constituency to which the Parties were to appeal was manifestly that existing at the time of the plebiscite, and, aside from the futility of such an attempt, there is no warrant for an endeavor by artificial rules to reestablish a constituency of a past period, although it may be appropriate to make reasonable regulations which will have regard to the position of the Peruvians of the provinces who may have been wrongfully expelled. The conditions of the plebiscite should be such as will be plain and practical and work substantial justice between the Parties in the present circumstances. They have also been framed in the light of the proposals made and views expressed by the Parties respectively in the course of their negotiations, and the Arbitrator has not failed to consider whatever historical precedents may be deemed to be of value. QUALIFICATIONS OF VOTERS In the beginning of the Jimenez-Solar negotiations it was maintained on behalf of Peru that “the right of suffrage belonged to none except Peruvians,” while the Chilean Minister urged that “all the inhabitants of the territory …38 had the right to declare their will to belong either to Peru or to Chile.” However, this point was yielded on behalf of Peru and both Peruvians and Chileans were to be allowed to vote under the Peruvian draft protocol of February 23, 1894, submitted in the Jimenez-Solar negotiations. That draft drew a distinction as respects residence between Peruvians and Chileans permitting “Peruvians …38 who reside at present in the provinces of Tacna and Arica” to vote, but only allowing “Chileans who can establish a continuous residence of two years …38 and who live there at present” to participate in the election. Again, in the negotiations leading to the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol of April 16, 1898 the representative of Chile maintained that “all the inhabitants of the territory” should vote; the Peruvian representative, “that only Peruvians born in the territory or that reside in it ought to be permitted to vote.” By the terms of the protocol, this was one of the points to be submitted to arbitration. In the Puga Borne-Seoane negotiations of 1908 it was contended for Chile “that all the qualified inhabitants of the territory should be called on to exercise the right of plebiscitary suffrage,” but it was answered for Peru that “the right of sovereignty belongs to the natives alone” or as the Peruvian translation has it, “the right to vote belongs to the denizens alone.” In the Edwards-Porras negotiations of 1909-1910, it was proposed on behalf of Chile that “all the inhabitants, Chileans, Peruvians and foreigners” should vote. It was responded on behalf of Peru that “all the Peruvians and Chileans” should have the right to vote that met the following requirements: “a. Twenty-one years of age, b. residence in the territory at least from July 1, 1907. Those also may take part who, born in the territory of Tacna and Arica may be present at the moment of the vote, if they shall

have been registered previously for that purpose. Public employees and members of the army or of the police that may be in service in the provinces mentioned may not vote.” The Huneeus-Valera exchanges of November 10, 1912, provided as follows: “Persons born in Tacna and Arica, and Chileans and Peruvians that may have resided for 3 years in the territory will be entitled to vote.” The Chilean Case in referring to the provisions of the Huneeus-Valera exchanges according a vote to “persons born in Tacna and Arica” without a residential requirement, points out that the Huneeus-Valera plebiscite was only to take place in 1933, but expresses the view that “the right to vote because of birth in the territory is an unimportant matter.” It thus appears that on three occasions in the course of negotiations the representatives of Peru have conceded the right to vote to Chileans having prescribed residence in the territory, and that the insistence on the right to vote of persons born in the territory, irrespective of present residence is not strongly opposed. The latter provision will give opportunity to such native Peruvians of the territory as may have been expelled, without attempting the difficult task of determining all the questions of fact as to particular cases. The only remaining question as respects nationality is whether the right to vote should be extended to residents of Tacna and Arica who are neither Peruvians nor Chileans. It must be remembered that a whole generation has grown up in the territory, since the treaty, among them a number of foreigners who are neither Chileans nor Peruvians, who do not know whether the land in which they live will ultimately be Chilean or Peruvian, and who may well have been restrained by this uncertainty from acquiring either Chilean or Peruvian nationality, although Peru permits naturalization after two years’ residence and Chile after only one year’s residence. In these circumstances, it would be no more than fair, while the number of such voters apparently would not be large, to permit foreigners, i. e., persons neither Chileans nor Peruvians, who have had a bona-fide actual residence in the territory for a sufficient length of time to become naturalized in either Chile or Peru, and who are willing to make affidavit of their intention to seek naturalization in whichever country is successful at the plebiscite, to have a vote. Aside from persons born in the territory, there remains to consider what period of bona fide residence in Tacna and Arica ought to qualify any person as a voter at the plebiscite irrespective of the place of his birth. The Arbitrator is of the opinion that the date upon which the qualifications of every voter in the plebiscite should be fixed, to the extent at least that he cannot acquire rights by the lapse of time thereafter, should be the date of the protocol of arbitration and supplementary act, namely, July 20, 1922. Also, that any person of Peruvian or Chilean nationality who has resided continuously in Tacna and Arica for two years prior to July 20, 1922, and who has continued to maintain his residence therein until the date of registration should be entitled to vote. Further, that any person of any other nationality

who has resided continuously in Tacna and Arica for two years prior to July 20, 1922 and who has continued so to reside until the date of registration, and who makes a solemn declaration in a form to be provided of his intention to continue to reside in the province and to seek naturalization under the laws of the country successful in the plebiscite should be likewise entitled to vote. And, also that for obvious reasons it would be advisable in addition to the foregoing requirements as to residence in the territory to require residence for a short but reasonable period immediately before registration in the sub-delegation in which the voter registers. Women’s suffrage does not exist either in Chile or Peru. Neither Party has requested it nor has it been suggested in any of the negotiations between the Parties. Ability to read and write is made a qualification for the exercise of the right of suffrage in both countries. But in view of the circumstances and of what is understood to be the character of a considerable portion of the population of the territory, it is believed to be just that a literacy qualification should not be required of those who own real property situated in the territory. In both countries, there are certain disqualifications by reasons of military service, and in Peru, the civil servants of the State are also excluded from the right of suffrage. It is believed that persons born in Tacna and Arica should not be deprived of a vote in this plebiscite by reason of either military or civil service. With respect to others, in view of the policy of the laws of Chile and, Peru, it is deemed to be advisable that those in the military service should not vote, and while Chile does not exclude from the franchise those engaged in the civil service, the Arbitrator sees no reason in this case for establishing a difference between the military and civil services. Accordingly, the Arbitrator holds that the following persons shall be entitled to vote in the plebiscite directed to be held under this award: A. Male persons, 21 years old, able to read and write, who qualify under one

(c) reside for three months immediately preceding registration in the sub-delegation in which they are resident at the time of registration; and (d) make an affidavit as to residence in a form, to be prescribed by the Plebiscitary Commission hereafter described. 3. Foreigners, i. e., persons who are neither Chileans nor Peruvians, who are eligible for naturalization in either Chile or Peru and who fulfill the qualifications described in subdivisions a, b, c and d, under paragraph A-2, and who, in addition, make affidavit in a form prescribed by the Plebiscitary Commission of their intention to apply at once for naturalization in the State winning the plebiscite. B. 1. Provided, however, that no person shall be denied the right to vote at the plebiscite solely because of inability to read and write who on July 20, 1922, and continuously from that date until the date when he applies for registration was the owner of real property in said territory. 2. Provided, further, that no person shall acquire a vote through residence in said territory under the provisions of paragraphs A-2 and 3 if during any part of such required period of residence he has been a member in any capacity of the army, navy, carbineers, government police, secret service, or gendarmerie of either Chile or Peru, or has received compensation as such; or has been a government official or civil employee in the political, judicial or fiscal service of either country, or has received compensation as such. 3. Provided, further, that military persons of all ranks and civil employees of every degree of both governments who were born in said territory shall be given the opportunity to return to their native place both to register and vote in the plebiscite. 4. Provided, further, (a) that no person serving a term of imprisonment after sentence for a non-political offense involving moral turpitude or (b) under guardianship, non compos mentis or insane, shall be allowed to register or vote. The Governments of Chile and Peru shall facilitate the entry into Tacna and Arica and the transit through Chile and Peru respectively for that purpose of any person claiming to be entitled to vote at the plebiscite, and the Plebiscitary Commission shall be competent to receive claims based on alleged violations of the foregoing provision and to decide as to the validity of such claims and the right of such persons to vote.

SUPERVISION OF THE PLEBISCITE It is obvious that the holding of the plebiscite should be appropriately supervised by competent and impartial authority, and in the negotiations of the Parties considerable attention has been given to the constitution of such authority. As one of the conditions of the plebiscite, the Arbitrator decides that there shall be constituted a Plebiscitary Commission, and Registration and Election Boards with the following organization, powers and duties: PLEBISCITARY COMMISSION A. Constitution. A Plebiscitary Commission shall be constituted consisting of three members, one to be appointed by the Government of Chile, one to be appointed by the Government of Peru, and the third member, who shall act as President of the Commission, to be appointed by the President of the United States. In case one party to the arbitration appoints a member of the Plebiscitary Commission but the other party fails to appoint a member for thirty days after the time hereafter provided in this Award, it shall thereupon become the duty of the President of the Plebiscitary Commission to appoint a member to fill the vacancy thus existing. In making this appointment the President of the Commission is not limited as to nationality except that no more than one member of the Plebiscitary Commission may be a national of either Chile or Peru. Vacancies shall be filled according to the manner of the original appointment. B. Procedure. The Plebiscitary Commission shall act by a majority vote and shall establish its own rules of procedure subject to the provisions of this Award. C. Powers. 1. The Plebiscitary Commission shall have in general complete control over the plebiscite and shall have authority to determine all questions as to the registration of voters, the casting and counting of the vote and whether the persons claiming the right to register and vote are qualified to do so, subject only to the provisions of this Opinion and Award. 2. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Plebiscitary Commission shall have the power and duty to promulgate rules and regulations for the plebiscite which shall provide as follows: (1) For the procedure of Registration and Election Boards; (2) For public notice of the time and places of registration and the time and places of voting; (3) For the registration of voters;

(4) For the opening to public scrutiny of the lists of registered voters before the date set for voting so as to furnish opportunity for the investigation of contested cases and the correction of the voting lists; (5) For the secrecy of the ballot; (6) For the printing of the plebiscitary ballots which shall be in simple form with two columns headed by representations of the national flags of Chile and Peru, respectively, with the words “for Chile” in one column and the words “for Peru” in the other, and a square in each column to be marked by the voter according to his preference; (7) For the reception and counting of the ballots; (8) For the tabulation and scrutiny of the returns of the vote; (9) For appeals from the Registration and Election Boards to the Plebiscitary Commission; (10) For proceedings either by way of appeal from the Registration and Election Boards or by way of original contest proceedings before the Plebiscitary Commission to exclude any or all votes cast or apparently cast at any voting place on account of intimidation, bribery or fraud. D. Appeal to the Arbitrator. 1. The Arbitrator reserves the power and right on his own motion to entertain an appeal from the Plebiscitary Commission on any question decided by it. The Arbitrator further reserves the power and right to entertain an appeal on the certificate of the Commission to the effect that the question decided involves the interpretation of the Award, the jurisdiction of the Commission, or some question of general importance in relation to the holding or result of the plebiscite and that one member of the Commission has filed a dissenting opinion in writing and requested that the question be certified to the Arbitrator. In every case of appeal, the Arbitrator reserves the power and right to determine the time and manner in which, and the record upon which, the appeal shall be submitted to the Arbitrator. E. Report to the Arbitrator—Contest Proceedings. After the tabulation and scrutiny of the returns submitted by the Registration and Election Boards to the Plebiscitary Commission is complete, the Plebiscitary Commission shall report by telegraph the result of the plebiscite to the Arbitrator and to the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Parties. Within five days after this report either Party may institute contest proceedings before the Plebiscitary Commission upon the ground that the result of the plebiscitary vote as announced has been affected by intimidation, bribery or fraud to such an extent

that the result reached does not represent the will of the people of Tacna and Arica. If such contest proceedings be instituted the Commission shall hear said proceedings summarily in accordance with rules of procedure to be determined by it and report its findings thereon at the earliest possible date to the Arbitrator and to the Parties. If no contest proceedings are instituted within five days, the Plebiscitary Commission shall so advise the Arbitrator and the respective Ministers of Foreign Affairs by telegraph. REGISTRATION AND ELECTION BOARDS A. Constitution and Numbers.—At least four Registration and Election Boards and as many more as the Plebiscitary Commission finds to be necessary, each Board consisting of three members, shall be appointed in the following manner: One member shall be appointed by each member of the Plebiscitary Commission, other than the President of the Commission, and the third, who shall act as President of the Board, shall be appointed by the President of the Plebiscitary Commission. Vacancies shall be filled according to the manner of the original appointment. B. Procedure. The registration and Election Boards shall respectively act by majority vote. C. Place of sitting.—One Registration and Election Board shall sit in Arica, one in Tacna and the others shall sit in such places as may be designated by the Plebiscitary Commission to the end that proper opportunity shall be given to persons qualified to register and vote. D. Powers.—The Registration and Election Boards shall proceed, in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Plebiscitary Commission, to make up and publish lists of the voters entitled to take part in the plebiscite and shall receive and count the vote. No person not duly registered shall be allowed to vote in the plebiscite. THE TIME OF THE PLEBISCITE The members of the Plebiscitary Commission shall be appointed within four months from the date of the rendition of this Award, and the Commission shall assemble in the City of Arica for its first meeting not later than six months from the date of the rendition of this Award. These times may be changed by the Arbitrator. The Commission shall thereupon proceed at once to formulate rules for its own procedure and regulations governing the plebiscite in conformity with the conditions herein set forth, and shall fix the date for the plebiscite, and the time and places of registration and voting. The dates, times and places so fixed may be changed by the Commission. EXPENSES OF THE PLEBISCITE

A. The expenses of the plebiscite shall be borne by the two countries in equal parts. B. The members of the Plebiscitary Commission shall be repaid their actual expenses and each member shall receive as compensation a sum equivalent to $1,000 per month during the period of service. C. The Commission shall at the earliest practicable moment make and submit to the Arbitrator an estimate of the total cost of carrying out the plebiscite, and a schedule showing the amounts which from time to time should be made available for the use of the Commission. Upon the approval of this estimate and schedule by the Arbitrator the two Governments shall deposit these sums in equal parts in an institution designated by the Commission and in the amounts and at that [the?] times specified in the estimate. If necessary, a supplementary estimate or estimates, schedule or schedules shall be made and submitted in like manner. Any amount not expended in the necessary and proper expenses of the plebiscite shall be repaid by the Commission at the conclusion of its labors to the two Governments in equal parts. D. Within four months after the date of the rendition of this Award, the two Governments shall each deposit in a financial institution to be designated by the Secretary of State of the United States the sum of $15,000 to be made available for the initial expenses and compensation of the members of the Plebiscitary Commission. E. The Arbitrator may extend the period fixed for the first deposit and may likewise modify any schedule presented by the Commission either before or after its approval in order to conform to any modification of the date of the plebiscite. F. In case either Party does not deposit its moiety of any amount required for the expenses of the plebiscite within the time or times specified as hereinbefore provided, or as provided in any schedule prepared by the Commission and approved by the Arbitrator, the other Party may advance the requisite amount in order that the work of the Plebiscitary Commission may not be interrupted, and any amount so advanced shall be added or subtracted as the case may be in paying the treaty sum of ten millions as hereinafter provided and the reimbursement of such advance or advances shall be secured in the same manner as the payment of the ten millions is secured. G. The Plebiscitary Commission shall appoint a bonded disbursing officer who shall on the authority of the Commission disburse from the sums

deposited as aforesaid the amounts required for the work of the Commission and the Registration and Election Boards. PROCLAMATION OF THE RESULT OF THE PLEBISCITE Upon being properly advised by the Plebiscitary Commission of the result of the plebiscite, the Arbitrator in case no contest proceedings have been instituted as hereinbefore provided, will proclaim the result by notifying both Parties. In case contest proceedings are instituted the Arbitrator upon receiving the report of the Plebiscitary Commission thereon will either proclaim the result of the plebiscite by notifying the Parties accordingly or will declare the plebiscitary vote void and decree a new plebiscite within three months.

LEGISLATION IN AID OF PLEBISCITE Both Chile and Peru shall enact appropriate legislation providing within their respective jurisdictions for the protection of the members of the Plebiscitary Commission and the Registration and Election Boards in the discharge of their functions; for the apprehension, trial and punishment of persons guilty of intimidation, bribery, fraud or other offense in connection with registration or voting in the plebiscite, or of interference with the Plebiscitary Commission or any of its members or any Registration and Election Board or any member or employee thereof in the discharge of their respective functions or duties; for compelling the attendance of witnesses before the Plebiscitary Commission and the Registration and Election Boards upon the request of the Commission duly made to some appropriate Chilean or Peruvian authority as the case may be and for the punishment of witnesses who when duly summoned refuse to testify before the Commission or any Registration and Election Board or who are guilty of perjury. CLAIMS FOR REIMBURSEMENT AND ACCOUNTING Chile contends that the Arbitrator shall impose as a condition of the plebiscite that in case Chile is defeated in the plebiscite she should be reimbursed for her expenditures for public works during the past forty years in Tacna and Arica. Peru on the other hand insists that any investments or improvements made by Chile in Tacna and Arica since 1894 were made at her own peril, and that Peru is not responsible for their value. And, furthermore, Peru contends that not only has Chile already received the ten million pesos provided by the Treaty through her prolonged occupancy of Tacna and Arica after the expiration of the original ten year period, but that Peru is entitled to an award of twenty million pesos in addition by way of payment on account of Chile’s prolonged and illegal occupation of the territory.

Although the Arbitrator is of the view that the conclusions heretofore set forth in this Opinion and Award are in effect decisive of these claims set up by the respective Parties, the Arbitrator does not consider himself to be entitled by the Terms of Submission to pass upon these claims as substantive matters. The Arbitrator is empowered to decide whether or not a plebiscite shall be held, and having decided in the affirmative the Arbitrator is then empowered to fix the conditions of the plebiscite, but the Arbitrator holds that the conditions which it is within his competence to impose are those which relate to the holding of the plebiscite and the matters which were to have been established by the special protocol contemplated by the Treaty of Ancon. The claims presented by the Parties do not relate to the manner in which the plebiscite is to be carried out. The Arbitrator therefore dismisses these claims’ of both Parties on the ground that they are not within his jurisdiction. THE PAYMENT OF THE TEN MILLIONS Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon provided, in the third paragraph relating to the contemplated special protocol, that this protocol should prescribe “the manner in which the plebiscite is to be carried out, and the terms and time for the payment of the ten millions by the nation which remains the owner of the provinces of Tacna and Arica.” As this payment by the terms of Article 3 depends upon and is to follow the plebiscite, it is deemed to be within the duty of the Arbitrator under the agreement of submission to determine the time and terms of payment. The matter is one in which there is no controlling legal principle. It is a question to be determined within certain general limits of fairness in the light of the treaty obligation. Chile in her case has informed the Arbitrator of her present desires, but doubtless because in her view of the case it was unnecessary to do so, Peru has not discussed the plan for the payment of the ten millions suggested by Chile or indicated her present views on the subject. Chile, however, in addition to proposing a plan of payment, has also indicated her present readiness to accept an arrangement which was at one time acceptable to Peru, namely, the arrangement for which provision was made in the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol of April 16, 1898. This was as follows: “Article XV. The indemnity of ten million pesos prescribed by Article III of the Treaty of October 20, 1883, will be paid by the country that shall become the owner of the provinces of Tacna and Arica on the following terms: one million within the period of ten days, reckoned from the proclamation of the general results of the plebiscite; another million within the following year; and two millions at the end of each year of the subsequent four years.

“The sums referred to will be paid in Peruvian silver soles or in Chilean silver coin of the kind that circulated at the time when the Treaty of October 20, 1883, was signed. “Article XVI. The total products of the customhouse at Arica are assigned for the payment of the indemnity mentioned in the preceding article.” As there is no apparent reason for adopting a basis of a different sort, the Arbitrator holds that the payment of the ten millions should be made in the following amounts and at the following times: One million within ten days after the proclamation by the Arbitrator of the result of the plebiscite; A second million within the year following; and Two millions at the end of each year of the subsequent four years. These sums shall be paid in Peruvian silver soles or in Chilean silver coin equivalent to the kind in circulation on October 20, 1883. The total revenues of the Custom House at Arica are assigned as security for the above payments. THIRD—THE BOUNDARY QUESTIONS—TARATA AND CHILCAYA The remaining questions relate to the boundaries of the territory to which Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon refers. The Article describes that territory as follows: “The territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica, bounded on the north by the River Sama from its source in the Cordilleras on the frontier of Boliva to its mouth at the sea, on the south by the ravine and River Camarones, on the east by the Republic of Bolivia, and on the west by the Pacific Ocean, shall continue in the possession of Chile subject to Chilean laws and authority during a period of ten years, to be reckoned from the date of the ratification of the present treaty of peace.” THE NORTHERN BOUNDARY—TARATA Immediately after the signing of the treaty, a dispute arose as to the northern boundary and the controversy has continued ever since. Chile contends that the treaty established a river line, that is, the River Sama from its source to its mouth and that this line should be defined and followed as the northern boundary irrespective of any Peruvian provincial lines. According to Chile’s contention, the territory in question would

embrace not only territory of the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica but also a portion of the Peruvian province of Tarata. Peru insists that Article 3 of the treaty dealt solely with the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica and that no part of the province of Tarata was included. It is not open to dispute that at the time of the signing of the treaty there existed under Peruvian law, and had existed for several years, a Peruvian department known as the Department of Tacna and that this department embraced three provinces known as the Provinces of Tacna, Arica and Tarata. It is also clear that the reference in the treaty to the provinces of Tacna and Arica must be taken to relate to the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica. If it were not for the description of the river Sama as a boundary no one would suggest that any territory was included which was not within the limits of the two Peruvian provinces named. The argument for the inclusion of other territory is that the reference to the two provinces must be deemed to be controlled by the described river line. The difficulty with this argument is that there is in fact no such river line as the treaty describes. There is no river Sama that has “its source in the Cordilleras on the frontier of Bolivia.” The river Sama as known and defined is formed by the confluence of the River Chaspaya and the River Tala, a confluence which takes place west of the town of Tarata (the capital of the Peruvian province of that name). From that junction the river Sama flows to its mouth at the sea cutting across the! northern portion of the Peruvian province of Tacna. So that there was territory of that province lying south of the river Sama and the Peruvian province of Arica lay to the south of the province of Tacna. There is a dispute as to which of the tributaries of the river Sama east of the junction of the rivers Chaspaya and Tala should be regarded as the main affluent or the continuation of the river Sama, but neither the Chaspaya nor the Tala, nor their tributaries, conform to the description of the treaty and enable’ the Arbitrator to establish any line of the river Sama as described “from its source in the Cordilleras on the frontier of Bolivia to its mouth at the sea.” The Chilean Case states that the Chilean geographer, Alejandro Bertrand, in a report to the Government of Chile in 1903, suggested “as a solution of the problem brought up by the fact that the River Sama does not rise in the mountains bordering upon Bolivia,” the adoption of a line that would unite the source of the Chaspaya or of the Ticalaco (which appears to be a tributary of the Tala) with the intersection of the two old Peruvian departments of Tacnan and Puno at the Bolivian border. In this uncertainty, Chile insisting upon a river line suggests that the Arbitrator appoint a Special Commissioner to investigate and report for the purpose of establishing a boundary line in the area intervening between the head of one or the other of the tributaries of the river Sama and the frontier of Bolivia. After the treaty was signed, Chile established her occupation on the line of the river Ticalaco, a river which lies about midway between the northern tributary of the Sama, the Chaspaya, and a southern tributary, (apparently through the Tala) the Estique, but

she insists that she has always claimed the Chaspaya as the true source of the Sama. Peru at once protested against occupation under the treaty of any portion of the Province of Tarata and has always maintained this position. Chile, under her claim of right, proceeded to establish a Chilean Province of Tacna, including a sub-delegation of Tarata. In a dispatch of July 14, 1886, from the Peruvian Consul in Iquique to the Peruvian Foreign Minister, it is stated that Chile had assumed jurisdiction in three of the districts of the Peruvian Province of Tarata, that is, the districts of Tarata, Tarucachi and Estique. It is quite apparent that the representatives of the Parties who negotiated the treaty, had little exact knowledge of the geography of the region to the east and wrote into the treaty an inaccurate description. It should also be said that there has not been furnished to the Arbitrator satisfactory evidence as to the exact line of the old Peruvian provincial boundaries. The record is strikingly deficient in appropriate maps and geographical information bearing upon these questions. Despite these difficulties, the Arbitrator finds certain controlling considerations in the construction of the treaty. The fundamental question is the intention of the Parties and any artificial construction is to be avoided. The Peruvian Provinces of Tacna and Arica were well known political divisions with their respective capitals of like names, and the Peruvian Province of Tarata was also a well known political division with its capital of the same name. It is difficult to believe that representatives of Governments who, however lacking in exact geographical information, knew of these political divisions, and the jurisdictions they denoted, and particularly the most important towns they embraced, would have used the expression—“the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica” when they intended to embrace not only such territory but also a portion of the territory of a distinct political division known as Tarata. The argument that this reference to political divisions should yield to a described geographical boundary assumes that there is a definite geographical boundary laid down, which is not the case, or that the description of a geographical boundary indicates an intention to include territory lying outside the provinces of Tacna and Arica, when in truth the description of a geographical boundary which did not exist serves to indicate that they did not know where the geographical boundary lay which they were attempting to describe. The reference to the political divisions known as the provinces of Tacna and Arica cannot, in the judgment of the Arbitrator, be overridden by a description of a line which it is impossible to lay down as described. Some light is thrown upon the question by the history of the negotiations leading to the Treaty of Ancon. In the conference of October 28, 1880, Chile stated as one of the conditions of peace:—“Retention on the part of Chile of the territory of Moquegua, Tacna, and Arica, occupied by Chilean forces.” In the protocol of February 11, 1882,39 Chile made the condition: “Occupation of the region of Tacna and Arica for ten years.” Reference is made by Chile in her Counter Case to a proposal of the Minister of the

United States in Chile to the Chilean Foreign Minister, in the course of good offices, that Chile should have the right to purchase “the Peruvian territory between the river Camarones and the River Sama,” but if any significance is to be attached to this as a proposal of a river line exclusively, it is met by the fact that in the later protocol of May 10, 1883,40 the Parties did not set forth a river line but stated that “The territories of Tacna and Arica shall continue in the possession of Chile,” etc. There were further discussions on the wording of the paragraph in question when the time came for the signature of the formal treaty, and it is to be regretted that the record is not more complete on this point. There is some evidence in the record which indicates that Chile endeavored to obtain the insertion of the expression “Department of Tacna” which would have embraced the provinces of Tacna, Arica and Tarata. The Peruvian Counter Case quotes from the work of Gonzalo Bulnes (“Guerra del Pacifico”—vol. III, p. 578) what purports to be a telegram from the Chilean Foreign Minister, then in Lima, to the President of Chile, on October 18, 1883, two days before the signing of the treaty, as follows: “In subscribing the definitive treaty, read the telegram of Aldunate to Santa Maria (President of Chile) dated October 18, 1883, we said that the department (departmento) de Tacna was to remain for ten years in the power of Chile; and the negotiators of Iglesias (President of Peru) argue that what was agreed in May, covered only the area, until the plebiscite of the provinces (provincias) of Tacna and Arica as far as the river Sama, and not the additional province of Tarata (no la otra provincia de Tarata) which reaches up to Locumba and which also forms part of the departmento de Tacna. In the presence of this difficulty, I do not dare to decide anything by myself. If we, concluding a treaty, had said that we ceded the territories (territorios) of Santiago and Victoria, would it be understood that we also ceded Rancagua? Everything is prepared for the delivery of Lima and Callao on Saturday; and the present difficulty causes grave perturbation.” While Chile has not had the opportunity to reply to the Peruvian Counter Case, it is apparent from the Chilean Counter Case that some question of this sort had arisen, as it gives a telegram of October 19, 1883, from the President of Chile to the Chilean negotiators as follows: “The telegrams and records that we have consulted convince us that we always have pointed to the River Sama as the boundary line between the Peruvian territory and that territory that is to be turned over to Chile. According to the conditions of the agreement we took the Sama in its entire extension, from the coast to the point where it branches off and continues to the Bolivian border, all settlements south of that line to be included in the territory to be ceded. When the said line was fixed it was also kept in mind

that the entire road leading into Bolivia—a fact that could not be overlooked —remained in the territory to be ceded, according to the result of the plebiscite. If, by taking the Sama as the boundary line, Tarata remains under our control, let it be so. We are keeping our word. We did not speak of departments but of territories when we mentioned Tacna and Arica before, because we fixed a line such as the Sama, which might or might not be a boundary line in the Peruvian territorial divisions of those regions.”

Peru has had no opportunity to comment on this telegram. The inference to be drawn from these exchanges is that the question of including territory of the province of Tarata was in the minds of the Parties. If Chile sought to include Tarata, she did not succeed in securing a reference to the province of Tarata in the description. If it was thought that the mention of the river boundary would effect this purpose, the fact remains that the description of the territory as that “of the provinces of Tacna and Arica” was put in the treaty and the river line was deprived of a controlling significance by its inaccuracy. If it be assumed, as appears to be the fact, that the question of the inclusion of territory of the province of Tarata was presented, it is deemed to be decisive that the treaty does not set forth a river line exclusively, and that the words “the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica” were retained. There is no sufficient evidence of intention, and no provision of sufficient precision, as to justify the conclusion that any territory of the province of Tarata was included in Article 3. It does not militate against this view that the exact line of the Peruvian provincial boundary is not defined in the record, or that there may have been some uncertainty in relation thereto. The capital of the Province of Tarata was the town of Tarata, a town of considerable importance. This furnishes a test as, on the Chilean claim, the town of Tarata was to go to Chile. But it is plain that neither of the Parties supposed that the town of Tarata was in the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica. So, also, arguments based on the strategic or economic importance of Tarata must be dismissed. If Chile for any reason attached importance to the retention of Tarata, it is all the more significant that she did not include in the treaty any reference to the Province of Tarata, while making distinct reference to the provinces of Tacna and Arica. Not only the first paragraph, but also the second and third paragraphs, of Article 3 of the treaty refer to these provinces. The second paragraph states that the plebiscite will decide “whether the territories of the above mentioned provinces will remain under the dominion and sovereignty of Chile or continue to form part of Peru.” It is added that either of the two countries to which “the provinces of Tacna and Arica” may remain annexed shall make the described payment. The third paragraph provides that the special protocol will

prescribe the terms and time of the payment to be made by the nation “which may remain in possession of the provinces of Tacna and Arica.” The Arbitrator decides that no part of the Peruvian Province of Tarata is included in the territory covered by the provisions of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon; that the territory to which Article 3 relates is exclusively that of the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica as they stood on October 20, 1883; and that the northern boundary of that part of the territory covered by Article 3 which was within the Peruvian Province of Tacna is the River Sama. THE SOUTHERN BOUNDARY—CHILCAYA The southern boundary of the territory covered by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon is stated therein to be “the ravine and River Camarones.” In this relation, it should be noted that Article 2 of the treaty provided for the cession by Peru to Chile in perpetuity of “the territory of the littoral province of Tarapaca, the boundaries of which are, on the north the ravine and River Camarones.” It thus appears that by both these articles the boundary between the Peruvian Province of Tarapaca, ceded absolutely to Chile, and of the territory of the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica to be continued, as stated, in the possession of Chile, is given simply as “the ravine and the River Camarones.” There appears to be no dispute as to this boundary between the mouth of the river. Camarones at the Pacific Ocean and Arapunta, the junction of the two principal tributaries, the Ajatama coming in from the northeast and the Caritaya coming in from the southeast. Chile contends that the Ajatama is the true continuation of the Camarones and claims the line of the Ajatama to the point where it is joined by the Rio Blanco and from that point draws a line to the Bolivian frontier which is based largely upon what Chile asserts to have been the legal or traditional boundary line between the territories of the Peruvian provinces of Arica and Tarapaca. This is in accord with a Chilean decree of May 4, 1904. Chile, however, asks that an expert commission be appointed by the Arbitrator to fix the line. Peru expresses her intention of abiding by the decision which the Arbitrator may consider to be appropriate and equitable, but is understood to claim the river Caritaya as the true boundary from Arepunta to its source, apparently maintaining that that source intersects with the Bolivian frontier. Between these two lines lie the valuable borax deposits of Chilcaya, over which there has been a serious controversy between rival private claimants. This dispute may have been influential in bringing about the delimitation decree made by Chile in 1904. Much of the evidence introduced in this record consists of reports and opinions which were pertinent to the controversy between private litigants. In the litigation, it was held in 1904, by the Chilean court in Arica that the plaintiffs, claimants of the borate mines of

Chilcaya under Tarapaca titles had failed to sustain their claims by a preponderance of evidence and that the judgment should be in favor of the defendants in possession claiming under Arica titles. The court held, however, that it was not competent to decide on the boundaries between Arica and Pisagua (Tarapaca). On January 3, 1905, this decision was affirmed on technical grounds by the Chilean Court of Appeals of Tacna. Both Parties seem to agree that the treaty line and the old Peruvian provincial boundary line are the same, and the Arbitrator taking the clause in question in the light of its context is of this view. It is impossible, however, to fix this line upon the data submitted to the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator decides that the southern boundary of the territory covered by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon is the Peruvian provincial boundary between the Peruvian provinces of Arica and Tarapaca as they stood on October 20, 1883. CONCLUSION The Arbitrator accordingly decides: That the territory to which Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon relates, and the disposition of which is to be determined by the plebiscite to be held as hereinbefore provided, is the territory of the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica as they stood on October 20, 1883; that is to say, so much of the territory of the said Peruvian province of Tacna as is bounded on the north by the River Sama, and the whole of the said Peruvian province of Arica; That the Arbitrator reserves the power and right to appoint a Special Commission consisting of three persons, one to be nominated by Chile, another to be nominated by Peru, and the third to be designated by the Arbitrator, to draw the boundary lines of the territory covered by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon in accordance with the determination of the Arbitrator in this Opinion and Award; that if either Party fails to make its nomination of a member of said Commission within four months after the date of this Opinion and Award, the Arbitrator shall have the power and right to appoint a member of said Special Commission to fill the vacancy so arising; and that vacancies in said Special Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments; That within four months after the date of this Opinion and award, each Party shall deposit a sum to be fixed by the Arbitrator in an institution to be named by him in order to meet the expenses and compensation of the members of said Special Commission and the Parties shall within two months after the date of this Opinion and Award submit to the Arbitrator their estimates of said expenses and compensation; that the failure of either Party to submit such estimate, shall not prevent the decision of the Arbitrator as to the amount of such deposit, and if either Party fails to make deposit of the amount fixed by the Arbitrator, the other Party may make the deposit required and the amount so advanced by either Party on behalf of the

other shall be added to or deducted from the amount to be received or paid by such Party, making the advance, under the second paragraph of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon; That all the periods hereinbefore mentioned may be extended or changed by the Arbitrator; That the holding of the plebiscite as hereinbefore provided shall not be delayed to await the proceedings or report of said Special Commission on boundaries but that either Party may challenge the right of any person to register or vote in said plebiscite upon the ground that he was born or resided as the case may be, outside the limits of the territory covered by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon as defined in this Opinion and Award, and the Plebiscitary Commission shall cause a separate record to be kept of all such persons whose right to register and vote may be affected by the report of the Special Commission on boundaries, and the votes of such persons shall also be separately kept. That the Arbitrator reserves the power and right to pass upon, adopt, modify or reject the report of said Special Commission, or to appoint a new Special Commission and pass upon its report in like manner; That if it appears from the report of the Plebiscitary Commission that the result of the plebiscite may depend upon the votes of persons whose right to register or vote may be in doubt until the boundaries of the territory covered by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon have been fixed as hereinbefore provided, the Arbitrator shall withhold the proclamation of the result of the plebiscite until said boundaries have been fixed and the right of such persons to register and vote has been determined accordingly. IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed. DONE in triplicate at the City of Washington on the fourth day of March in the year one thousand nine hundred and twenty-five, and of the Independence of the United States the one hundredth and forty-ninth. [SEAL] CALVIN COOLIDGE By the President: CHARLES E. HUGHES, Secretary of State

derived, in translating the words, which, in the text of the Treaty, say literally: “expirado este plazo”, which in the English language is equivalent to “At the expiration of this time limit”, or “this time limit having expired”, by the words “after the expiration of”, which, translated into Spanish, mean “después de expirado”; the phrase given in the authentic text thus peremptorily fixes a time limit of ten years for possession by Chile, and fixes the time for the realization of the plebiscite. Had the Honorable Arbitrator obtained a correct and unimpeachable translation of the Spanish words used in the Treaty of Ancon, he would necessarily have arrived at the logical conclusion that the plebiscite should have taken place in 1894; and he could not have reached the unacceptable conclusion, which deeply wounds the Peruvian national pride, that Chile had the right to hold our provinces after the time limit expressly stipulated in the Treaty of Ancon, thus leaving the indefinite prolongation of the said period at the arbitrary will of one of the parties.

It is therefore necessary to declare respectfully, before the Honorable Arbitrator, that Peru cannot accept the declaration as to the legitimacy of the Chilean sovereignty over the territories of Tacna and Arica, or the legitimacy of their occupation during the years subsequent to 1894. My Government cannot understand the argument contained in the Opinion and Award to the effect that since no provision was made in the third clause for the nullification of the obligations at the expiration of the time limit, such nullification could not have taken place. The nullification, by its nature, need not be stipulated by the parties, since it is automatically effected when certain circumstances are brought about, without the necessity for a previous agreement; and it is a general principle in law that one reason for nullifying a contract is failure to fulfil the obligations within the time stipulated. Moreover, the time stipulated was ten years, as is declared specifically and unequivocally by the text of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon, when it says, “the territory of the provinces … shall continue in the possession of Chile and subject to Chilean laws and authority for a period of ten years, from the date of the ratification of the present Treaty of Peace”. As the ratification was effected on March 28, 1884, the possession by Chile and the subjection of the territory to the legislation and authorities of that country legally ended on March 28, 1894. The failure to effect the plebiscite upon the expiration of that day, that is, immediately after March 28, 1894, constituted a failure to comply with the third clause and consequently made it void. While it is true that in the Appendix to the Case of Peru the Treaty was presented in the form given in Foreign Relations of the United States43 where it is roughly translated “after the expiration of”, the obvious meaning of “after” is “upon”, or “at”, or “immediately after” the expiration of the ten year time limit, and not “at any time after”, as the Honorable Arbitrator evidently assumed. In the Case of Peru, on pages 22

The importance of this error of translation is shown on page 7 of the Opinion and Award, where the following language is used: “The plebiscite was to be had ‘after the expiration of that term,’ that is, after the ten years, but no limit was defined.” In point of fact, correctly translated, there was a specific limit of time, and that limit was “at the expiration of that term,” which was limited, by the Treaty, to ten years from the date of ratification of the Treaty. The Treaty was ratified March 28, 1884. The ten years therefore expired on March 28, 1894. The word “plazo” is defined in Spanish dictionaries to mean “time limit”, so that the language of the Treaty, correctly translated, expressly fixes a time limit for the holding of the plebiscite. The exact translation of the words would be “expirado”, “having expired”, “este”, “this”, “plazo”, “time limit”, which is the equivalent of “at the expiration of that term”, and clearly places a time limit upon Chilean possession of the provinces, and upon the holding of the plebiscite. The Spanish word “después” means “after”, in the sense adopted by the Honorable Arbitrator. No such word is found in the Treaty, and no other word that could be properly interpreted to mean “after” in such a sense. To insert the word “después”—“after”—in the second paragraph of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon is to change entirely its meaning and add an express provision not therein contained. The consequence of this error of translation runs through the entire Opinion and Award. It is made the basis of excusing Chile for failing to surrender possession of Tacna and Arica at the time named in the Treaty, when the right of Chilean possession ceased, and

it is used to relieve Chile from responsibility for all the acts committed under the claim of sovereignty illegally committed by Chile since March 28, 1894, inasmuch as possession of the provinces should, under the terms of the Treaty, have been yielded to Peru at that time. It must also be noted that the Honorable Arbitrator seems to have failed to give weight to the conclusive proofs offered by Peru relative to the expulsions, spoliation of property, acts of terrorism and fraudulent colonization of Chileans on lands of the Peruvians, facts which are so notorious to the world that the Honorable Arbitrator might well have taken judicial notice thereof, and which are sufficient, if they are duly examined and appreciated, to leave no doubt as to the error of submitting this controversy to solution through a plebiscite. The manner with which the Opinion and Award has seemed to treat these acts of vandalism, outrage, and oppression has led the Chileans to renew their persecutions against the Peruvians of Tacna and Arica even since the Award was published, as if they were reassured that they could continue to commit such crimes with impunity. Indeed, through our Embassy, we have informed the Honorable Arbitrator of the recent criminal acts, among which are the following: A Peruvian merchant, Antonio Mollo, with his family, on the 11th of March was violently driven out from Putre. In Tarata the Peruvian homes of Musso, Bulis and Bravo were assaulted, and the last named was killed. The schools of Tacna have been closed. Martines Birne’s house on the Chilean side of the River Sama in Tacna was also assaulted, after the Award was handed down, by three Chilean carabineers and the master of the house and two other Peruvians, Roman y Angel Yanes, and all the occupants of the house were tied and beaten. Threats and violence were committed against defenseless Peruvian inhabitants of Tarata, the women being outraged by Chilean carabineers. The Peruvians Felix Nalvarte, Timoteo Rodriguez, Vicente Mamani, Pedro Lamrec and Lorenzo Flores having escaped from the persecutions of Chilean authorities in Arica, reached Locumba and advise that two hundred Peruvians resident in Arica were shipped from that port to the south of Chile to avoid their vote in the plebiscite. New detachments of Chilean carabineers have been established on the Ticalaco and Tarata rivers cutting off communications between Locumba and Tarata and from there are shooting in upon the defenseless inhabitants of Locumba. Chilean forces are terrorizing the Peruvian inhabitants of the territories involved in the plebiscite with the purpose of forcing them to vote in the plebiscite in favor of Chile, and when they resist they are persecuted and expelled from the territory. Steps are being now taken by Chilean officials to compel Peruvian citizens by force to sign documents of allegiance in which they request that they continue under Chilean sovereignty. Carlos Becerra, Manuel Corvacho, Felix Baluarte, Saturnino Florez, Miguel Corvacho, Nataniel Corvacho, Luciano Lira, Benjamin Navarro, Tomas Chambo y Carlos Otoya have arrived at Locumba, fugitives from Chilean persecutions in Arica, saying that their families have been cruelly outraged. They were forced to flee, making the trip on foot, to avoid being embarked for the South of Chile.

This picture of actual conditions which has been sketched shows that there has truly been a violation of the essential conditions for the plebiscite, which would justify Peru in refusing to accept the decision; but, as it is the invariable policy of our country to comply with international responsibilities, we will not fail to carry out the Award rendered, notwithstanding the errors which have been pointed out, and in spite of the fact that they so deeply wound the sentiments of justice which actuate Peru in insisting that Chile by her refusal to hold the plebiscite when it should have been held, in 1894, brought about the nullification of the third clause of the Treaty of Ancon. That clause was unfulfilled by wish of Chile alone, which country has not had and could not show the slightest legitimate excuse for its recalcitrant attitude. The guarantees which we are about to enumerate specifically, if granted and declared by the Honorable Arbitrator—guarantees which are unanimously required by our national opinion supporting the just desires of the Peruvian population that has been expelled from our provinces, after suffering countless outrages—would respond to the principles of elementary justice. Without such guarantees, the rights of our voters would be destroyed; intimidated by Chilean acts of violence, they would hesitate to return to the land in which they were born. Even today those that have remained still continue to be subjected to the cruelty of oppressors who, by the terms of the Opinion and Award, consider themselves amply justified in continuing the abuses and violence which they have endured for more than thirty years. The guarantees which the Government of Peru asks of the Honorable Arbitrator, as a condition for assuring the fairness of the voting, are the following: First: the evacuation of the territories of Tacna and Arica by the Chilean civil authorities, army, gendarmerie and police force, who should be replaced by American authorities and forces not only during the plebiscite, but immediately, in order to put an end to the hostilities which are still being carried on against Peruvian inhabitants who still remain in these territories, and to make it possible for the natives who are outside of the territories to return freely, without the fear of becoming the victims of a repetition of the outrages and crimes which have been committed and continue to be committed even after the arbitrator’s decision, since it is absolutely necessary for the inhabitants of the said territories to remain free from all moral and material pressure which tends to curtail their personal liberty and their freedom to vote, as is universally established by the doctrines and precedents concerning plebiscites. Second: that the installation and operation of the Plebiscite Commission be hastened, in order that its high, impartial authority may at once begin to govern the provinces of Tacna and Arica, avoid the continuation of acts of violence, expulsion and internment in the southern provinces of Chile of the

Peruvian inhabitants who should take part in the plebiscite, and permit Peruvians and Chileans, on an equal footing, to prepare directly in the disputed territories the conditions for their participation in the plebiscite. Third: that the time limit for the taking of the plebiscite vote commence to be reckoned from the date of the civil and military evacuation of the provinces of Tacna and Arica, a procedure which is in accordance with the known precedents and very particularly with that of the plebiscite of Upper Silesia, in which a representative of the United States actually intervened (second and fourth annexes to Article 88 of the Versailles Treaty).44 Fourth: that it be declared that Peruvians who have resided in Tacna and Arica for five years and who have been expelled by the Chilean authorities, have not lost the character of residents. The same period is fixed in the Award in treating of residents with a right to vote, and the right to make claims is recognized in similar cases, especially in the plebiscite of Schleswig (Versailles Treaty) and in that of Upper Silesia (fourth annex to Article 88 of the Treaty of Versailles). Fifth: that the Honorable Arbitrator arrange for the residents to be required to prove the character of the occupation or industry in which they are engaged and from which they gain their livelihood, since this would be the only method of avoiding fraud, which the Government of Peru knows has been perpetrated systematically for several years and continues to be perpetrated at present in Tacna and Arica, in order to give the appearance of the existence of a large Chilean resident population. It is obvious that this requirement should be clearly established because it is the one most likely to assure the honesty of the voting. Sixth: that it be taken into consideration with reference to the provisions contained in that part of the Award relative to the qualification of voters, by which the right to vote is taken from a person who has been imprisoned by virtue of a judicial sentence for common crimes, that trials for such alleged offenses have for years been instituted by the Chilean authorities, a party interested in the present controversy, on ostensible, simulated and fraudulent grounds, for the very purpose of putting such Peruvians out of the way and incapacitating them from voting in any eventual plebiscite. These requests do not involve any substantial modification of the Opinion and Award. They concern only such measures as are absolutely necessary for the faithful execution of the plebiscite, which it is indispensable to have declared expressly as the only effective means of guaranteeing the liberty and honesty of the voting in the plebiscite, more particularly in the present case, above all others, because it has reference to a

country which for the last thirty years has made our countrymen the victims of the most reprehensible violence. In making these requests, my Government accepts the provisions contained in the second part of the second Article of the protocol of arbitration, which authorizes the Honorable Arbitrator to determine the procedure and time limits for the execution of the Opinion and Award. I have [etc.] By the Peruvian Defense Commission, SOLÓN POLO President

The Award was the result of a careful examination of the elaborate record submitted by the parties. This record fully covered all the questions treated in the views now submitted on behalf of the Government of Peru and argued all the questions which it is now sought to reargue. Under the Terms of Submission agreed to by both parties as well as by general principles of International Law these questions have been decided by the Award “finally and without appeal.” This reply well might end here. In deference, however, to the great nations who are the parties to this arbitration, and keeping in mind the importance of a correct understanding of the Arbitrator’s Award, and the proper procedure thereunder, the Arbitrator deems it advisable to make certain additional observations. A large part of the communication now presented to the Arbitrator is based upon a claim of an improper translation of Article III of the Treaty of Ancon, it being claimed that this Article as translated should read “at” and not “after” the expiration of the term of ten years. As pointed out in the Award, the translation complained of is the translation submitted by Peru in her Case, and in the opinion of the Arbitrator fairly interprets the meaning of the passage in question. The problem before the Arbitrator was one of substance—of construction rather than translation, a problem which had been debated by the parties long before this arbitration gave rise to any questions of English translation. It goes far beyond the relatively unimportant and largely academic question of the use of any particular English word in translating the Treaty whether that word be “after”, “at”, “on”, or “upon”, all of which are used at various places in the Peruvian documents. It may also be said that the Award of the Arbitrator is in entire harmony with the practical construction placed upon the Treaty by the parties in their dealings with one another after the expiration of the ten-year period, from 1894 to 1912; the parties repeatedly negotiated for a plebiscite and in 1898 agreed on the terms of a protocol providing for a plebiscite which was not ratified by the Chilean Congress. The President of the Peruvian Defense Commission suggests that the Arbitrator failed to give weight to the “proofs offered by Peru relative to the expulsions, spoliation of property, acts of terrorism and fraudulent colonization of Chileans on lands of the Peruvians,” (page 6 of communication under consideration). There was a large body of testimony submitted by both parties on this subject and the Arbitrator weighed the evidence with the greatest care but did not find the proofs sufficient on which to base a finding “that a fair plebiscite in the present circumstances cannot be held under proper conditions or that a plebiscite should not be had” (Award of Arbitrator page 36). Second: The Arbitrator also notes the specific instances of expulsion and oppression which the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission charges have taken place

since the rendition of the Award. These charges should be brought to the attention of the Plebiscitary Commission when it shall have been constituted. The Arbitrator notes with satisfaction that the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission, although expressing the opinion that conditions of Tacna and Arica as described by him “would justify Peru in refusing to accept the decision,” gives formal assurance that “as it is the invariable policy of our (his) country to comply with international responsibilities” Peru “will not fail to carry out the Award rendered.” Third: With regard to the various guarantees with respect to the conditions of the plebiscite requested by the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission, the Arbitrator, so far as his formal ruling is concerned, contents himself with the reply already made to the views submitted on behalf of the Peruvian Government, namely, that the conditions of the plebiscite constituted one of the questions submitted to the Arbitrator; that the Award was made after careful consideration of the record submitted by the parties, and that both by the agreement of the parties and under the principles of International Law the Award is final and without appeal. However, the Arbitrator makes the following general observations: As already stated, the conditions under which the plebiscite was to be held constituted one of the questions submitted to the Arbitrator. The parties agreed upon a procedure which was approved by the Arbitrator and which gave to both ample opportunity to be heard. Peru, with full knowledge, made no requests even in the alternative for findings in regard to the conditions of the plebiscite while these conditions were sub judice—neither the requests she now makes nor any others. Of course, orderly procedure and the agreement under which this Arbitration was held forbid that a party to the arbitration should wait until after the Award is rendered before making requests for findings. Nevertheless, the Arbitrator did not permit the interests of Peru to be prejudiced through her failure to make requests for findings in regard to the conditions of the plebiscite. He considered the whole question carefully and fixed the conditions under which the plebiscite was to be held so as to afford the most ample protection to the rights of both parties to the arbitration.

The Arbitrator furthermore makes the following observations responsive to each of the several requests submitted by the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission: “First: the evacuation of the territories of Tacna and Arica by the Chilean civil authorities, army, gendarmerie and police force, who should be replaced by American authorities and forces not only during the plebiscite, but immediately,” etc.

The Arbitrator is constrained to point out that this request goes beyond the scope of the authority of the Arbitrator under the Terms of Submission and the findings of the Award. The Supplementary Act of the Washington Protocol provides that even in the event that the Arbitrator decides that a plebiscite need not be held, “pending an agreement as to the disposition of the territory the administrative organization of the provinces shall not be disturbed.” Therefore, even in the event the Arbitrator had held Chile’s present possession unlawful, he would have been without power to direct the evacuation of the provinces “pending an agreement as to the disposition of the territory.” But the Award on the contrary holds that “the fair construction (of the Treaty of Ancon) is that Chile was to retain possession pending the holding of the plebiscite and that thus retaining possession her administrative authority continued.” (Award, p. 20). The foregoing observations, however, are without prejudice to the exercise of the powers of the Plebiscitary Commission as provided in the Award which are ample to guarantee to every qualified voter full assurance of personal protection as well as the assurance that his vote may be freely cast and will be fairly counted. The Award provides “that the Plebiscitary Commission shall have in general complete control over the plebiscite,” and the Arbitrator has named as President of this Commission General Pershing, a distinguished American, who himself embodies every guarantee in his character and personality. “Second: that the installation and operation of the Plebiscite Commission be hastened, in order that its high, impartial authority may at once begin to govern the provinces of Tacna and Arica,” etc. In so far as this request merely asks that “the installation and operation of the Plebiscite Commission be hastened,” the Arbitrator points out that it asks for something which depends, first, upon the action of the Government of Peru alone, and, second, upon the action of the Governments of Chile and Peru. In accordance with the terms of the Award, “the members of the Plebiscitary Commission shall be appointed within four months from the date of the rendition of this Award, and the Commission shall assemble in the City of Arica for its first meeting not later than six months from the date of the rendition of this Award. These times may be changed by the Arbitrator.” In other words, the Award merely fixed a maximum time for the appointment of the members of the Commission. The Arbitrator has already appointed the presiding member of the Plebiscitary Commission, as well as the third member of the Special Boundary Commission. Chile has also appointed her member of the Plebiscitary Commission. It is suggested that nothing stands in the way of the constitution of the Commission as soon as similar action shall have been taken by Peru. The Commission once constituted could arrange to hold its first meeting at Arica as soon as the necessary preliminaries shall have been accomplished by the two Governments.

“Third: that the time limit for the taking of the plebiscite vote commence to be reckoned from the date of the civil and military evacuation of the provinces of Tacna and Arica, etc.” This request is governed by the observations of the Arbitrator on the first request since this request also goes beyond the scope of the authority of the Arbitrator under the Terms of Submission and the findings of the Award in that it is predicated on the “civil and military evacuation of the provinces.” “Fourth: that it be declared that Peruvians who have resided in Tacna and Arica for five years and who have been expelled by the Chilean authorities, have not lost the character of residents.” As heretofore pointed out the Arbitrator in fixing the qualifications of the voters did not have the advantage of having before him requests for findings in that regard on the part of Peru. He nevertheless considered the questions involved with great care in the light of the evidence and arguments submitted by both parties. The various provisions of the Award on this subject are interrelated in a general plan. Compliance with this request is therefore not only impossible because of the finality of the Award but unnecessary and inadmissible because it would involve the revision of a plan which was carefully drafted and which in its entirety in the opinion of the Arbitrator does justice between the parties. “Fifth: that the Honorable Arbitrator arrange for the residents to be required to prove the character of the occupation or industry in which they are engaged and from which they gain their livelihood, since this would be the only method of avoiding fraud,” etc. It is the duty of the Plebiscitary Commission to consider all the evidence as to the qualifications of voters in order to prevent fraudulent voting. This request should therefore be brought to the attention of the Commission for its consideration. “Sixth: that it be taken into consideration with reference to the provisions contained in that part of the Award relative to the qualification of voters, by which the right to vote is taken from a person who has been imprisoned by virtue of a judicial sentence for common crimes, that trials for such alleged offenses have for years been instituted by the Chilean authorities, a party interested in the present controversy, on ostensible, simulated and fraudulent grounds, for the very purpose of putting such Peruvians out of the way and incapacitating them from voting in any eventual plebiscite.” The Arbitrator is not clear as to the precise meaning of this request. The Award provides, p. 42:

“That no person serving a term of imprisonment after sentence for a nonpolitical offense involving moral turpitude … shall be allowed to register or vote.” It will be the duty of the Plebiscitary Commission to interpret and apply this provision according to its letter and spirit to the facts of each individual case presented to the Commission to which it is relevant. It is suggested, therefore, that any specific case or cases which are thought to involve the interpretation or application of this provision be presented to the Plebiscitary Commission. In general, the Award makes the most ample provision for the consideration by the Plebiscitary Commission of all questions involving the qualifications of voters and the prevention of fraud, with a view to insuring to every qualified elector the right to vote. Ample provision is also made for appeal from the Plebiscitary Commission to the Arbitrator. In conclusion it need hardly be said that only a desire to be of service in bringing about a settlement of a long standing controversy between two great nations with whom the United States enjoys the most friendly relations induced the Arbitrator to undertake this arduous task and that so far as in him lies, acting always within the well defined limits of the Terms of Submission, he will leave nothing undone which scrupulous care and attention on his part can accomplish in securing a fair election and equal justice to both parties. The ruling which the Arbitrator has felt constrained to make, viz. that the Award is final and without appeal, has rendered it unnecessary to afford opportunity to the Agents of the Government of Chile to present the views of their Government. A copy of the communication of the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission and of this reply is, however, being furnished to the Agents of the Government of Chile. CALVIN COOLIDGE Arbitrator By the Arbitrator FRANK B. KELLOGG Secretary of State 45 Francis White, Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs.

Pounvexter

Wane

mia eT. °

that the fundamental petitions in its appeal are beyond the powers of the Arbitrator inasmuch as the arbitral agreement precisely provides that in the event of a plebiscite being declared in order the Honorable Arbitrator is authorized to determine the conditions thereof. The principle among such conditions is that the absolute freedom and protection of the voters shall be assured as otherwise the provision for a popular ballot called for in Article III of the Treaty of Ancón would be frustrated. Although the Honorable Arbitrator considers that the plebiscitary commission is sufficient to guarantee a true ballot there can be no doubt that the presence of the authorities and troops of the occupant state would hamper said guarantees with inevitable difficulties and limitations, both as to the prevention of fraud and to avoid and repress violence on the part of the administration in occupation, which it would be practicably [practically] impossible to control effectively in such a manner as to prevent it from harming the other party by availing itself of its dominant position to win the plebiscite by unlawful means if needed. The Government of Peru is confident that should this eventuality materialize the authorities and troops of the occupying state would be replaced by those of some neutral administration. Nor does the Government of Peru concur with the Honorable Arbitrator in his interpretation of the Supplementary Act of the Arbitration Protocol, where from the provision that “even in the event that the Arbitrator decides that a plebiscite need not be held pending an agreement as to the disposition of the territory, the administrative organization of the provinces shall not be disturbed” he deduces that “therefore, even in the event that the Arbitrator had held Chile’s present possession unlawful, he would have been without power to direct the evacuation of the provinces pending an agreement as to the disposition of the territory”. As a matter of fact, the relevant article of the Supplementary Act contemplated only the possibility of not changing the administrative organization of the territory in the event that the holding of the plebiscite would be decided against, clearly establishing thus the fact that said administrative organization could be changed should the contrary occur, namely, a declaration that a plebiscite should be held. The aim of the Peruvian petition is to establish in the territory subject to the plebiscite, a situation of at least relative equity, inasmuch as absolute justice would be an impossibility after the acts of intimidation and terrorism of which the Peruvians have been the victims and which have created a situation sui generis in the Provinces and from which, in all fairness, the only way out would have been the return of the Provinces directly to the rightful owner. Such a situation of equity is all that Peru asks for and it is to be regretted that the Honorable Arbitrator, in all his wisdom and who had and has unlimited powers to determine the conditions of the plebiscite, should have

considered it convenient not to use as yet precisely the most important of them all, thus placing one of the parties in a dominant position and leaving the other in one of evident inferiority. In view of the foregoing, Peru did not deem it necessary to specifically request, in the presentation of her case, the evacuation of the territory because it relied on the justice of the Arbitrator in the event of the rejection of the Peruvian thesis that a plebiscite would not be in order owing to the time elapsed since it should have been held, and owing also to the recalcitrant attitude of Chile and to the acts committed by that country against the Peruvian population, that the Arbitrator would impose such conditions for the plebiscite as would tend to compensate Peru for the evident injustices committed against her during the unlawful occupation of her territory. Our claim for guarantees arises from the unequal position of the two States in the territories in dispute and tends to counteract the effects of the acts of violence and injustice to which one of the parties has made a victim of the other and since the Honorable Arbitrator established other conditions, it would seem reasonable to expect that he would not forget the main feature that stands out above all others in modern plebiscites, namely, that of removing the armed forces of both the interested parties as well as the heads of their administrative bodies. With reference to our petition regarding the right to vote of those who have been expelled it should be stated that although Chilean and Peruvian residents are apparently on an equal footing, it is a well known fact that the residence of the former has not been interrupted while that of the latter has suffered interruptions at the hands of those interested in eliminating them and who were powerful enough to do so. There is besides the grave circumstance that Chile has been able to introduce into the provinces as large a population as she has seen fit, while on the other hand the Peruvians have been continually expelled, and thus unequal conditions leading to an evident injustice have been created with the result that a Chilean with two years residence prior to July, 1922, can vote whereas a Peruvian born outside the territory of Tacna and Arica and with an equal or even longer residence can not vote simply because the Chilean authorities have expelled him. As such a state of affairs would cause an exasperating inequality, the Peruvian Government is reluctant to admit that this is the sense in which the Award should be construed and trusts that the Plebiscitary Commission will take a similar view. The Award admits that expulsions have taken place though not in a number sufficient to warrant a ruling that the plebiscite would be out of order. It declares that it is far from condoning such acts of violence, therefore condemning them, but the logical outcome of such condemnation would appear to have been the provision of such conditions for the plebiscite as would have restored the justice which has been outraged by one of the parties and would to some extent have repaired the harm done to the other. Peru feels, however, that its insistence on this point is now more than ever justified by the fact that

since the rendering of the Award, Chile has deliberately and systematically violated the status created by the Award by removing several hundred natives and other Peruvian residents of the Provinces under occupation and sending them south in order to deprive them of their right to vote in the plebiscite. These removals have been denounced to the Honorable Arbitrator and it should be noted that Chile has not attempted to deny them but simply explains them as a “voluntary exodus of the natives who were attracted by the high wages paid in the nitrate fields”, and since this concerns a relatively large number of voters of which the party that wields force within the territory seeks violently to deprive the other, it would appear to be within the right of the Honorable Arbitrator to reestablish the balance thus disturbed, inasmuch as the Washington Protocol has invested him with full powers which he has expressly reserved for himself in the Award. The Government of Peru with all due respect for the arbitral decision which has been rendered, finds no reason to change the above opinions which have been expressed, and will maintain in its integrity its claim concerning provision of those guarantees which are absolutely indispensable for the holding of a true plebiscite, the execution and results of which will be acceptable to the world at large and which Peruvian citizens may attend on a footing of absolute equality with those of Chile so that the referendum shall express the true popular decision contemplated in the Treaty of Ancon. It is not to be supposed, and Peru in no way supposes, that it was the intention of the Honorable Arbitrator to deny Peruvian residents expelled by the Chilean authorities the right to vote, as the immediate result of such an interpretation would be to constitute a precedent incompatible with the concepts of justice and leading to a continuation of the acts of violence condemned by the Award. Moreover, the agreement entered into, empowered the Honorable Arbitrator to decide on all difficulties arising from the unfulfilled stipulations of Article III of the Treaty of Ancon and should the occasion arise, to determine all the conditions of the plebiscite, therefore the present arbitration confers on the Honorable Arbitrator far fuller jurisdiction of powers than the mere deciding of whether the plebiscitary provision is in force or has expired. To sum up, what Peru has sustained and sustains is that the entire plebiscitary process must rest on the strictest principles of international justice and that it would be a painful contrast for the juridic and moral conscience of the peoples of this continent that, if in Europe, which has just immerged [emerged] from a devastating war which left in its wake a host of violent passions, the peoples involved in the struggle reacted immediately and rectified their frontiers decreeing plebiscites based upon these precepts, [while] here in free America, without the pressure and passions of a recent war, a plebiscite is decreed which differs but very little from those which were imposed under a regime of bayonets to disguise the annexations and the conquests of the victorious soldiers of the Napoleonic Wars.

Notwithstanding the foregoing observations which reflect, though imperfectly, the feelings of the Peruvian people, the Government of Peru, whose high sense of duty both for itself and its international obligations has prompted it to accept the Award, takes note of the statements contained in the last communication from the Honorable Arbitrator to the effect that “the foregoing observations, however, are without prejudice to the exercise of the powers of the Plebiscitary Commission”, powers which “guarantee to every qualified voter full assurance of personal protection as well as the assurance that his vote may be freely cast and will be fairly counted”; that “the plebiscitary commission shall have in general complete control over the plebiscite”; that [it] will “prevent fraudulent voting”; which [that it”] has full powers “involving the qualifications of voters and the prevention of fraud”; insisting also that “ample provision is also made for appeal from the Plebiscitary Commission to the Arbitrator”, and lastly that the Arbitrator “will leave nothing undone which scrupulous care and attention on his part can accomplish in securing a fair election and equal justice to both parties”. The Government of Peru interprets these statements regarding its requests for guarantees in the sense that the Honorable Arbitrator refers them to the Plebiscitary Commission as the body which is empowered to grant them and which will grant them if they prove to be necessary. With due consideration of the foregoing appreciations of the matters herein dealt with, the Government of Peru appoints Mr. Manuel de Freyre Santander as its delegate to the Plebiscitary Commission. The Government of Peru is confident that this decision arrived at, after mature consideration, will be justified by the rigorous impartiality of the proceedings of the Plebiscitary Commission. I have [etc.] HERNÁN VELARDE 47 Received by the Department in English only.

[Enclosure] President Coolidge to the Permian Ambassador (Velarde) IN THE MATTER OF THE TACNA-ARICA ARBITRATION JUNE 29, 1925 The Arbitrator has had the honor to receive and carefully examine the communication addressed to him under date of June 18, 1925, by the Ambassador of Peru and notes with satisfaction the appointment of the Peruvian member of the Plebiscitary Commission. The Arbitrator adheres in all respects to his ruling of April 9, 1925, and is of the opinion that this ruling leaves nothing to be said on his part in response to the present communication of the Government of Peru. A copy of the communication of the Peruvian Government and of this response is being furnished to the Ambassador of the Government of Chile. CALVIN COOLIDGE Arbitrator

By the Arbitrator Frank B. Kertocc Secretary of State

2. In regard to the general situation, the Peruvian member of the Commission on August 10 proposed provisions for neutralization of the territory.

3. Chilean member holds that the Commission cannot even discuss the internal administration of the territory. He offers to consider these matters privately with me but he insists that the Commission is powerless to act. The issue on the Commission’s authority must be made soon. There is no doubt of Chilean oppression and intimidation of Peruvians. Members of my delegation have already discovered several cases. The general attitude of the Peruvian population is one of abject fear. Referring again to the matter of circulation, that is, of travel restrictions, the Chileans hold it to be entirely within their authority, but they will submit decrees to me for suggested changes. The Chilean attitude is very rigid and determined, although they assert that they are ready to guarantee free and fair treatment to the Peruvians. I am trying to keep the proceedings of the Commission confidential in order to avoid public discussion in both countries. Under existing conditions a fair plebiscite is quite impossible and it will be difficult task to bring the parties together, so bitter is the animosity between them. Pershing. VON TRESCKOW 49 Oscar H. Ordonez, Peruvian Commissioner on the Special Boundary Commission.

KELLOGG 50 William Coy Dennis, general legal adviser to the president of the Plebiscitary Commission.

I replied to all of them that I was without specific instructions, but that the impartiality of the United States was beyond question and that the honor of the American Nation required guarantee of fairness to both Chile and Peru; that I could make no report as I had no personal knowledge; that General Pershing could give the Government of the United States full information and that the Chilean Ambassador in Washington was the one to make such representations as Chile wished to make to the American Government; that Chile’s right to govern the territory carried with it the responsibility of maintaining order; and that if either Chile or Peru withdrew from the plebiscite, the step would be disastrous for it as it would be condemned by the public opinion of the world. President Alessandri has telegraphed most emphatically to the intendente to maintain order at all costs and to safeguard the rights of the Plebiscitary Commission, of its agents, and of every qualified voter; and he has telegraphed an appeal to civic organizations to refrain from violence and from retaliation for murder of two Chileans allegedly by two Peruvians, and to give the Peruvian voters all their rights, etc. It is said that Alessandri is once more considering advisability of going to Arica and inviting President of Peru to join him there. Collier. Referring to request in your telegram of September 6, do you, in the light of Collier’s telegram, still wish me to make representations through Embassy at Santiago? I feel that his telegram somewhat alters the situation and might make it advisable to wait to see if Government of Chile takes action that President Alessandri has promised Collier would be taken. If you still desire me to make representations, however, shall I cover the whole ground of your message to Edwards and protest against the conditions in Tacna and Arica which you say prevent a fair election, or do you wish me merely to cover matter in your concluding paragraph, that is, to ask the President of Chile to refrain from making inflammatory speeches, to abstain from anything by which difficulties of situation would be increased, and to lose no opportunity to give calm and pacific counsel to the people. I thought that if, perhaps, I limit myself to this statement, your position might be weakened and Chilean Government will not get the idea that we believe its action will prevent a fair election. In my understanding, however, representations to the President of Peru should merely correspond to last paragraph your telegram. In view of your telegram of August 16, 8 p.m., in which you request that no representations be made without your approval, I hesitate to make any in present instance without your further advice. I suggest also that whatever I do should be done as Secretary of State rather than in the name of the Arbitrator. KELLOGG

Von "Trescxow

Chile’s power to govern the plebiscitary territory during the plebiscite is without limitation. The Commission’s control can exist only in derogation of the power of Chile to exercise authority within the plebiscitary territory, and to this derogation Chile consented in agreeing to the supplementary act appended to the protocol of arbitration by which the Arbitrator was empowered to determine the conditions of the plebiscite. Were the authority of Chile unlimited, the Commission could have no control whatever over the plebiscite. The Commission would have no function and there would exist no reason for its establishment, [apparent omission] inconsistent with the high character of the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator specifically mentioned certain matters requiring regulatory action by the Plebiscitary Commission, in some instances adding instructions as to how the regulatory power of the Commission should be exercised, but manifestly he did not attempt to cover the whole ground and he provided for unknown factors and unforeseeable emergencies by empowering the Commission in broad terms to exercise complete control generally over the plebiscite, thus investing the Commission with the power to deal with everything that is essential to a fair election and equal justice to both parties, subject only to the terms of his opinion and award. (7) The plebiscite looked to by the award is one fair not only in form but in substance. As a corollary it follows that Chile is not entitled to any unfair or inequitable advantage by reason of her right to possess and govern the territory during the period of the plebiscite. Complete control over the plebiscite was given the Commission by the Arbitrator for the very purpose of making certain that Chile should not use possession and control of the territory subject to the plebiscite to obstruct or prevent it. (8) It is well within the powers of the Commission to adopt the proposed resolution setting forth certain prerequisites to a fair plebiscite in Tacna-Arica. Whether the accomplishment of the reforms suggested in that resolution is essential to continuing with the plebiscite is a question of fact addressing itself to the judgment and accomplishments of the Commission rather than being a question of law. The resolution represents a careful and successful effort not to overstep the line between counteractive checking and forestalling misgovernment, on the one hand, which tends to obstruct or prevent a fair plebiscite, all of which is within the competence of the Commission, and taking over the plebiscitary territory, on the other, which is not within the competence of the Commission. The resolution merely points out some instances where it is necessary for Chile to take such action as will amount to the observance of her obligations to exercise her control of the plebiscitary territory so as not to interfere with or prevent a fair plebiscite but to facilitate one. Doubtless Chile will contend that the Plebiscitary Commission can not lawfully adopt the proposed resolution by arguing that the award invests the Commission with only the limited powers specifically mentioned in the award and that under the award the Commission is required to formulate at once regulations governing the plebiscite. This position is untenable both practically and legally. A committee to formulate the election and registration regulations has been constituted but it can neither carry forward nor

complete its labors satisfactorily until after the reforms demanded by the resolution have been accomplished. The resolution will not satisfy the Peruvian member of the Commission because it comes far short of what he believes to be necessary, but I believe that he will vote for it. Its adoption will most certainly be followed by Chilean appeal to the Arbitrator. New developments taking place before the introduction of the resolution may render certain modifications advisable. I am not committing myself absolutely to the resolution as now cabled, but in the light of my previous communications it will serve to indicate the nature of any modifications that may have to be made on short notice. I have made the prerequisites as easy for acceptance by Chile as is consistent with progress. If policy of obstruction be continued, the Commission will be compelled more and more to exercise of its latent powers in order to carry out the award. Pershing. VON TRESCKOW 53 Telegram in two sections. 54 Col. Edward A. Kreger, legal adviser to the president of the Plebiscitary Commission.

ITEM 4. Relief of all Army, carbineer, police and secret service personnel from duty as sub-delegates, district inspectors, and in general from duty in any civil executive capacity whatsoever, in the plebiscitary territory; such functionaries to be replaced during the plebiscitary period by civil officials appointed by proper Chilean authority. ITEM 5. Relief, upon request of the Commission, of each and every public functionary in the plebiscitary territory, military, carbineer, police, secret service, or civil executive,58 who, in the judgment of the Commission, has used, is using, or pending the completion of plebiscitary operations shall use his position or powers in a manner designed to repress or prevent legitimate expression of views touching issues to be determined by the plebiscite; each functionary so relieved to be replaced by another appointed by proper Chilean authority. ITEM 6. Transfer from the plebiscitary territory of every relieved sub-delegate, district inspector, or other civil executive, who is a member of the military, carbineer, police or secret service personnel and is not a native of the plebiscitary territory.59 ITEM 7. Removal of all restrictions upon entering or leaving the plebiscitary territory that may be inconsistent with the free return, presence, or departure of persons claiming to be plebiscitary electors, and of such other persons as may desire to engage in any legitimate form of propaganda, publicity, or other form of electoral activity in the plebiscitary territory, in the interest of either of the two candidates for ultimate sovereignty; and like freedom for press representatives. This shall not be construed so as to preclude reasonable supervision and limitation by the Chilean Government in a manner and for a purpose not deemed, by the Commission, inconsistent with a fair plebiscite. ITEM 8. Removal of all restrictions upon travel within the plebiscitary territory, and modification of hotel and guest laws and regulations applicable in that territory so that such laws and regulations may not interfere with the freedom essential to a fair plebiscite. This shall not be construed so as to preclude reasonable police and sanitary regulations prescribed by the Chilean Government and not deemed, by the Commission, inconsistent with a fair plebiscite. ITEM 9. Establishment of equal opportunity and equal protection from molestation or interference for public meetings, parades, addresses, and other forms of legitimate public propaganda touching the plebiscite, as well as for legitimate private discussion of plebiscitary issues, in the plebiscitary territory, irrespective of whether the effort is made in the interest of Chile or

in the interest of Peru; and establishment of equal opportunity and equal protection for the display, in the plebiscitary territory, by private persons and by legitimate organizations, of the flag of either of the two candidates for ultimate sovereignty. This shall not be construed so as to preclude reasonable supervision and limitation by the Chilean Government in a manner and for a purpose not deemed, by the Commission, inconsistent with a fair plebiscite. ITEM 10. Removal of censorship from the cables and of any existing censorship from the press, radio, telegraph, telephone and mails, within, to or from the plebiscitary territory. ITEM 11. Return to the plebiscitary territory60 by Chile at her expense of every man within Chilean jurisdiction who either directly61 or through the Peruvian Commissioner claims the right to vote in the plebiscite, alleges that he left the plebiscitary territory involuntarily on or after April 13, 1924, and makes a prima facie case, satisfactory to the Commission, of electoral right and involuntary departure. SECTION 2. That the President of the Commission be and he is hereby instructed to cause an authenticated copy of this resolution to be presented to the Chilean Member of the Commission, and that the Chilean Member of the Commission be and he is hereby instructed to cause this resolution to be brought to the attention of the proper Chilean authorities.62 The foregoing resolution was adopted by the Plebiscitary Commission, Tacna-Arica Arbitration, on the second day of November, 1925. JORDAN HERBERT STABLER Secretary General Tacna-Arica Arbitration Plebiscitary Commission JOHN J. PERSHING President 55 Copy transmitted to the Department by General Pershing under covering letter of November 7; received November 25. Footnotes have been used to indicate where the text as adopted differs from the draft submitted by General Pershing. 56 The original draft provided that the carabineers then in the territory should be replaced by others who had not served therein.

57 The original draft provided for replacement of police and secret service personnel in the territory by others who had not served therein. 58 Here the original draft added “or of any other character.” 59 In the original draft provision was made for the “departure” (instead of transfer) besides those listed, “of any other character neither a native nor a legal resident of the territory.” 60 The original draft read “Return to Tacna Arica.” 61 “or indirectly” was here stricken from the original draft. 62 Section 2 was not in the original draft as telegraphed.

3. But Chile’s right to continue her administrative authority during the holding of a plebiscite is no clearer than is her duty with respect to the holding of plebiscite itself. Under Treaty of Ancon which, as Arbitrator held, was still in effect, Chile not less than Peru was bound by provision for the plebiscite. This provision manifestly implied fair opportunity for a plebiscite through absence of coercion or intimidation which would frustrate purpose of a plebiscite. The fact that Chile had the right to maintain administrative authority during plebiscite period gave no color of right to permit coercion or intimidation so as to destroy fair opportunity for a plebiscite, but on contrary placed on her the responsibility of exercising her administrative authority in such way as to provide fair opportunity and to protect from intimidation, fraud, and oppression those who were entitled to vote. Chile’s very right to retain possession of the territory in dispute is based on her agreement for the plebiscite which implies necessarily use of her authority properly to safeguard it. This duty of Chile’s is fundamental, underlying the award and all proceedings under the award for the holding of the plebiscite. 4. As the Governments of Chile and Peru had not been able to agree upon conditions of a plebiscite, the Arbitrator was empowered, should he find that a plebiscite should be held, to establish these conditions for it. Purpose of the submission to the Arbitrator of conditions of plebiscite was manifestly to permit establishment of conditions which would permit fair plebiscite and not merely to define details of a plebiscite which by means of intimidation, coercion, or fraud would be plebiscite in form only and not one in substance and truth as contemplated by the treaty. While Arbitrator was not empowered to deprive Chile of her right under Treaty of Ancon to continue her administrative authority during plebiscite period, he was empowered to require use of that administrative authority for proper safeguarding of plebiscite in such manner as to prevent coercion, intimidation, and fraud in connection with it. As Chile’s retention of administrative authority was conditioned by Treaty of Ancon upon holding of a plebiscite, her exercise of administrative authority until and during the plebiscite was subject to the conditions laid down by the Arbitrator, and these conditions could properly embrace such requirements with respect to her administrative authority as in opinion of Arbitrator were essential to fair opportunity for the plebiscite. It was to this end that the Arbitrator provided that Chile and Peru should enact appropriate legislation for protection of members of the Plebiscitary Commission and of the registration and election boards in discharge of their functions and for apprehension, trial, and punishment of persons guilty of intimidation, bribery, fraud, or other offenses in connection either with registration or with voting, or of interference with the Commission or of the boards or of their members, etc. Not only was Chile bound by her agreement for the plebiscite to use her administrative authority to protect voters against

practices of intimidation, fraud and oppression, but also if her existing legislation was inadequate to provide punishment for aforesaid offenses, Chile was required by award to enact such additional legislation as might be needed to meet situation. 5. In defining conditions of the plebiscite, the Arbitrator provided for constitution of Plebiscitary Commission for purpose of securing supervision of plebiscite by competent and impartial authority. The powers of the Commission are derived from the award, which provides that the Commission “shall have in general complete control over the plebiscite.” This general provision was not limited by subsequent particularization of certain questions which Commission was authorized to determine. It is right and duty of Commission to deal with any questions which relate to holding of the plebiscite, and necessarily to deal with any questions arising from attempts to interfere with plebiscite by coercion, intimidation, or fraud. The Commission’s action in this regard must, of course, be consistent with terms of the treaty. Commission could not require, any more than Arbitrator could require, Chile to surrender her possession or her administrative authority during plebiscite period, but Commission is entitled to require that Chile exercise her authority in such a manner as to protect the plebiscite and take all appropriate measures to prevent abuse of that authority by fostering or permitting coercion, intimidation, or fraud. 6. You must determine, I think, the advisability of proposing this resolution. It depends on state of the facts to which it is addressed; and, in view of your knowledge of situation and in view of investigations which have been conducted under your supervision, I assume that the conditions are as they are reported and that the resolution is justified. I am of opinion that, subject to reservations stated below, Plebiscitary Commission has authority to make the requirements set forth in the resolution: (a) I assume that army, carabineers, police, and secret service

Chilean Constitution; brief examination indicates that Constitution promulgated September 18, 1925, promises in substance that judges will remain in office during good behavior, but that the lower judges will carry on respective functions for such time as law may determine. Elsewhere in Constitution provision is made for their appointment by President of Chile. I make this suggestion for your careful consideration. (b) I also think wisdom doubtful of providing for a determination with respect to “reputation,” such as is provided in paragraph 5 of resolution. It seems to me that without putting matter on basis of “reputation,” it should be put, with qualifications stated above regarding officers having constitutional status, upon basis of such persons using or having used position or powers they hold in manner hostile to fair plebiscite. Commission would have to get at facts in order to establish reputation and these facts would probably serve purpose in demanding transfer or removal. (c) In regard to paragraph 10 of resolution which provides for “removal of censorship if any exists,” I wonder if it would not be better for Commission to determine whether such censorship exists or not and its effect. Commission could demand freedom from censorship if it has reason to believe that censorship exists. 7. I send this to you personally because Arbitrator should not prejudge any question which may come before him in future. The broad right of appeal exists and Arbitrator may review any action of Commission. It is, of course, obviously important that I should be advised as far as practicable of contemplated proceedings of Commission so that I may advise with you or aid and assist you by representations to the Governments of Chile and Peru if you think that step advisable. There is, I think, a distinction between the Arbitrator’s advising these Governments upon disputed questions which may be presented to him on appeal which may embrace questions of fact, and my recognition in course of diplomatic interchanges of the clear principles laid down by him upon which award proceeds and advisability of these Governments doing everything possible to carry but fair plebiscite. I should, for these reasons, like to have your views on whether or not you think that the time has come for me to acquaint Chilean Government, through diplomatic channels, with view that while the Arbitrator will render his decisions upon questions that come to him in due course, it is quite inadmissible that Chile, after having invoked the authority of the President of the United States as Arbitrator and after having insisted upon recognition of her administrative authority under Treaty of Ancon during

plebiscite period, should attempt to use that administrative authority to thwart a fair plebiscite. This is matter of broad international consequence and I feel there would be ample justification for directing attention of Government of Chile to regrettable character and consequences of such an attitude as it appears to have assumed. If any question of fact is at issue, the Plebiscitary Commission is on the ground and can determine it; but if Chile entertains any idea that she has right to use her administrative authority not only so as not to prevent coercion and intimidation but actually to countenance or to foster them, the Government of Chile should be disabused of this notion. Arbitrator’s award has sustained right to a plebiscite under the Treaty of Ancon and has provided for the plebiscite; and if now Chile thwarts plebiscite by failing to use her administrative authority properly to protect it and by refusing to accede to the reasonable requirements of the Commission for such protection as is required, she will be responsible for all the consequences. It may be well to have in mind that one of these consequences may be not merely failure of the present plebiscite and ordering of a new plebiscite, but a forfeiture of her right to a plebiscite and with it of any right to the disputed territory; for, as award indicates, one of conditions of Chile’s retention of the territory is that a plebiscite should be held, with implication that neither Chile nor Peru should frustrate it. Arbitrator has held that there was not sufficient evidence that Chile had frustrated it, and that plebiscite should be held as stated in the treaty. But if now, with plebiscite ordered and with Plebiscitary Commission on the ground, it appears that the administrative authority of Chile is used in such a way as to frustrate the holding of an appropriate plebiscite and that she refuses to take the reasonable measures essential to that plebiscite, she may be exposed to the contention that she has forfeited any right to the territory under the Treaty of Ancon. I am not unmindful of provision in award for the ordering of new plebiscite and this would appear to be appropriate if it appeared that objections which vitiated the first plebiscite were not of such fundamental character as to void agreement for a plebiscite. But if it appeared that Chile’s administrative authority had been exercised in way to thwart purpose of the plebiscite or that she had refused to use that authority on request of the Commission in way that would reasonably support a fair plebiscite, the logic of the Arbitrator’s award might be turned against her and a court of arbitration might well hold that Chile had been guilty of a prevention of performance of article III of Treaty of Ancon and had lost her rights under it. Upon the evidence presented to the Arbitrator in the case submitted, he was unable to find Chile guilty of conduct frustrating the plebiscite. The Arbitrator was unwilling to resort to disputable inferences in reaching such a grave conclusion. As he said in the award, the plebiscite furnished an appropriate method of deciding the controversy; but

now award for the plebiscite is being carried out, and if the plebiscite under award is prevented by Chile, this conduct can easily be put before the world in light which will take from her all sympathy and will clearly demonstrate impartiality and justice of position of the United States. Please advise whether you wish me to make representations to the Government of Chile, and, if you do, whether I shall wait until your resolution has been formulated and presented to Plebiscitary Commission. It seems to me, if representations are made, that they should be made at substantially same time your resolution is presented or else immediately afterwards before they are rejected, and should be made on basis of your resolution. KELLOGG

At the meeting tomorrow I expect to present results of observation and investigation by me and by my staff, in support of my resolution. The situation has not improved. Evidence continues to come in of repressive and oppressive activities against Peruvians. Nothing less than is called for by my resolution can be considered as a first step toward further progress with the plebiscite. I believe that time for representations from the Secretary of State to the Government of Chile has now arrived. Pershing. VON TRESCKOW

As the Governments of Chile and Peru had not been able to agree upon the conditions of a plebiscite, the Arbitrator was empowered, in case he found that a plebiscite should be held, to establish these conditions. The purpose of the submission to the Arbitrator of the conditions of the plebiscite was manifestly to permit the establishment of conditions which would permit a fair plebiscite and not merely to define the details of a plebiscite which by reason of coercion, intimidation or fraud would be a plebiscite only in form and not one in substance and truth as contemplated by the Treaty. While the Arbitrator was not authorized to deprive Chile of her right under the Treaty to continue her administrative authority pending a plebiscite, he was empowered to require the use of that administrative authority for the proper safeguarding of the plebiscite and so as to prevent coercion, intimidation and fraud in connection with it. As Chile’s retention of the administrative authority was conditioned by the Treaty upon the holding of a plebiscite her exercise of administrative authority pending and during the plebiscite was subject to the conditions established by the Arbitrator. With this in view, the arbitration provided that Chile and Peru should enact appropriate legislation for the protection of the members of the Plebiscitary Commission and the Registration and Election Boards in the discharge of their functions and for the apprehension, trial and punishment of persons guilty of intimidation, bribery, fraud or other offenses in connection with registration or voting in the plebiscite, or of interference with the Plebiscitary Commission or the Boards or the members of the Commission, et cetera (Award P. 49).64 Thus not only was Chile bound by her agreement for the plebiscite to use her administrative authority to protect voters from intimidation, fraud and oppression, but if the existing legislation of Chile was not adequate to provide punishment for such offenses, Chile was required by the Award to enact such additional legislation as might be needed to meet the exigency. It has been the cause of great disappointment to the Secretary of State to learn that the laws have not been administered in such a manner as to give reasonable assurances to the Peruvian voters that they will be unmolested and permitted the free exercise of their suffrage as provided in the Award. In defining the conditions of the plebiscite the Arbitrator provided for the constitution of the Plebiscitary Commission for the purpose of securing the supervision of the plebiscite by competent and impartial authority. The powers of the Plebiscitary Commission are derived from the Award. This provides (p. 44)65 that the Plebiscitary Commission ‘shall have in general complete control over the plebiscite.’ This general provision was not limited by the subsequent particularization of certain questions which the Commission was authorized to determine. It is the right and duty of the Commission to deal with any questions which relate to the holding of the

plebiscite, and necessarily to deal with any questions which arise as to attempts by coercion, intimidation, or fraud to interfere with the plebiscite. The Commission is entitled to require that Chile shall exercise her authority in such manner as to protect the plebiscite and shall take all appropriate measures to prevent the abuse of that authority by the fostering or permitting of coercion, intimidation or fraud. In expressing the most earnest hope that the Chilean Government will not only issue adequate instructions for the conduct of Chilean officials in the Provinces in dispute but will also see that they are faithfully carried out in order that a free and fair plebiscite as contemplated by the Arbitrator’s Award may be effected, Mr. Kellogg desires to add that it is quite inadmissible that Chile after having invoked the President as Arbitrator, and having insisted upon a plebiscite and upon the recognition of her administrative authority under the Treaty pending the plebiscite should attempt to use that administrative authority to thwart a fair plebiscite. It is hardly necessary to allude to the regrettable situation that would arise should the Plebiscitary Commission formally find, and the Arbitrator, on the matter coming before him, should be compelled to hold, that, on account of the action of the Chilean authorities in opposition to the terms of the Award, a free and fair plebiscite could not be held. The Secretary of State has also been informed that, in connection with the work of the Special Commission on Boundaries, not only were adequate penalties not being meted out to those officers guilty of molesting Peruvians connected with the Boundary Commission but also that adequate measures were not taken to see that they did not recur. Conditions were such that the Peruvian members of the Commission were finally obliged to withdraw until the situation should be remedied. Under the terms of submission the Arbitrator was empowered to determine the claims pending with regard to Tarata and Chilcaya, that is, to determine the northern and southern boundaries of the territory in question. The Award of the Arbitrator sets forth his decision as to the principle which should govern the delimitation of the boundaries. The Arbitrator reserved the power to appoint a Special Commission to draw the boundary lines of the territory covered by Article III of the Treaty of Ancon in accordance with the Award. As the Arbitrator had the authority to determine these boundaries, and it became necessary for the purpose of this determination to ascertain the Peruvian provincial boundaries of Tacna and Arica, it was competent for the Arbitrator to provide for an agency to make investigation, draw the actual lines and report. The Special Commission is the agency constituted for this purpose. The Arbitrator is still in control of the proceeding; his work as Arbitrator is not finished and will not be finished until the boundary lines are fixed. It was for this reason that

the Arbitrator reserved the authority to pass upon the report of the Special Commission or to appoint a new Special Commission and pass upon its report in like manner. Interferences with the Boundary Commission, or its members, representatives or employees, while prosecuting their work under the Arbitrator’s Award are interferences with the Arbitrator. They are interferences with the discharge of the Arbitrator’s duty and with the exercise of his authority under the terms of submission. Where such interferences occur in territory under the Chilean administration, it is the obvious duty of the Chilean Government to afford redress and prevent their recurrence by the proper action of the authorities. If the Chilean Government should not do this, if it should fail to afford protection to the Special Commission, its representatives and employees, while they are at work under the decision of the Award in territory under Chilean administration it would subject itself to the responsibility of interfering with the Arbitrator and of violating the essential conditions of the submission to arbitration. The Secretary of State desires to express his confidence that the Chilean Government will not be willing to disappoint the expectation of the just settlement of the long standing controversy through the agreed submission to the Arbitrator and will readily appreciate the importance of taking such action, in the discharge of its administrative responsibility, as will assure a fair and free plebiscite, as contemplated by the submission to arbitration and the Award, and adequate protection to the Special Commission on Boundaries, its representatives and employees, in the performance of the task assigned to it.” You may leave a copy of the above statement with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Chief of State should they so request. At the same time you may orally call to their attention that one of the consequences of a persistence of the Chileans in their present attitude may be not simply the failure of the present plebiscite and the ordering of a new plebiscite, but a forfeiture of Chile’s right to a plebiscite and with it of any right to the disputed territory. For as the Award indicates, one of the conditions of Chile’s retention of the territory is that a plebiscite should be held with the necessary implication that neither party should frustrate it. The Arbitrator has held that there was not sufficient evidence that Chile had frustrated it and that the plebiscite should be had as contemplated by the Treaty. But if, now, with a plebiscite ordered, and with the Plebiscitary Commission on the ground, it appears that the administrative authority of Chile is used so as to frustrate the holding of an appropriate plebiscite, and that she refuses to take the reasonable measures which are essential to such a plebiscite, she may be exposed to the contention that she has forfeited any right to the territory under the Treaty. I am not unmindful of the provisions of the Award for the ordering of a new plebiscite (p. 49) and this would be appropriate if it appeared that the objections which vitiated the first plebiscite were not of such a fundamental character as to discharge the

agreement for a plebiscite. But if it appeared that the administrative authority of Chile had been exercised so as to thwart the purpose of the plebiscite or that she had refused to use that authority on the request of the Commission in a way that would reasonably support a fair plebiscite, the logic of the Award of the Arbitrator might be turned against Chile and it might well be held that she has been guilty of a prevention of the performance of Article III of the Treaty of Ancon and had lost her rights thereunder. Cable immediately when this message is delivered.65a KELLOGG

Government of Chile to carry out free and fair election, and for that reason tendered their resignations. The Ambassador said he had already made this suggestion to Chilean Government, and that the Government had appeared favorable to it; he said he would reiterate his views and would suggest that Edwards make his proposal along above lines to you in answer to and as counterproposition to your resolution. He said that on hearing from Santiago that Edwards would do so, he would suggest that you give matter most careful consideration. I said that I should be glad to do so. I am transmitting this information to you before hearing from Ambassador Collier, as I wish to afford you ample opportunity to think matter over. It seems to me that Mathieu’s proposal offers possible way out. I am not familiar with conditions in provinces, of course, and am not able to say whether this will give necessary assurances that free and fair election be carried out. If it is your opinion that proposal gives necessary assurances, I feel it would be well to accept suggestion. Fully appreciate that Chilean Government should have acted on own initiative several weeks ago. If Government acts at this time, however, it will be because resolutions you presented have had necessary effect in making it clear you cannot be swerved from your course, and my telegram of Oct. 10, 6 p.m., will have shown Chilean Government that I consider your position legally sound. For these reasons, I feel that if aim can be accomplished by palatable means, we shall gain in harmony and in peaceful and unobstructed carrying out of plebiscite by accepting Mathieu’s suggestions. Foregoing is solely for your information and no mention should be made to either Peruvian or Chilean Commissioners. I do not know, of course, what action Government of Chile will take on Mathieu’s recommendations. KELLOGG

There are now four times the number of carabineers here that were in the province less than two years ago. The number of policemen has also been largely increased. These forces together with present civil officials throughout the territory have with practically no exceptions been involved in work of deportation, coercion, and intimidation. The ratio of the combined forces of army, carabineers, and police to males over 20 years of age in the territory is one to six. Removals must be publicly announced and carried out to convince absent voters that it will be safe to return. … The demands contained in my resolution must, I think, be regarded as minimum and any material modification cannot be accepted. They are necessary to give assurance on Chile’s part of purpose to hold free plebiscite and to satisfy Peru that that is our purpose. They are also necessary to remove as far as possible the agencies and the conditions which have contributed to the present reign of terror. Further demands may be made from time to time in assuring free and fair plebiscite. Any substantial modification of position we have taken would destroy usefulness of Plebiscitary Commission and make free plebiscite impossible. Pershing. VON TRESCKOW

offense, every effort should in some way be made to arrange with Chile’s Commissioner for necessary protection in carrying out election, and careful consideration should be given any reasonable proposals. Rather than to withdraw, suggest for your consideration and as last resort that, should resolution be adopted by majority of the Commission and Chile refuse to appeal but nevertheless continue to oppose thereby creating situation requiring attention of the Arbitrator, he might under the first paragraph of subdivision D of the award entertain an appeal on his own motion. If Arbitrator should determine that under the conditions Chile refuses to take measures to afford proper protection to insure fair plebiscite, Chile, by thus thwarting plebiscite and breaking condition on which she remained in possession of the territory, would incur forfeiture of the territory. While Arbitrator held that Chile’s acts had not been sufficiently proved to justify him in holding that Chile had forfeited her right, if the Arbitrator again has question before him on the evidence relating to plebiscite directed by the award, his determination would be conclusive as to very foundation of Chile’s right of possession. I doubt that Chile would be willing to face such very serious outcome. I think Ambassador Mathieu will cable his Government strongly urging it to take action, but whether Government of Chile will go to full extent of resolution I am unable, of course, to say. In meantime I shall lose no opportunity to press on Chilean Ambassador necessity for proper action. I think most careful consideration should be given any reasonable suggestion of Government of Chile and I am sure you will appreciate gravity of situation. KELLOGG 67 Not printed.

made no reply but he said that we were coming to a deadlock, and that his Government intended to adhere to its view on questions of Commission’s authority, and at next meeting he would state his legal position and propose motion in substitution for mine which would make no reference to Commission’s authority. He said that Chileans would not appeal to the Arbitrator, and a deadlock would be created which I would have to report to Arbitrator who would then have grounds for suggesting conversations between Chile and Peru with view to settlement outside plebiscite. Edwards said he felt they were building up a good case. I expressed no opinion except to say that if situation was as he had outlined it and as it appeared to be, a plebiscite would be well-nigh impossible. (2) Chile has not made any serious effort on her own initiative to create situation in which plebiscite could be held. On contrary she is actively engaged in effort to make plebiscite impossible through continuation of methods reported again and again. I send résumé of Edwards’ statements in paragraph (1) above merely for Secretary’s information as indicating course Government of Chile may follow. No reference should be made to this cable in communications to Chile or to Ambassador at Washington, nor to fact that conversation reported has been held between Edwards and me. At yesterday’s meeting of Commission, Edwards’ statement seemed to lay foundation for action he had outlined to me in foregoing conversation. His proposals were so far short of anything adequate as to be entirely unacceptable, especially as they refuse to recognize authority of Commission and show no sincere attempt to meet demands. Commission meets again tomorrow. Pershing. VON TRESCKOW

support authority of President of the Commission would greatly enhance prestige of the United States in general everywhere and in particular would bring about lasting settlement of the Tacna-Arica question. POINDEXTER

necessary. Only thing I could promise would be to transmit Minister’s telegram for your consideration. KELLOGG

meeting be held Saturday, and, with the additional reason in mind that my advisers would have opportunity to examine Chilean case, therefore I agreed to call off meeting.

I think Edwards’ request for delay was made in hope that it would be possible eventually to prevent further consideration of my resolution, and that Chile would thus be able to extricate herself from present situation without serious consequences. She would then be in position to say that she had always been ready to do all that had been asked if and when question of her refusal to comply with Arbitrator’s interpretation should arise. It is my opinion, strongly supported by my advisers, that an early meeting should be held and motion passed. Should motion not be passed and plebiscite should be suspended at this point, our position would be seriously weakened as no direct issue has yet been made and there are no grounds for appeal by Chile to Arbitrator even if she should decide to do so, nor is there any issue or default by either Government on which Commission could go to Arbitrator. Another reason for early meeting and passage of motion lies in fact that otherwise Peru would be left entirely without guarantees; and I greatly fear that we should forfeit confidence and support of Peruvian delegation and that Peru would withdraw, leaving field free for Chile and making my position impossible. Action on our demand, moreover, would have salutary effect on Chile, not only in regard possibly to inducing change of attitude on her part but also in regard to her proposals for a diplomatic settlement. The risk that Peru will be so encouraged as to become unreasonable is, I think, less than risk she will not prosecute negotiations in earnest if we weaken and fail to pass motion. Passage of motion will not increase Chile’s present embarrassment materially but it will make clear that we are in earnest. Anyway, Peru’s attitude toward any compromise is very doubtful. I have ventured to cable at this length only because of representations I know will be made to you at Washington by Chile; I think that I should advise you of my views in advance, so that if you agree with me, you will be able to reply to Chilean Ambassador in such a way as greatly to strengthen my position. Pershing. VON TRESCKOW

President will confine himself to role of Arbitrator, sustaining power of Plebiscitary Commission to make reasonable requirements under the award and making clear the obligation of Chile as administrator of the territory to provide fair opportunity for plebiscite, in this way making clear to both Chile and Peru fairness and impartiality of his intention and procedure. Meanwhile both those countries, contemplating possible failure of plebiscite for one reason or another, may find ways to negotiate for a definite settlement. There can exist an attitude on my part permitting such a course but not going to extent of submitting or favoring an alternative plan. Case is not yet ripe enough for suggestions by me regarding nature of an alternative settlement. If negotiations between Chile and Peru, or any of their representatives, progress far enough to be promising, I am likely to receive hints if not requests from Governments of both that my good offices are desired. Should that happen, I would be in strong position and could ascertain from each party what it is willing to do, and I might be able to assist in helping them to reach agreement. But this will come about only at their invitation and with reasonable prospect of success; otherwise plans for plebiscite should continue. If they fail, party responsible must accept all the blame. KELLOGG 73 The same to the Embassy in Chile as Department’s No. 69, and to the Embassy in Peru as Department’s No. 63.

This version of Chilean Government’s action has since been confirmed by Minister for Foreign Affairs, who expresses willingness to have Government of the United States make inquiries, and asserts his desire to give information on any complaint that may be brought to his attention. Since first call at the Embassy, Peruvians have come here daily to say that they were not molested by neighbors in the north and needed no protection from them; that they are remaining here involuntarily; but that since first complaint was made to me they have been required to sign statements to contrary and upon refusal have been threatened with repatriation, but without indemnification or the opportunity to earn a living. These cases I have not discussed with the Foreign Office. Writer of first complaint to me said that he addressed me because numerous letters to Plebiscitary Commission had apparently been intercepted. I am convinced that practically all of these deportations were unjustified and are related to the plebiscite, and that charges of communistic activity are pretexts. …

I respectfully submit my view, in answer to your request. It is quite apparent that our duty requires us not to ignore any fact which affects the plebiscite, or any relevant statement if it is not inherently improbable. Our diplomatic and consular officers in Chile should be free to take statements from all who assert that rights granted them by award are being violated or whose liberty appears to be abridged because of their lawful activities in connection with the plebiscite. Diplomatic and consular officers, at least under the present circumstances, should avoid everything susceptible of being construed as espionage or police investigation or interference with administrative action; but they should be free to hear complaints and, after previously consulting with the authorities, even to visit places of residence or detention, and their interviews with complainants should be private to avoid fear of later punishment by complainants. Impartiality, in my opinion, requires that after complaint has been received, then Chilean authorities should be fully informed and given opportunity to explain or to refute. … I am confident that if I bring these complaints to the attention of the present Minister for Foreign Affairs, he will accept and probably suggest course of procedure I have just outlined. I believe it even possible to obtain his promise to give complete list of all natives of Tacna now in Chile with their present residence and changes of residence in future and to acknowledge the right of unrestricted correspondence and interview between them and American diplomatic, consular, or plebiscitary representatives. Embassy and consulates should keep in touch in order to ascertain reliability of statements made, and especially to ascertain that the repatriated really get home.

… I believe bitterness which Chileans feel against our observers in Tacna, and in certain places against our consuls, arises from Chilean belief that they conduct ex parte investigations, encourage Peruvian complaints, and do not give Chile chance to explain or refute. COLLIER

Tuesday I shall call up for final action motion presented yesterday calling for departure from the province of officials who have been removed from public office unless they have Commission’s permission to remain. There has been merely formal compliance with demands for removal of officials, who have been uniformly honored and in some instances have been promoted to higher civil positions and in others have been retained for service in the province. Presence of officials guilty of acts inimical to fair plebiscite cannot be permitted if purpose of their removal is not to be completely frustrated. Pershing VON TRESCKOW

have been enacted and dates for registrations shall have been fixed, the Commission will expect the wholehearted cooperation of the Chilean authorities. While I understand perfectly reasons you give for not issuing rules and regulations at this time, the general public is not so well informed and might accept Chilean contention that there was undue delay, in view of provisions of award that Commission shall proceed at once to formulate its rules, etc. Chile will be deprived of any possible technical justification by your promulgation of rules and regulations as suggested above, and the responsibility for compliance will be placed squarely upon her. KELLOGG

Chile’s action but that I was confident that Chile would never be willing to incur the universal condemnation of the American Republics which I felt would certainly follow an action that must be interpreted as an unwillingness to accept suggestions intended merely to secure just and honest plebiscite. I think these diplomats will express this view to their Governments and will talk this way to Chilean Government if it sounds them out. Still, to obtain approval of other American Republics it may be well to avoid further delay in the plebiscitary proceedings which to many of them seems unnecessarily long and which all realize only gives additional opportunity for passions to become more inflamed. I have reliable information that ex-President Alessandri is returning here to urge the Government to maintain its present position or refuse to continue with plebiscite on ground that proceedings to date have been violation of award and usurpation of power by Pershing. He and Barros Jarpa are being denounced by many for getting Chile to arbitrate, and others talk loosely of great violence being done them if outcome is unsatisfactory; on other hand, Edwards is receiving much criticism for having angered Pershing. The desire for a political settlement with division of the territory is evidently growing; foreign diplomats often speak of it as the only solution that offers possibility of restoring harmony.” KELLOGG

reserve the right for itself and the American delegation to make clear in the same manner its position. The action of the Chilean Government and Commission leads almost inevitably to the conclusion that the Chilean Government does not desire a plebiscite and is taking action which will almost necessarily make the holding of an election impossible. It is therefore much to be hoped that the Chilean Government and Commission will desist from such action and in the future will loyally cooperate in the efforts now being made to hold an election. It was explained that this does not mean that this Government objects to publicity regarding the action of the Plebiscitary Commission on the contrary it welcomes it but it does object to publicity in a manner which brings about recrimination in the press which will so excite public opinion as to make it well-nigh impossible for the Commission to carry on its work. It was added, however, that this Government very strongly resents the implications made and the campaign carried on against the members of the American delegation. KELLOGG

that date,78 in which Chilean authorities, even the highest, were charged by General Pershing with fraud and violence, imputing base motives to all, including Edwards. I said that this speech had not been given to press. Minister admitted that it had not, but said he was going to send copy of speech to the Embassy as perhaps Pershing had not communicated it to you, and that it was such an unwarranted document and so clearly showed that General Pershing had no intention of even registering the voters and holding plebiscite, that Edwards’ speech of November 28 had been inspired by it. … COLLIER

I have not been informed what General Pershing said in his speech to Commission on November 21. It is true that Pershing, replying to Edwards’ letter of November 21, wrote him long communication stating reasons for delay and setting forth in detail acts of violence, intimidation, and deportation of Chilean authorities in Tacna and Arica. General Pershing did not publish this answer, although Edwards published his of the 21st. I have given no statements to press as I was desirous of not adding anything to bitterness which now exists and which Edwards seems bound to foment. You are entirely justified in your statements to Minister for Foreign Affairs in way I feel about these publications. Do not, however, make any further suggestion about removal of Edwards as that is matter for Chilean Government to decide. Likewise it would be better not to make further reference to presumption that Pershing had taken no important steps without being convinced that he represented ideas of Arbitrator. I would not again open subject; and I have kept the President out of it entirely, because, while he has greatest confidence in Pershing, he must maintain detached position, and will, of course, pass on any question brought before him on its merits, I desire to thank you for all that you have done in this matter. I do not know where it is going to end. Should be glad to receive any suggestions you care to make. KELLOGG

probably caused by confusing the speech with the informative material given out in

that I am sure you will give careful consideration to suggestions I have made, especially in view of President’s solicitude in matter. KELLOGG

Section 3. That after His Excellency the Chilean member of the Commission shall have delivered to the Secretary General for transmission to the Arbitrator a complete file of all documents, including all the minutes of the meetings of the Commission, which the Chilean member has made a part of his “dissenting opinion and request for certification on appeal” such file shall be transmitted by mail to the Arbitrator by the President of the Commission: provided, that any document included by the Chilean member in the file to be transmitted to the Arbitrator which is not included in the minutes so to be transmitted shall be filed in quadruplicate, one copy to be transmitted to the Arbitrator, one for the President of the Commission, one for the Peruvian member, and one for the Secretariat. Section 4. That the President of the Commission be and hereby is authorized to request the Secretary of State of the United States to transmit to the Arbitrator a copy of the letter dated November 27, 1925, addressed to His Excellency the Chilean member by the President of the Commission, and copy of the remarks made by the President at the meeting of December 9, 1925, in introducing a substitute for the Chilean member’s resolution to fix the date of the plebiscite; that His Excellency the Chilean member of the Commission be and hereby is authorized to request his Government to instruct the Chilean Ambassador in Washington to deliver to the Secretary of State of the United States, for transmission to the Arbitrator, a copy of the Chilean member’s address delivered at the meeting of November 28, 1925, and a copy of the memorandum read and filed by the Chilean member at the meeting of December 14, 1925, respecting the resolution to fix the date of the plebiscite introduced by the President of the Commission in substitution for a resolution on the same subject introduced by the Chilean member; and that His Excellency the Peruvian member of the Commission be and hereby is authorized to request his Government to instruct the Peruvian Ambassador in Washington to deliver to the Secretary of State of the United States, for transmission to the Arbitrator, a copy of the Peruvian member’s statement read in the 7th session of the Commission, analyzing the conditions existing in the plebiscitary area; a copy of the remarks of the Peruvian member and a statement of the status of the cases respecting offences committeed against Peruvian citizens for which complaints have been lodged in the Chilean courts, which were read during the 14th meeting of the Commission, on November 21, 1925; as well as a copy of the remarks made by the Peruvian member during the

course of the 17th and 18th meetings of the Commission, on

JOHN J. PERSHING 84 Text of resolution of December 9 not printed; under it, the date of the plebiscite was

Boundary disputes

Contents

Colombia and Nicaragua [266] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Nicaragua (Thurston) Washington, March 21, 1925.

ownership of the Mosquito coast and the adjacent islands, including especially the Corn Islands and the San Andrés Archipelago. I note that after failing to settle the controversy by diplomatic negotiations your Government accredited a legation to the Government of Colombia with instructions to lay before the Colombian Government the draft of a convention, a copy of which accompanies your predecessor’s note;91 that this draft was not accepted by Colombia; that Colombia has now proposed a settlement, leaving to Colombia the San Andrés Archipelago and to Nicaragua the Mosquito coast and the Corn Islands;92 that the Nicaraguan Government has rejected this latter proposal; and that the Nicaraguan Government now finds itself constrained to request the good offices of the United States Government in order that the Government of Colombia may consent to refer to arbitration the question of the ownership of the San Andrés Archipelago.93 In reply I have the honor to inform you that the request of the Government of Nicaragua has received the most careful and friendly consideration. It would of course be inappropriate for this Government to express an opinion as to the force and validity of the arguments advanced by the Governments of Nicaragua and Colombia in the course of the diplomatic negotiations between them, especially as it does not have at hand all of the information necessary for a full consideration of the question. From such information as is now in the possession of this Government, however, it would appear that the Spanish colonial legislative and administrative dispositions, the interpretation and validity of which are in question, referred equally to the San Andrés Archipelago and to the Mosquito coast and the Corn Islands. It would thus appear that a decision in favor of either party based solely upon the uti possidetis juris of 1810 might be expected to apply with equal force to all of the territory in dispute. Under these conditions this Government does not feel that it could consistently urge upon the Government of Colombia the submission to arbitration of the question of the ownership of a portion only of this territory with the consequent relinquishment of whatever claim Colombia may have to the remainder. This Government understands that the Archipelago of San Andrés has been occupied by Colombia since 1822, whereas Nicaragua has exercised jurisdiction on the Mosquito coast since the declaration of independence from Spain and has occupied the Corn Islands since about 1890. The proposal of the Colombian Government, which would recognize the sovereignty of Nicaragua over the Mosquito coast and the Corn Islands and the sovereignty of Colombia over the San Andrés Archipelago, would therefore make permanent a situation which has existed in fact, so far as the more important portions of the territory in dispute are concerned, practically since the achievement of the independence of the two Republics. Such an arrangement, furthermore, would set at rest any question as to the sovereignty of Nicaragua over the east coast of that Republic and the Corn Islands, territory which is obviously infinitely more valuable to Nicaragua than the San Andrés Archipelago. Without committing itself at this time to the expression of any opinion as to the intrinsic merits of the controversy, the Government

of the United States is inclined to feel that a settlement on the basis indicated would afford an equitable solution of the matter. I need not say that this observation is made in the most friendly spirit and solely in the hope of promoting an amicable settlement on terms advantageous to both parties. Accept [etc.] FRANK B. KELLOGG 87 Not printed. 88 José Andrés Urtecho. 89 Salvador Castrillo. His occupancy of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was brief, Dr. Urtecho resuming charge of the Ministry upon his removal. 90 Not printed. 91 Printed in Nicaragua y Colombia: Ultimas comunicaciones sobre la cuestion Mosquita entre el Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y la Legacion de Colombia ([Managua?], Tipografia Progreso, 1925), p. 115.

Colombia and Peru94

Putumayo, and the Caquetá Rivers must be established in perpetuity as well as in general all the rivers common to the two countries. I handed to the Brazilian Chargé on January 6 a memorandum95 embodying the Colombian suggestion and stating that, animated by the sincerest desire to be of service to both Governments in arriving at a satisfactory solution of the present difficulties, the Government of the United States would be glad to transmit the views of the Government of Brazil in the premises to that of Colombia, should this action be the desire of the Brazilian Government. I read this memorandum to the Brazilian Chargé and asked him if he knew what his Government’s attitude would be toward establishing the boundary by recognizing a section of land east of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as Colombian territory. Senhor Gracie answered no, but said that he would cable to his Government for instructions. I added that I took for granted that any settlement of this question would involve the withdrawal of Brazilian opposition to the Colombian-Peruvian treaty and I then stated confidentially that should the Government of Brazil decline to recognize as Colombian any territory east of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line, and should Brazil be willing to grant freedom of navigation of the rivers mentioned in perpetuity to Colombia, as was granted for 10 years by the Treaty of Commerce and Navigation signed on August 21, 1908, at Rio de Janeiro between Brazil and Colombia, I should be disposed to use my good offices to obtain Colombia’s recognition of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as had been done by the Colombian Executive in the unratified treaty of 1853 between Brazil and Colombia. The Chargé assured me that he would regard my statement as strictly confidential and would not transmit it to his Government; you may, therefore, should the matter be discussed between the Brazilian authorities and yourself, state as your personal opinion that the Government of the United States might be disposed to use its good offices, should the Government of Brazil express its readiness to grant freedom of navigation of the rivers in question, to have the Apaporis-Tabatinga line recognized by Colombia. You will cable fully all developments. HUGHES 95 Not printed.

While this Government is acting as a means of communication between interested parties, it is a medium of communication which is also profoundly interested in a just and prompt settlement. Please endeavor to have the matter given prompt consideration. HUGHES 98 Not printed.

The Minister has recovered from his illness but the President has been away from the Capital since last week and will probably not return until the end of January. MORGAN

Government authorized him to say that, in view of the withdrawal of Brazil’s protest against the treaty, the Government of Peru would immediately urge upon the Peruvian Congress the ratification of the boundary treaty with Colombia. There would then be drawn up a procès-verbal of the meeting in four copies which would be signed by the Secretary of State, the Brazilian Chargé, the Colombian Minister, and the Peruvian Ambassador. This procedure would follow the method used to bring about the establishment of diplomatic relations between Colombia and Panama and the settlement of the boundary between those countries.3 As this method appears to offer an appropriate way of disposing of this difficulty, the Department trusts that it will be satisfactory to the Brazilian Government and hopes that you will be able to obtain the prompt agreement of that Government. Cable results of your efforts. HUGHES 2 British and Foreign State Papers, vol. XLII, p. 1308.

Third. The signing, immediately after the ratification of the above convention, of a convention between Brazil and Colombia by which the boundary between those countries would be agreed to on the Apaporis-Tabatinga line, Brazil agreeing to establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of navigation on the Amazon and other rivers common to both countries. Mr. Gracie then stated that he was authorized by his Government to accept the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State had just made and that in consequence he was instructed by his Government to inform the Peruvian Ambassador that Brazil withdraws its opposition to the Colombian-Peruvian treaty above mentioned on the understanding that Peru will make as a condition in settling its boundary question with Colombia, the recognition of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as described by the treaty of 1851 and in consequence Brazilian dominion over the territory to the east thereof. Mr. Gracie added that should Colombia agree to recognize the above mentioned Apaporis-Tabatinga line Brazil was ready to agree in the same convention to establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of navigation on the River Amazon and other rivers common to both countries. Doctor Olaya then stated that he was authorized by his Government to accept the friendly suggestion just made by the Secretary of State. Doctor Olaya added that he was authorized to state that on the condition that the treaty of March 24, 1922, between Colombia and Peru, should be ratified by the Government of Peru the Government of Colombia would agree to conclude immediately thereafter a treaty with Brazil recognizing as the frontier between the two countries the village of Tabatinga, and from that place to the north the direct line until it meets the River Yapurá at its junction with the Apaporis, and in consequence Brazilian dominion over the territory to the east thereof, it being understood that Brazil in the same treaty would agree to establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of navigation on the Amazon and other rivers common to both countries. Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his Government to express its acceptance of the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State had just made and that as a consequence of the assurance just given by the Colombian Minister that, immediately upon the ratification of the boundary treaty of March 24, 1922 by Peru, Colombia would conclude a treaty with Brazil recognizing as the frontier the Apaporis-Tabatinga line described by the treaty of 1851 and in consequence Brazilian dominion over the territory to the east thereof, thus meeting the condition upon which the Brazilian Government withdrew its protest to the ratification of the Colombian- Peruvian treaty of March 24, 1922, his Government would immediately

advise the Peruvian Congress thereof, repeating at the same time its recommendation that it approve the boundary treaty with Colombia. The Ambassador of Peru, the Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Brazil then stated that they desired to express the gratitude of their respective Governments for the good offices of the (Secretary of State exerted in such an amicable manner in the interest of harmony between the three interested Republics in order to adjust the questions considered in the meeting recorded by this Procès Verbal. This Procès Verbal of the meeting, drawn up in quadruplicate, was signed by the Secretary of State, the Ambassador of Peru, the Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Brazil. One copy will be retained by the Secretary of State, who will send of the remaining three copies, one each to the Ambassador of Peru, the Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Brazil, respectively.” Please communicate this text immediately to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and express the hope that he will find it possible to send instructions to the Brazilian Chargé in Washington without delay to take part in the meeting in the manner set forth above and to sign the Procès Verbal. HUGHES 4 Not printed.

at a loss to under, stand statement of President and Minister for Foreign Affairs that Peru had not requested the friendly offices of the Department.

nothing in the Procès Verbal that injects any new element into the situation as far as Peru is concerned. The insistence of the Peruvian Government on the modifications will make it necessary to re-open negotiations with Bogotá and Rio thus making it impossible to sign the Procès Verbal by March 3. You will please explain to him again the desire if possible to bring about this amicable settlement before I leave office on March 4, which means the Procès Verbal must be signed not later than Tuesday afternoon, March 3. In case all Governments were in agreement it had tentatively been arranged to sign on Monday afternoon at 4 o’clock. Should the President feel that he can instruct Señor Velarde to sign the Procès Verbal it will be appreciated if instructions to that effect could be sent on Sunday in order that it may be signed on Monday. In a telegram to the Peruvian Ambassador sent yesterday, which was superseded by instruction above mentioned, Señor Salomón informed Velarde it would be contrary to the Peruvian constitution to recommend to Congress the approval of the treaty. Should this contention again be advanced you will call attention to the statement made to you by Minister for Foreign Affairs reported in your No. 6, February 27, noon, that should Colombian–Peruvian treaty be modified as he suggested “the Peruvian Congress, he felt sure, would ratify the treaty in 15 days and that the Peruvian Executive Government would use all means in its power to bring that about.” If the Executive can make the recommendation in one case there would appear to be no constitutional reason why it cannot do it in the other. You may also point out that the agreement of the Executive as provided in the Procès Verbal to renew its recommendation of approval would appear to be an undertaking well within the province of the Executive and in no manner interfering with the prerogatives of the legislative branch whereas the third modification suggested by the Peruvian Government that “consideration of the treaty by the Peruvian Congress would be resumed” is a definite undertaking on the part of the Executive for the legislative branch. You will please state to President Leguía that the Department is making this last effort to bring about a friendly agreement between the three countries concerned and that it would very much regret to have to inform Brazil and Colombia that the Department’s good offices had been unfruitful because of the apparent disinclination of Peru to accept the friendly suggestion proposed. HUGHES

The President urges that if the language “immediately after the ratification of the above treaty” should be retained in the third suggestion of the Secretary of State as set forth in the proposed process-verbal it would immediately make Peru the object of pressure both by Brazil and Colombia and deeply involve her in the conflicting interests of those two countries. …

The President with a great gesture of earnestness and sincerity stated that he was willing to sign with Colombia and Brazil an agreement to submit all of the matters involved in the proposed procès-verbal to the Washington Government (meaning, I presume, the President) and stated that he was willing to sign for that purpose any protocol drawn up by the Secretary of State and emphasized again his trust and confidence in the Washington Government and his leadership in the policy of submitting South America[n] international differences to the arbitration of that Government. I urged upon the President [omission?] maintaining that signing by the representatives of Brazil and Colombia under explicit instructions from their Governments of the agreement contained in the proposed procès-verbal would make it impossible for either of them to embarrass Peru in the manner pointed out by him or to involve Peru in the pressure of conflicting interests between those countries if Peru really desired the ratification of the treaty which had been signed by the Executives of the Peruvian and Colombian Governments. The President again asserted his desire that the treaty should be ratified and stated emphatically it was his intention to repeat his recommendation to that effect to the Peruvian Congress but reiterated his assertion that he could not possibly agree to the procès-verbal without the modifications stated above and I believe his position in this respect unalterable. The possibility occurs to me of a supplementary and separate agreement between the representatives of Colombia and Brazil in respect to the matters affecting the rights only of those two countries, in view of the fact that President Leguía is agreeing to the only action required of the Peruvian Government by the procès-verbal, namely, to advise the Peruvian Congress of the withdrawal of the objections made by Brazil to renew his recommendation that Congress approve the pending treaty with Colombia. POINDEXTER

Peruvian treaty, Brazil would appear to be fully covered by the direct assurance given by the Colombian Minister that his Government agrees to conclude immediately after the ratification of the Colombian–Peruvian treaty the treaty with Brazil recognizing the Tabatinga–Apaporis line and Brazilian dominion over the territory to the east thereof. Peru’s objection to making reference to this in its statement is that matter is one that concerns Brazil and Colombia only. For your information it may be said that there has been a very ample exchange of telegrams between the Department and the Embassy in Lima during the last few days and the above represents the most that it has been possible to obtain from Peru. Procès Verbal should be signed tomorrow afternoon. Please endeavor to expedite Brazilian Government’s reply. HUGHES

Mr. Hughes stated that he had invited Messrs. Velarde, Olaya and Gracie to his office to consider the boundary treaty between Colombia and Peru signed in Lima March 24, 1922, in respect to which observations of a friendly nature had been made to the Peruvian Government by the Brazilian Government. Mr. Hughes stated that the three Governments concerned had requested his good offices in the settlement of this question and, after carefully considering the matter, he desired to suggest as a solution of the difficulty the following: First. The withdrawal by the Government of Brazil of its observations regarding the boundary treaty between Colombia and Peru; Second. The ratification by Colombia and Peru of the above mentioned boundary treaty; Third. The signing of a convention between Brazil and Colombia by which the boundary between those countries would be agreed to on the Apaporis- Tabatinga line, Brazil agreeing to establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of navigation on the Amazon and other rivers common to both countries. Mr. Gracie then stated that he was authorized by his Government to accept the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State had just made and that in consequence he was instructed by his Government to inform the Peruvian Ambassador that Brazil withdraws its observations regarding the Colombian-Peruvian treaty above mentioned on the understanding that Peru will make as a condition in settling its boundary question with Colombia, the recognition of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as described by the Treaty of 1851 and in consequence Brazilian dominion over the territory to the east of that line. Mr. Gracie added that should Colombia agree to recognize the above mentioned Apaporis-Tabatinga line Brazil was ready to agree in the same convention to establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of navigation on the River Amazon and other rivers common to both countries. Doctor Olaya then stated that he had instructions from his Government to accept the friendly suggestion just made by the Secretary of State. Doctor Olaya added that he was authorized to state that on the condition that the treaty of March 24, 1922, between Colombia and Peru, should be ratified by both Governments the Government of Colombia would agree to conclude immediately thereafter a treaty with Brazil recognizing as the frontier between the two countries the village of Tabatinga, and from that place to the north the direct line until it meets the River Yapurá at its junction with the Apaporis, and in consequence Brazilian dominion over the territory to the east of that line, it being understood that Brazil in the same treaty will agree to establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of navigation on the Amazon and other rivers common to both countries.

Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his Government to express its acceptance of the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State had just made in the sense that his Government would immediately advise the Peruvian Congress thereof, repeating at the same time its recommendation that it approve the boundary treaty with Colombia. The Ambassador of Peru, the Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Brazil then stated that they desired to express the gratitude of their respective Governments for the good offices of the Secretary of State exerted in such an amicable manner in the interest of harmony between the three interested Republics in order to adjust the questions considered in the meeting recorded by this Procès Verbal. This Procès Verbal of the meeting, drawn up in quadruplicate in English, Spanish and Portuguese, was signed by the Secretary of State of the United States of America, the Ambassador of Peru, the Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Brazil. It is understood that in case of doubt the English text will be binding. One copy in each language will be retained for the files of the Department of State by the Secretary of State, who will send of the remaining three copies, one each, in each language, to the Ambassador of Peru, the Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Brazil, for their respective Governments. CHARLES E. HUGHES HERNÁN VELARDE ENRIQUE OLAYA SAMUEL DE SOUZA LEÃO GRACIE 17 Notes not printed.

signing between Brazil and Colombia of a convention etc.” This, therefore, was a point that had been disposed of and the procès-verbal stood worded and signed thus. Neither can I agree for identically the same reasons to the change in the terms of the procès-verbal, referring to the declarations of the Minister of Colombia, which the Honorable Mr. Hughes sends me restoring, without change, the form in which they appeared in the original draft. In that draft it was said in that part to which I am referring, that “if the Treaty between Colombia and Peru of March 24, 1922, were ratified by the Government of Peru, the Government of Colombia etc.” On account of my remarks and on account of their being accepted by Mr. White who was surely authorized thereto by the Minister of Colombia, since it is so recorded in the procès-verbal, as signed, the above copied sentence was changed as follows: “If the Treaty between Colombia and Peru of March 24, 1922, were ratified by both Governments, the Government of Colombia, etc.” It is with genuine regret that I find myself constrained to offer the foregoing remarks.

I take note that a communication identical with that sent to me has been received by the Minister of Colombia and the Chargé d’Affaires of Brazil. I have [etc.] HERNÁN VELARDE

of the above treaty”, which referred to the boundary treaty between Colombia and Peru, should be omitted from the third part of the proposal by the Secretary of State thus leaving that part to deal with matters exclusively between Brazil and Colombia. This was agreed to and the Procès Verbal was signed in that sense. However, in order that there might be no misapprehension on the part of those concerned that the various steps in the proposal of the Secretary of State were to be carried out in the sequence mentioned, my predecessor made this clear by stating in his covering note that the third proposed action would be taken after the carrying out of the second step. It was likewise the understanding that Mr. Secretary Hughes’ second suggestion would not be carried out until the first suggestion had been complied with but it was not necessary to mention this in the covering letter as his first suggestion was complied with in the Procès Verbal itself wherein the Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires informed Your Excellency of the withdrawal by Brazil of its observations regarding the Colombian-Peruvian treaty. There is thus no change whatsoever in the Procès Verbal as signed. The Procès Verbal is itself clear and the covering note merely sets forth what is obvious in the Procès Verbal that the settlement proposed by the Secretary of State is to be accomplished in three steps in the order mentioned. With reference to Your Excellency’s remarks regarding Mr. Secretary Hughes’ reference to the renewal by the Colombian Minister of his statement made in the meeting on March 4, that his Government will conclude the treaty with Brazil provided for in the third portion of the Secretary of State’s proposal, immediately after the ratification by Peru of the Colombian-Peruvian boundary treaty, I have the honor to reply as follows: In the Procès Verbal as originally drawn up it was provided as Your Excellency remembers that the Colombian Minister would say that he was authorized by his Government to state that should the treaty of March 24, 1922, between Colombia and Peru be ratified by the Government of Peru the Government of Colombia would conclude immediately thereafter the treaty with Brazil provided for in the third step of the proposal of the Secretary of State. Although this step of the proposal provided for action only by Colombia and Brazil, those Governments agreed, at the request of your Government, to change the words “by the Government of Peru” for the words “by both Governments”. It is manifest that this change, while it could benefit none of the three Governments concerned, might conceivably cause a delay to the prejudice of Brazil by requiring one extra step, namely the ratification by Colombia of the treaty of March 24, 1922, between Colombia and Peru, before the third step in the Secretary of State’s proposal, which relates only to action by Brazil and Colombia, would be carried out. The Colombian Minister therefore spontaneously addressed a note to the Secretary of State on March 4, before the signing of the Procès Verbal, which made it clear for the benefit of the Brazilian Government, the one principally concerned in this matter, that the

Colombian Government would conclude with Brazil the convention stipulated in the third step of the Secretary of State’s proposal immediately upon the ratification by Peru of the boundary treaty between Peru and Colombia signed March 24, 1922. In other words this was an assurance from Colombia to Brazil that although under the changed wording of the Procès Verbal, which was made to meet the desire of your Government, Colombia need not conclude the convention with Brazil until the boundary treaty between Colombia and Peru had been ratified by both those Governments, it would nevertheless do so upon the ratification of that treaty by Peru thus obviating the delay which might occur should the Colombian Congress not then be in session. This was a friendly act on the part of the Colombian Government which, I feel sure you will concur with me, not only does not change the Procès Verbal in any way, especially in so far as Peruvian interests are concerned, but is in the nature of an additional act of comity and friendship beyond the strict requirements of the Procès Verbal. Your Excellency will thus see that there are no changes in the Procès Verbal which I am glad to feel forms an equitable basis for the settlement of the questions pending between the three countries concerned in the matter of boundaries. As said before the suggestions of my predecessor consist in three steps. The first one has now been complied with and I feel confident that Your Excellency’s Government and the Government of Colombia will very shortly comply with the second and that the Brazilian and Colombian Governments will in due course comply with the third thus definitely disposing of the matter. Accept [etc.] FRANK B. KELLOGG

I told him that I had suggested to the Peruvian Ambassador yesterday that he urge his Government to have the Treaty ratified. I told him confidentially that the Special Representative of the Ecuadorian Government (Elizalde), now in Washington, called on me the other day and wanted a copy of the Peruvian-Colombian Boundary Treaty and I told him that I could not give it to him because it would not be published until it was ratified; that I thought there was nothing secret about it. He seemed to understand the terms and protested that it was contrary to Ecuadorian interests because it gave Peru the territory to the north of Ecuador and would make it more difficult for Ecuador to agree with Peru as to the boundary between Ecuador and Peru. I told him that it seemed to me that the question of whether Peru conceded territory to Colombia or Colombia to Peru was a question purely between those countries; that I could not see how it could legally affect Ecuadorian interests; that the territory belonged to those countries and they had a right to settle their disputes. He said that Ecuador had conceded certain territory to Colombia but did not expect Colombia to give it to Peru. I told him I could not see that this would make any difference. If the territory belonged to either one of those countries, they were at liberty to agree on their boundaries as they saw fit. In any event, I told him the United States could not interpose or offer its good offices to settle any dispute unless all the countries involved should request it and that it was not a matter in which we had a right to interfere. I told him he could convey this information in a confidential manner to his Government. 20 Not printed.

the adjustment of the questions of dispute which she had pending with the neighboring republics. President Leguía thanked me for my frank expression and assured me that he was heartily in favor of the ratification of the treaty and would proceed to secure it at the earliest practicable moment. Thereafter Señor Focion Mariategui, who is also the leader of the Government party as well as the Presiding Officer of the Chamber of Deputies, called at the Embassy by appointment on November 25th, and advised me that the President had consulted with him subsequent to my interview with the President on the subject referred to. Señor Mariategui, however, expressed the opinion that while the sentiment of Congress was growing more favorable to the Colombian Boundary Treaty, yet if it were presented for action at this time, a bitter debate would be precipitated and that he had grave doubts of the success of such a motion. He stated that he believed that in view of the increasing strength of the Leguía Government and of the favorable developments in the Tacna- Arica plebiscite which had been sponsored by President Leguía, sentiment would continue to grow still more favorable with reference to the treaty and that later on when the Plebiscite had made further progress or had been disposed of, favorable action could be obtained. I have [etc.] MILES POINDEXTER

Costa Rica and Panama [310] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)

[316] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)

demarcation of the boundary between Panama and Costa Rica. Your Excellency states that this matter has been pending for many years without any advance having been made in its final determination, and that the Government of Costa Rica is naturally anxious to settle it in order to avoid disagreeable and regrettable frontier incidents. Your Excellency suggests that now that there are new administrations in both Panama and Costa Rica, since the painful incidents of 1921, it should be possible to dispose of this matter without further friction. Finally Your Excellency states that your Government would be happy to have Panama appoint its engineer to delimit, in conjunction with those named by the arbitrator and by the Government of Costa Rica, the frontier as set forth in the arbitral award.

In reply I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that Panama also earnestly desires to end forever the boundary question with Costa Rica; but as the Republic of Panama in 1921 was the victim of an unjustifiable aggression which at that time obliged it to make heavy expenditures, my Government feels that the settlement of the pecuniary claim should be considered a question precedent to the demarcation of the frontier. Once this question has been settled the Government of Panama would be disposed to proceed with the delimitation, in accordance with the line fixed in the arbitral award,26 from the mouth of the Sixaola River to the point near the ninth degree of north latitude beyond Cerro Pando, and would accept the rest of the delimitation as far as the Pacific coast, it being always understood that in making this delimitation of the territory a just line will be established which protects the interests of the Panamans who live or hold properties in the region in controversy, permitting, as far as may be practicable, the lands of the said inhabitants or owners to remain within the frontiers of Panama. This could be done by the mere signing of a protocol in which would be incorporated the instructions which could be carried out by the Boundary Commissioners. The proposed solution does not involve any new feature inasmuch as the President of France, in explaining his decision at the request of Costa Rica, declared that the lines of the award were general, and that they remained subject to the changes which the Boundary Commissioners might consider necessary to make when setting the landmarks, taking into consideration the best interests of the two countries. To carry out the proposed solutions along the lines above described, Panama is disposed to enter into direct negotiations with Costa Rica as soon as possible. My Government wishes to have it understood, however, that in making these proposals it is animated by a spirit of pure conciliation, and that this attitude does not imply in any manner that Panama accepts the validity of the arbitral award, to which, it is understood, the note of Your Excellency refers.

I avail myself [etc.] H. J. ALFARO [Enclosure 2—Translation] The Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs (Alfaro) to the American Minister (South) PANAMA, January 30, 1925. MR. MINISTER: With reference to our interview of this morning permit me to inform Your Excellency that the Government of Panama considers that in order to proceed with the nomination of the Panaman engineer who should participate in the demarcation of the boundary line with Costa Rica, it is essential that a previous agreement be reached along the lines indicated in the note which I had the honor to address to Your Excellency dated the 29th instant, numbered S. P. 249. I avail myself [etc.] H. J. ALFARO 24 Latter not printed. 25 File translation revised.

line demarcated. This matter has been pending so long to the detriment of the development of the regions on both sides of the line, that the United States Government feels that the desire of the Costa Rican Government to have this matter now definitely determined is a reasonable one; and, being confident that the White Award and the Treaty of 1910 definitely establish the boundary my Government instructed me to invite Your Excellency’s Government to appoint its engineer to demarcate the line. Your Excellency’s Government declined to appoint its engineer and stated that it considered an arrangement with Costa Rica along the lines specified in your note of January 29, last, essential before Panama can appoint its engineer. You did inform me, however, that your Government is ready to enter immediately into direct negotiations with the Government of Costa Rica. In view of the position taken by Your Excellency’s Government I am instructed to make clear to you the position of the American Government in the premises: The Government of the United States feels that the boundary line should now be definitely established and that the Treaty of 1910 and the White Award are valid and binding on both Panama and Costa Rica. While my Government cannot depart from this position it is willing, as a further manifestation of its friendship and good-will toward Panama, to await for a reasonable time the outcome of such direct negotiations as Panama may undertake with the Government of Costa Rica. Any agreement satisfactory to both Panama and Costa Rica will of course be acceptable to my Government but in the absence of any such agreement my Government will have no other alternative than to afford facilities for the engineers appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States and by the Government of Costa Rica in demarcating the boundary line, should Panama refuse to cooperate therein. In the absence of a prior arrangement between Panama and Costa Rica my Government will proceed to this in January, 1926. With reference to the position adumbrated in Your Excellency’s note of the 29th ultimo, I am instructed to say that my Government can find no merit in the Panaman claim for indemnity against Costa Rica for the action taken by the latter in 1921. Without expressing any opinion regarding this action it should nevertheless be pointed out that Panama had then been in occupation for eleven years of territory which it clearly recognized in the Porras- Anderson Treaty of 1910 as belonging to Costa Rica and Costa Rica’s action was doubtless inspired by the desire to enter into possession of what had been recognized as belonging to it but was being withheld.

In order to further the negotiations my Government will be glad to express to the Costa Rican Government the hope that in order to bring about a settlement of this question and to pave the way for the reestablishment of friendly relations between the two countries it agree that upon marking this boundary the line should be so drawn as to give fair protection to the interests of the Panamans living or holding property within the district under discussion so far as this can be done consistently with the Award. Furthermore no mention will be made at this time to the Costa Rican Government of the readiness of the American Government to proceed in January, 1926, with the demarcation of the boundary line should no agreement have been reached in the meantime.” HUGHES 27 Not printed; it transmitted the substance of the note of January 30 from the Panaman Minister of Foreign Affairs, supra.

KELLOGG 34 Repeated to Panama as the Department’s telegram No. 70 of the same date.

On its face this offer seems reasonable, conciliatory, and eminently fair. Discuss the matter orally and informally with the President and the Foreign Minister and determine if some such arrangement cannot be agreed upon as affording once for all a satisfactory settlement of this long-drawn-out dispute. Telegraph results. KELLOGG 38 Repeated to Costa Rica as the Department’s telegram No. 27 of the same date (file

Casorla says it is his impression that the President will waive the demand for the return of the vessels mentioned in article 4 of the counterproposal, if necessary, but that the President thinks the return of the trophies is necessary in order to create a public sentiment in favor of his proposal. The exception which is mentioned in the last clause of article 5 of the counterproposal refers to the items in article 4. My information is that the Panaman representative has indicated that he is not willing to accept the President’s proposal even if Panaman Government should send him instructions to do so.

The above information should be considered confidential until the Costa Rican Minister at Washington informs the Department. Repeated to the American Legation in Panama. DAVIS 44 Neither printed.

Extension of the sovereignty of the United States over Swain’s Island by joint resolution of Congress, approved March 4, 1925 [323] The Secretary of State to President Coolidge Washington, May 22, 1924.

Mr. Jennings. The British Embassy at Washington under date of January 30, 1918, informed the Department that His Majesty’s Government understood that Swain’s Island was American territory and, accordingly, transmitted to the Department for consideration a copy of the evidence presented in support of the charges. The evidence was referred to the Secretary of the Navy, who caused an investigation to be made respecting the conditions obtaining on the island. Such investigation disclosed that the complaints were not justified and the Department so advised the British Embassy under

embodied in Sections 5570–5578 of the Revised Statutes, authorizes the President, in his discretion, upon the fulfillment of the conditions enumerated therein to declare that islands or keys not within the jurisdiction of any other Government, and upon which guano deposits have been discovered by American citizens, shall appertain to the United States. It is questionable, in view of the interpretation given the Act of August 18, 1856, by the Courts, whether an island declared to appertain to the United States becomes thereby a part of the territorial domain thereof. In the case of Grafflin versus the Nevassa Phosphate Company of New York (35 Fed. page 474), the Court stated in part as follows: “Looking to the language and purpose of the act of Congress, which is entitled ‘An act to authorize protection to be given to citizens of the United States who may discover deposits of guano,’ we find nothing which indicates that it was the intention of Congress to claim title to or to recognize in the discoverer, who was to be protected in the exclusive occupancy of the island for the purpose of obtaining and shipping guano therefrom, any title to the land; on the contrary, the provisions of the law entirely negative any idea that such islands were in any sense to become part of the territorial domain of the United States. It is clear that the United States extends its protection to the discoverer and his assigns solely to enable him to obtain the guano. The act of Congress does not authorize or countenance the establishment of any form of governmental authority or local tribunal; it does not look to colonization or permanent settlement. It treats these islands, as in fact they are, as unsuited for permanent settlement by civilized communities, and as only temporarily occupied for the purpose of obtaining the guano.” I may also mention that a further complication with regard to the status of Swain’s Island arises from the fact that no guano has, at least for some years, been removed from the island and the question whether the limited jurisdiction conferred by the Guano Islands Act continues over an island after the removal of guano has ceased does not appear to have been passed upon by the courts. While it is questionable whether the United States has acquired sovereignty over Swain’s Island by reason of the provisions of the Act of August 18, 1856, it appears to be clear that no other country is in a position to assert a claim to the island. The fact that the island is included in the list of guano islands appertaining to the United States, and has since 1856 been continuously in the possession of the Jennings family, who have always regarded themselves as American citizens, and that American jurisdiction over the island has been recognized by Great Britain, the only other country which might be in a position to dispute an American claim thereto, would seem to place upon this Government the responsibility either of extending its sovereignty over Swain’s Island and assuming the obligations which such a course would necessarily entail, or of disclaiming the exercise of any control or jurisdiction over the island and the inhabitants thereof.

jurisdiction of the administrative and judicial authorities of the government established therein by the United States. 47 Correspondence not printed. 48 Correspondence not printed.

Albania:

Contents

Recognition by the United States of the government of Ahmed Zogu1 1 For previous correspondence regarding relations with the revolutionary government in Albania, see Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 306 ff. [324] The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State

[329] The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State

I am trying to convince Zogu that the only way to clear his name is by swift and searching justice since he has been branded as a criminal before the world. Probably the whole matter will be dropped as soon as the records of the court have been changed to Zogu’s satisfaction, if we disregard the verdict from the outset. GRANT-SMITH

Renewed representations by the United States for equitable treatment of American oil interests in Albania6 6 For previous correspondence regarding oil concessions in Albania, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 371 ff. [333] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)

[338] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State

[345] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

Endeavor to obtain the text of the Italian agreement with Albania and especially inform Department concerning the period within which the second choice of areas for exploitation by Italian interests is to be made. KELLOGG 24 Agreement to the appointment of Dr. Terenc Toçi as Albanian consul general at New York had been temporarily withheld.

I gathered from conversation with Sheffield that, if properly selected, 50,000 hectares could include all the oil-bearing areas in Albania, and that the Italians did not know where the oil-bearing territories were. Inasmuch as the Italian Government have more interest in the political and strategic situation than in petroleum, it would appear that American interests could well go ahead and take their chances with third choice; for if the British do not pick the right areas, it is practically sure the Italians will not, as the districts to be assigned to them seem almost to have been decided upon. After considering the matter further, I withdraw the suggestion I made yesterday24a about representations to the Italian Ambassador in Washington. Repeated to Tirana and London. FLETCHER 24a Telegram not printed.

and Coleman that he refused to accept my written representations until I had had time to consider the fact that should the two unsatisfactory situations be mentioned in the same paper he would be able to use it against the United States in the press and before the League of Nations. After carefully going over the representations again and finding that the two situations were not dependent upon one another in any way I left the above mentioned Note Verbale at the Foreign Office. The Albanian Government’s reply, copies of which are transmitted herewith both in the original and in translation, was dictated in my presence by the Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Secretary General of the Foreign Office, Djemail Bey Dino, on the 23rd

The Albanian Minister for Foreign Affairs ad interim (Mufid Bey Libohova) to the American Chargé (Kodding) No. C IV 964 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs reiterates to the Legation of the United States of America its assurances as to the favorable reception of American requests in the economic and financial field. The Principle of the Open Door, according to the Albanian Government, has never ceased to be respected. The grant of the petroleum concession to the Railway Administration of the Italian State is combined with the institution of a State Bank in Albania and with the contracting of a loan of two million pounds sterling on the Italian market. It concerns, consequently, the existence of an indivisible economic whole. The American companies can without injury to the rights acquired by the Italians obtain other oil concessions on the same terms. As to the concession granted to the Anglo-Persian the Albanian Government was engaged with regard to that company previous to the recognition of Albania by the Government of the United States. In the note transmitted by the Legation of the United States to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs mention is made of profits which Albania should have derived from the geological work of American companies. The Albanian Government, as far as this Ministry knows, has not derived to date any profit from these works. As to the expenses incurred by the American companies it is evident that all these were made at their risk and peril. As for the murder of the two Americans the Albanian Government, strongly moved by that regrettable incident, immediately took all the measures that the situation permitted. In the interval there has been the revolution of last June but for which the Judicial proceedings which resulted would have been finished at the present time. The legal cabinet on its return to the country undertook again with more care the acceleration of the judicial proceedings in question and according to the progress of the trial the expected judgement will shortly be given. Furthermore several of the alleged murderers have been killed not having wished to surrender alive. Consequently the Albanian Government can not accept any responsibility of either a moral or material order; in a word, justice follows its course without any obstacle from any side. The courts will judge in full independence. The Albanian Government warmly and sincerely desires the continuation of cordial relations between the United States of America and Albania. TIRANA, March 23, 1925.

25 Note verbale not printed.

the matter and pointed out that the Anglo-Persian concession was not monopolistic, citing the grant of a larger area to the Italian Railroad Administration. Mr. Eyres felt that his Government would have interposed no objection had the French not made a matter of right of the question hut had merely suggested negotiating an agreement with the Anglo-Persian Oil Company. I have [etc.] TROJAN KODDING

The Anglo-Persian Oil Company is preparing to start drilling its first well on the 12th of this month at a point about 15 miles north and slightly east of Valona. I have [etc.]

C HAS. C . Haar

Approval by the Parliament of Albania of the American-Albanian agreement effected by an exchange of notes June 23 and 25, 1922 [361] The Commissioner in Albania (Blake) to the Secretary of State

each case by the submission of satisfactory evidence to the Department of State. It would be a further source of gratification to me to be able to draw to the attention of my government the fact that similar assurances had been given by the Government of Albania that favored-nation treatment also would be accorded American interests in Albania, coincident with an initiation of formal diplomatic relations between the Government of Albania and that of the United States of America; and that the Albanian Government will include this provision as a treaty clause in any future commercial convention that may be drawn up between Albania and the American Government. In connection with the above, for the completion of the archives of this Commission, I venture to suggest the propriety of our confirming these understandings by an exchange of written communications. Please accept, Mr. Prime Minister, the assurances of my highest consideration.” To the above, the Prime Minister replied as follows, under date of June 25, 1922: “Mr. Commissioner: In response to your letter of June 23, 1922, I beg to state that the Albanian Government feels the utmost satisfaction to enter into correspondence with the unofficial representative of the United States Government, which more than once has saved Albania from partition and utter destruction, by pleading her cause during most critical periods of her history. In connection with the two points you bring forth in your letter as needing settlement, before you could take any steps in favor of the official recognition of the Government of Albania by that of the United States, allow me to communicate to you that: 1. The Albanian Government will recognize the passports given by the authorities of the United States of America, to persons of Albanian origin, who are naturalized Americans in conformity with the American laws concerning nationalities. 2. In case a commercial treaty is concluded between the Government of the United States of America and that of Albania, the latter promises to insert in the said treaty, the most favored nation clause. Meanwhile, following the official recognition of the Government of Albania by that of the United States, and pending

the conclusion of the treaty above mentioned, the American interests in Albania will receive the most favored nation treatment. Furthermore, the Albanian Government is ready to show all kinds of facilities! to the installation of American capital in Albania, as well as to accord concessions to American concerns. Please accept, Mr. Commissioner, the assurances of my highest consideration.” I have [etc.] MAXWELL BLAKE

official recognition of the Government of Albania by that of the United States of America and pending the conclusion of the treaty above mentioned the American interests in Albania shall receive the most favored nation treatment as well as the Albanian interests in America. 3. This law takes effect on the day of its publication. 4. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of the Interior are charged with the execution of this law. SUL STAROVA Min. of Finance and Min. a. i. of Justice. M. JUKAMin. of Pub. Works and Min. a. i. of the Interior.

[Enclosure 2—Translation] Report Rendered by the Albanian Minister for Foreign Affairs TIRANA, November , 1925. The approval is proposed of the two conditions of the United States of America for the following reasons: 1. The Albanian State is engaged to the United States of America

H. Vaiom

Austria: Contents Informal agreement between the United States and Austria for continuation of reciprocal most-favored-nation treatment in customs matters (Documents 364-365)

Informal agreement between the United States and Austria for continuation of reciprocal most-favored-nation treatment in customs matters1

You know, of course, of the provisions of section 317 of the Tariff Act of 1922,6 according to which the President is empowered to proclaim additional or new duties not exceeding 50 percent ad valorem or the equivalent on articles imported from any country which discriminates in respect to any customs duties or other charges, or in the classification or regulation of commerce, against the commerce of the United States. You should not, however, make reference to section 317 unless the attitude of the Austrian authorities necessitates it.

KELLOGG

Belgium:

Contents

Convention between the United States and Belgium for the prevention of smuggling of intoxicating liquors, signed December 9, 1925 [366] The Acting Secretary of State to the Belgian Chargé (Tilmont) Washington, September 8, 1925.

Treaty Series No. 759 [Document 367] Convention Between the United States of America and Belgium, Signed at Washington, December 9, 19254 The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of the Belgians, being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States on the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America: Mr. Frank B. Kellogg, Secretary of State of the United States; and His Majesty the King of the Belgians: Baron de Cartier de Marchienne, His Majesty’s Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to the United States of America. Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and claims, without prejudice by reason of this agreement, with respect to the extent of their territorial jurisdiction. ARTICLE II (1) His Majesty the King of the Belgians agrees that Belgium will raise no objection to the boarding of private vessels under the Belgian flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States, its territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring to import or have imported alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel may be effected. (2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws.

(3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a greater distance from the coast of the United States, its territories or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases, however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the United States, its territories or possessions by a vessel other than the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this article can be exercised. ARTICLE III No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or possessions on board Belgian vessels voyaging to or from ports of the United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal, provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions. ARTICLE IV Any claim by a Belgian vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the rights conferred by Article II of this Convention or on the ground that it has not been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of the High Contracting Parties. Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to an umpire selected by the two Governments; should they fail to agree on the choice of that umpire, it shall be referred to the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded at The Hague October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III) of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard being had for Articles 70 and 74, but excepting Articles 53 and 54) as the Tribunal may consider to be applicable and to be consistent with the provisions of this agreement. All sums of money which may be awarded by the Tribunal on account of any claim shall be paid within eighteen months after the date of the final award without interest and without deduction, save as hereafter specified.

Each Government shall bear its own expenses. The expenses of the Tribunal shall be defrayed by a ratable deduction of the amount of the sums awarded by it, at a rate of five per cent, on such sums, or at such lower rate as may be agreed upon between the two Governments; the deficiency, if any, shall be defrayed in equal moieties by the two Governments. ARTICLE V This Convention shall be subject to ratification and shall remain in force for a period of one year from the date of the exchange of ratifications. Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of the High Contracting Parties may give notice of its desire to propose modifications in the terms of the Convention. If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of the term of one year mentioned above, the Convention shall lapse. If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications, the convention shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically, but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration modifications in the Convention, and to the provision that if such modifications are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Convention shall lapse. ARTICLE VI In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the provisions of the present Convention the said Convention shall automatically lapse, and, on such lapse or whenever this Convention shall cease to be in force, each High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have possessed had this Convention not been concluded. The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Majesty the King of the Belgians in accordance with the constitutional laws of Belgium; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible.

In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention in duplicate in the English and French languages and have thereunto affixed their seals.

Done at the city of Washington this ninth day of December, one thousand nine hundred and twenty-five. FRANK B KELLOGG [SEAL] BON DE CARTIER DE MARCHIENNE [SEAL] 4 In English and French; French text not printed. Ratification advised by the Senate,

Interest of the United States in German reparation payments to Belgium5

[373] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

7 For correspondence concerning payment by Belgium, see ibid. , pp. 140 ff.; for text of agreement, see ibid., 1923, vol. II, p. 180.

take position that Belgium should receive the percentage that would go to the United States under proposed plan if latter had accepted substitution of German liability described in Article 232 of Treaty of Versailles10 and letter

exchange. Request Department cable me tentative text of letter for Belgians to send me which will meet our angle of situation. Anticipate no difficulty in having it signed. Logan. HERRICK

“My dear Mr. Gutt: In reply to your letter of blank regarding the payment to the United States of the sums received by Belgium under Article 4 of the agreement of January 14, 1925, I beg to inform you that my Government has instructed me to state that it will apply on account of the indebtedness of the Belgian Government to the United States the sums thus received from the Belgian Government, it being understood that the Government of the United States of course continues to look to Belgium for the payment of the entire amount of its indebtedness to the United States. I am also directed to express my Government’s appreciation of your assurances given with respect to the intention of the Belgian Government to make these payments available to the Government of the United States in Belgian francs or currencies freely convertible into dollars. It is understood that any payment of the above account in currencies freely convertible into dollars will be credited to Belgium at the equivalent thereof in dollars at the current rate of exchange at the time of such payment. Payments may be made to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or by deposit in the national bank of the country whose currency is used, in the name of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for account of the Treasury of the United States, it being understood that the Federal Reserve Bank shall have the right at any time to convert into dollars the amount standing to its credit in the account.” (4) If Belgium desires any change in the foregoing draft letters, do not modify above texts without consulting Department. (5) [Paraphrase.] For your information it is Treasury’s intention to apply payments referred to against interest on the Belgian debt to the United States; upon receipt of the first payment Belgian Government will be duly advised. [End paraphrase.] HUGHES 17 Supra. 18 Not printed. 19 Camille Gutt, Belgian assistant representative on the Reparation Commission.

4. The total priority accorded the Belgian war debt under article 4 of the finance

periodical notification of the sums accruing in the second and subsequent Dawes Annuity years. Faithfully yours, JAMES A. LOGAN, Jr. [Enclosure] The Belgian Assistant Representative on the Reparation Commission (Gutt) to the American Unofficial Representative on the Reparation Commission (Logan) PARIS, 17 February, 1925. MY DEAR MR. LOGAN: I desire to confirm our understanding that the sums to be received by Belgium under Article Four of the Agreement of January 14, 1925, by reason of the debt of Belgium to the United States of America, shall be paid over to the United States by Belgium when and as received. My Government is prepared to take appropriate steps to that end and, having in mind your desire that payments be made in currencies freely convertible into dollars, I take pleasure to assure you that my Government, unless and until the Transfer Committee authorizes the transfer into foreign currencies of the marks received, will use the funds to be received under this head in marks for the payment on account of the deliveries in kind to be received by Belgium from Germany and will pay to the United States Government the equivalent amount in Belgian Francs or in currencies freely convertible into dollars. I shall be glad if you will let me know whether the foregoing is agreeable to your Government and advise me as to any details with respect to the procedure to be followed in making these sums promptly available to the Government of the United States. Faithfully yours, GUTT 24 Not printed. 24a Letters to Mr. Gutt not printed.

Brazil: Contents Disapproval by the Department of State of proposed loans from American bankers to the State of São Paulo (Documents 379-382)

Disapproval by the Department of State of proposed loans from American bankers to the State of São Paulo [379] Memorandum by Mr. Stokeley W. Morgan, of the Division of Latin American Affairs, of a Conversation With Mr. Earle Bailie, August 18, 1925 August 18, 1925

It seems to me that the question hinges on whether the financing of crops by the bank will result in maintaining an artificially high price or merely a steady normal price. MORGAN 1 Of J. & W. Seligman Co., New York, N. Y. 2 Francis White, chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs. 3 Not printed.

Bulgaria: Contents Continuance of American capitulatory rights in Bulgaria (Documents

Continuance of American capitulatory rights in Bulgaria [383] The Minister in Bulgaria (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

of the most favored nation. The Department would therefore, under present circumstances, be disposed to press for rights of a capitulatory character only in the event that other Powers advance claims by virtue of the capitulations. Your comments on the present situation and on the attitude of the various capitulatory Powers would be appreciated. FRANK B. KELLOGG

could be made of the Capitulations, both as a threat or as a barter, for the Bulgarians were ready to exchange anything against their removal at that time. Beginning with 1892 Bulgaria began, by treaty and agreement, to ameliorate her position. Almost invariably such steps in advance as she consummated were solely on the judicial side, and dealt mostly with civil law. Italy, Germany and Austria all withdrew the necessity of the presence of a consular representative in case of civil action. Curiously enough, Great Britain which had plead[ed] the cause of Bulgaria at Berlin never acquiesced to this modification. By degrees practically all cases to be tried before a civil court were allowed to pass without challenge by the Capitulary nations. Certain agreements were entered into to protect nationals undergoing bankruptcy or similar commercial misadventures in Bulgaria. By degrees Bulgaria came to believe herself free from the onus of the Capitulations and as they were not invoked, as far as I can discover, from 1908, when she became a sovereign state, and [to] the end of the war she, possibly, had every reason to think that they were considered non-existent. However, Article 175 of the Treaty of Neuilly clearly stipulates that the Capitulary rights are to be considered as still in existence. In 1924 and again in 1925 Great Britain, France and Italy acting in consort [concert?] brought up the question of the extraterritoriality of their consuls based on the Capitulations. I must state, that from conversation with the representatives of these powers, I am inclined to believe that the representations made were rather to obtain preferential commercial agreements as against relinquishment of the rights enjoyed, and if the point could be definitely forced home it was a point definitely gained. After the explosion in the Cathedral on April 16th, 1925, the situation respecting the capitulations became a trifle more involved. Léger, a Frenchman, and his wife were arrested for complicity in the affair. They had rented rooms to some of the conspirators and I believe personally that Léger knew that he was without the law. At all hazards [sic], the fact remains that, they were tried by a military tribunal and both were found guilty. Léger was condemned to death and his wife to life-imprisonment. The French Chargé did not hear till several days after his arrest that Léger was in prison. He contented himself at that time with furnishing the man with counsel and seeing that Madame Léger receive[d] some sort of preferential treatment from the prison authorities. However, after the two were sentenced, the French Minister who had newly arrived received instructions to request clemency of the King for Léger. The French Minister tells me that in making the request he pointed out that in other countries the crime of which the condemned was accused was not punishable by death,

and that should the Government persist in its attitude it might be necessary to invoke the Capitulations. He found a ready listener in the King, who at all times is against capital punishment, and the sentence was commuted to life imprisonment; which was satisfactory to all concerned. Inasmuch as the trial had caused a certain amount of comment, seeing that it comprised [sic] foreigners, the British Legation requested what its attitude should be under similar circumstances of the Home authorities. The reply was to the effect that in all cases of a criminal nature as soon as the Legation learned of the arrest all possible facilities should be arranged for the detained person. It is to be understood that this refers primarily to political crime. Later, as the case developed would be time enough to determine on a definite line of action. The attitude of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs is that the Capitulations no longer exist. They state that since the Capitulations have been abolished in Turkey they can no longer be invoked in Bulgaria, as they were merely a relic of Ottoman rule. When faced with Article 175 of the Treaty of Neuilly, to which the British Minister once called their attention, they assume a calmer attitude. There is no doubt that their existence is a thorn in the flesh, and that present Bulgaria would do much to remove them. At this moment the attitude of the three Great Powers holding capitulary rights under the terms of the Treaty of Neuilly is about as follows: Great Britain has withdrawn rights in Civil cases, but have made definite statements concerning their rights in Criminal cases. Will use Capitulations as a lever to obtain preferences in proposed Commercial Treaty. France has adopted a similar attitude, perhaps a trifle more conciliatory, but have made it clear that Capitulations certainly exist in Criminal cases. It is to be noted that all Roman Catholics in Bulgaria are supposedly under the protection of the French. This dates from the time of Francis the First, and it appears unlikely that it would be invoked. Italy joined Britain and France concerning the Consular question pointed out in the foregoing. Their Chargé (Italy’s) tells me that he does not believe that his country would invoke the Capitulations except in a flagrant miscarriage of justice in a criminal case. I believe, inasmuch as Italy is bending every effort toward capturing the trade of Bulgaria, that she prefers to use the Capitulations to gain some end and that eventually she will barter them away against some Treaty or Agreement. At the present moment American citizens in Bulgaria receive the same treatment as that accorded to the nationals of other countries. Moreover, such Americans as reside in this country are unlikely to run afoul of the law in criminal matters. Their litigation, such as it is, would come before a civil court.

There is one side of the question that must be considered attentively. In a country as prone to political disturbance as Bulgaria it would appear unwise to renounce capitulary rights in cases involving political crime. Even though the Government at Washington might not desire to institute a Consular Court to examine a case, nevertheless as shown in the case of Léger, the remindance [sic] of the existence of the Capitulations might have a salutary effect. It would appear to be the best policy to hold the capitulary rights of the United States in reserve against either the possible defense of a national or to use for some commercial preference. I have [etc.] PHILANDER L. CABLE

Canada:

Contents

Extradition convention between the United States and Canada applying to offenses against laws for the suppression of traffic in narcotics1 1 This convention resulted from a draft extradition treaty submitted by the representatives of the United States to their Canadian colleagues at the Ottawa

Treaty Series No. 719 [Document 386] Convention Between the United States of America and Great Britain in Respect of the Dominion of Canada, Signed at Washington, January 8, 19252 The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, in respect of the Dominion of Canada, being desirous of enlarging the list of crimes on account of which extradition may be granted with regard to certain offences committed in the United States or in the Dominion of Canada under the Conventions concluded between the United States and Great Britain on the 12th July,

ARTICLE III The present Convention shall be considered as an integral part of the said Extradition

Boundary treaty between the United States and Canada [387] Treaty Between the United States of America and Great Britain in Respect of the Dominion of Canada, Signed at Washington, February 24, 1925 Done at Washington the 24th day of February, A. D. 1925. Treaty Series No. 720

Treaty Series No. 720 [Document 387] Treaty Between the United States of America and Great Britain in Respect of the Dominion of Canada, Signed at Washington, February 24, 19257 The United States of America and His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, in respect of the Dominion of Canada, desiring to define more accurately at certain points and to complete the international boundary between the United States and Canada and to maintain the demarcation of that boundary, have resolved to conclude a treaty for these purposes, and to that end have appointed as their respective plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America: Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; and His Britannic Majesty, in respect of the Dominion of Canada: The Honorable Ernest Lapointe, K. C, a member of His Majesty’s Privy Council for Canada and Minister of Justice in the Government of that Dominion; Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers, which were found to be in due and proper form, have agreed to and concluded the following articles: ARTICLE I Whereas Article V of the Treaty concerning the boundary between the United States and the Dominion of Canada concluded on April 11, 1908, between the United States and Great Britain,7a provided for the survey and demarcation of the international boundary line between the United States and the Dominion of Canada from the mouth of Pigeon River, at the western shore of Lake Superior, to the northwesternmost point of Lake of the Woods, as defined by the treaties concluded between the United States

August 9, 1842, is intersected by the boundary from the northwesternmost point of Lake of the Woods to the summit of the Rocky Mountains as established under existing treaties and surveyed, charted, and monumented by the Joint Commission appointed for that purpose in 1872, at five points in Lake of the Woods adjacent to and directly south of the said northwesternmost point, and that there are two small areas of United States waters in Lake of the Woods, comprising a total area of two and one-half acres, entirely surrounded by Canadian waters; And whereas no permanent monuments were ever erected on these boundary lines north of the most southerly of these points of intersection; The Contracting Parties, in order to provide for a more practical definition of the boundary between the United States and the Dominion of Canada in Lake of the Woods, hereby agree that this most southerly point of intersection, being in latitude 49°

Canada from the northwesternmost point of Lake of the Woods south to the 49th parallel of north latitude and thence westward along said parallel of latitude to the summit of the Rocky Mountains, as established under existing treaties and surveyed, charted, and monumented by the Joint Commission appointed for that purpose by joint action of the Contracting Parties in 1872; And whereas Article VI of the said Treaty concluded on April 11, 1908, further provides that in carrying out the provisions of that article the agreement stated in the protocol of the final meeting of the said Joint Commission, dated May 29, 1876, should be observed, by which protocol it was agreed that in the intervals between the monuments along the 49th parallel of north latitude the boundary line has the curvature of a parallel of 49° north latitude; And whereas the Commissioners appointed and acting under the provisions of Article VI of the said Treaty of 1908 have marked the boundary line wherever necessary in the intervals between the original monuments established by the said Joint Commission, appointed in 1872, in accordance with the agreement stated in the Protocol of the final meeting, dated May 29, 1876, of the Joint Commission aforesaid, and as set forth in Article VI of the Treaty of 1908, by placing intermediate monuments on lines joining the original monuments, which have in each case the curvature of a parallel of 49° north latitude; And whereas the average distance between adjacent monuments as thus established or reestablished along the 49th parallel of north latitude from Lake of the Woods to the summit of the Rocky Mountains by the Commissioners acting under Article VI of the Treaty of 1908 is one and one-third miles and therefore the deviation of the curve of the 49th parallel from a straight or right line joining adjacent monuments is, for this average distance between monuments, only one-third of a foot, and in no case does the actual deviation exceed one and eight-tenths feet; And whereas it is impracticable to determine the course of a line having the curvature of a parallel of 49° north latitude on the ground between the adjacent monuments which have been established or reestablished by the Commissioners and the demarcation of the boundary would be more thoroughly effective if the line between adjacent monuments be defined as a straight or right line; And whereas it is desirable that the boundary at any point between adjacent monuments may be conveniently ascertainable on the ground, the Contracting Parties, in order to complete and render thoroughly effective the demarcation of the boundary between the United States and the Dominion of Canada from the northwesternmost point of Lake of the Woods to the summit of the Rocky Mountains, hereby agree that the line heretofore referred to as the international boundary between the United States and the Dominion of Canada from the northwesternmost point of Lake of the Woods to the summit of the Rocky Mountains shall be defined as consisting of a series of right or straight lines joining adjacent monuments as now established or reestablished and as now laid down on charts by the Commissioners acting under Article VI of the Treaty of 1908, in lieu of the definition set forth in the agreement of the aforesaid Joint Commissioners, dated May 29, 1876, and quoted in Article VI of the said Treaty of 1908, that in the intervals between the monuments the line has the curvature of the parallel of 49° north latitude.

ARTICLE III Whereas the Treaty concluded on May 21, 1910, between the United States and Great Britain,7c defined the international boundary line between the United States and the Dominion of Canada from a point in Passamaquoddy Bay lying between Treat Island and Friar Head to the middle of Grand Manan Channel and provided that the location of the line so defined should be laid down and marked by the Commissioners appointed under the Treaty of April 11, 1908; And whereas it has been found by the surveys executed pursuant to the said Treaty of May 21, 1910, that the terminus of the boundary line defined by said Treaty at the middle of Grand Manan Channel is less than three nautical miles distant both from the shore line of Grand Manan Island in the Dominion of Canada and from the shore line of the State of Maine in the United States, and that there is a small zone of waters of controvertible jurisdiction in Grand Manan Channel between said terminus and the High Seas; The Contracting Parties, in order completely to define the boundary line between the United States and the Dominion of Canada in the Grand Manan Channel, hereby agree that an additional course shall be extended from the terminus of the boundary line defined by the said Treaty of May 21, 1910,

the Atlantic Ocean and between Alaska and the Dominion of Canada from Mount St. Elias to Cape Muzon are nearing completion; And whereas boundary monuments deteriorate and at times are destroyed or damaged; and boundary vistas become closed by the growth of timber; And whereas changing conditions require from time to time that the boundary be marked more precisely and plainly by the establishment of additional monuments or the relocation of existing monuments; The Contracting Parties, in order to provide for the maintenance of an effective boundary line between the United States and the Dominion of Canada and between Alaska and the Dominion of Canada, as established or to be established and for the determination of the location of any point thereof, which may become necessary in the settlement of any question that may arise between the two governments hereby agree that the Commissioners appointed under the provisions of the Treaty of April 11, 1908, are hereby jointly empowered and directed: to inspect the various sections of the boundary line between the United States and the Dominion of Canada and between Alaska and the Dominion of Canada at such times as they shall deem necessary; to repair all damaged monuments and buoys; to relocate and rebuild monuments which have been destroyed; to keep the boundary vistas open; to move boundary monuments to new sites and establish such additional monuments and buoys as they shall deem desirable; to maintain at all times an effective boundary line between the United States and the Dominion of Canada and between Alaska and the Dominion of Canada, as defined by the present treaty and treaties heretofore concluded, or hereafter to be concluded; and to determine the location of any point of the boundary line which may become necessary in the settlement of any question that may arise between the two governments. The said Commissioners shall submit to their respective governments from time to time, at least once in every calendar year, a joint report containing a statement of the inspections made, the monuments and buoys repaired, relocated, rebuilt, moved, and established, and the mileage and location of vistas opened, and shall submit with their reports, plats and tables certified and signed by the Commissioners, giving the locations and geodetic positions of all monuments moved and all additional monuments established within the year, and such other information as may be necessary to keep the boundary maps and records accurately revised. After the completion of the survey and demarcation of the boundary line between the United States and the Dominion of Canada from the Gulf of Georgia to Lake Superior and from the St. Lawrence River to the Atlantic Ocean, as provided for by the Treaty of April 11, 1908, the Commissioners appointed under the provisions of that Treaty shall continue to carry out the provisions of this Article, and, upon the death, resignation, or other disability of either of them, the Party on whose side the vacancy occurs shall appoint an Expert Geographer or Surveyor as Commissioner, who shall have the same powers and duties in respect to carrying out the provisions of this Article, as are

conferred by this Article upon the Commissioner appointed under the provisions of the said Treaty of 1908. The Contracting Parties further agree that each government shall pay the salaries and expenses of its own commissioner and his assistants, and that the expenses jointly incurred by the Commissioners in maintaining the demarcation of the boundary line in accordance with the provisions of this Article shall be borne equally by the two Governments. ARTICLE V This treaty shall be ratified by the Contracting Parties and the ratifications shall be exchanged in Washington or Ottawa as soon as practicable. The treaty shall take effect on the date of the exchange of ratifications. Upon the expiration of six years from the date of the exchange of ratifications of the present treaty, or any time thereafter, Article IV may be terminated upon twelve months’ written notice given by either Contracting Party to the other, and following such termination the Commissioners therein mentioned and their successors shall cease to perform the functions thereby prescribed. In faith whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this treaty in duplicate and have hereunto affixed their seals. Done at Washington the 24th day of February, A. D. 1925. [SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] ERNEST LAPOINTE

Convention and protocol between the United States and Canada to regulate the level of the Lake of the Woods [388] Convention Between the United States of America and Great Britain in Respect of the Dominion of Canada, Signed at Washington, February 24, 1925 In faith whereof the above named Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention and affixed thereto their respective seals. Done in duplicate at Washington, the 24th day of February, 1925. Treaty Series No. 721 [389] Protocol Accompanying the Convention To Regulate the Level of the Lake of the Woods Done in duplicate at Washington the 24th day of February, 1925. Treaty Series No. 721 [390] Agreement Accompanying the Convention and Protocol To Regulate the Level of the Lake of the Woods In witness whereof the undersigned have signed this Agreement at Washington this 24th day of February, 1925. Treaty Series No. 721

Treaty Series No. 721 [Document 388] Convention Between the United States of America and Great Britain in Respect of the Dominion of Canada, Signed at Washington, February 24, 19258 The United States of America, and His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, in respect of the Dominion of Canada, Desiring to regulate the level of Lake of the Woods in order to secure to the inhabitants of the United States and Canada the most advantageous use of the waters thereof and of the waters flowing into and from the Lake on each side of the boundary between the two countries, and Accepting as a basis of agreement the recommendations made by the International Joint Commission in its final report of May 18th, 1917,9 on the Reference concerning Lake of the Woods submitted to it by the Governments of the United States of America and Canada, Have resolved to conclude a Convention for that purpose and have accordingly named as their plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America: Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; and His Britannic Majesty, in respect of the Dominion of Canada: The Honorable Ernest Lapointe, K. C., a member of His Majesty’s Privy Council for Canada and Minister of Justice in the Government of that Dominion; Who, having communicated to each other their full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I In the present Convention, the term “level of Lake of the Woods” or “level of the lake” means the level of the open lake unaffected by wind or currents. The term “Lake of the Woods watershed” means the entire region in which the waters discharged at the outlets of Lake of the Woods have their natural source. The term “sea level datum” means the datum permanently established by the International Joint Commission at the town of Warroad, Minnesota, of which the description is as follows: “Top of copper plug in concrete block carried below frost line, and located near fence in front of and to the west of new schoolhouse. Established

States of America and His Britannic Majesty, relating to boundary waters and questions arising between the United States and Canada.

ARTICLE II The level of Lake of the Woods shall be regulated to the extent and in the manner provided for in the present Convention, with the object of securing to the inhabitants of the United States and Canada the most advantageous use of the waters thereof and of the waters flowing into and from the Lake on each side of the boundary between the two countries for domestic and sanitary purposes, for navigation purposes, for fishing purposes, and for power, irrigation and reclamation purposes. ARTICLE III The Government of Canada shall establish and maintain a Canadian Lake of the Woods Control Board, composed of engineers, which shall regulate and control the outflow of the waters of Lake of the Woods. There shall be established and maintained an International Lake of the Woods Control Board composed of two engineers, one appointed by the Government of the United States and one by the Government of Canada from their respective public services, and whenever the level of the lake rises above elevation 1061 sea level datum or falls below elevation 1056 sea level datum the rate of total discharge of water from the lake shall be subject to the approval of this Board. ARTICLE IV The level of Lake of the Woods shall ordinarily be maintained between elevations 1056 and 1061.25 sea level datum, and between these two elevations the regulation shall be such as to ensure the highest continuous uniform discharge of water from the lake. During periods of excessive precipitation the total discharge of water from the lake shall, upon the level reaching elevation 1061 sea level datum, be so regulated as to ensure that the extreme high level of the lake shall at no time exceed elevation 1062.5 sea level datum. The level of the lake shall at no time be reduced below elevation 1056 sea level datum except during periods of low precipitation and then only upon the approval of the International Lake of the Woods Control Board and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be necessary to protect the use of the waters of the lake for domestic, sanitary, navigation and fishing purposes.

ARTICLE V If in the opinion of the International Lake of the Woods Control Board the experience gained in the regulation of the lake under Articles III and IV, or the provision of additional facilities for the storage of waters tributary to the lake, demonstrates that it is practicable to permit the upper limit of the ordinary range in the levels of the lake to be raised from elevation 1061.25 sea level datum to a higher level and at the same time to prevent during periods of excessive precipitation the extreme high level of the lake from exceeding elevation 1062.5 sea level datum, this shall be permitted under such conditions as the International Lake of the Woods Control Board may prescribe. Should such permission be granted, the level at which under Article III the rate of total discharge of water from the lake becomes subject to the approval of the International Lake of the Woods Control Board may, upon the recommendation of that Board and with the approval of the International Joint Commission, be raised from elevation 1061 sea level datum to a correspondingly higher level. ARTICLE VI Any disagreement between the members of the International Lake of the Woods Control Board as to the exercise of the functions of the Board under Articles III, IV, and V shall be immediately referred by the Board to the International Joint Commission whose decision shall be final. ARTICLE VII The outflow capacity of the outlets of Lake of the Woods shall be so enlarged as to permit the discharge of not less than forty-seven thousand cubic feet of water per second (47,000 c. f. s.) when the level of the lake is at elevation 1061 sea level datum. The necessary works for this purpose, as well as the necessary works and dams for controlling and regulating the outflow of the water, shall be provided for at the instance of the Government of Canada, either by the improvement of existing works and dams or by the construction of additional works. ARTICLE VIII A flowage easement shall be permitted up to elevation 1064 sea level datum upon all lands bordering on Lake of the Woods in the United States, and the United States assumes all liability to the owners of such lands for the costs of such easement. The Government of the United States shall provide for the following protective works and measures in the United States along the shores of Lake of the Woods and the banks of Rainy River, in so far as such protective works and measures may be necessary for the purposes of the regulation of the level of the lake under the present Convention:

namely, the removal or protection of buildings injuriously affected by erosion, and the protection of the banks at the mouth of Warroad River where subject to erosion, in so far in both cases as the erosion results from fluctuations in the level of the lake; the alteration of the railway embankment east of the town of Warroad, Minnesota, in so far as it may be necessary to prevent surface flooding of the higher lands in and around the town of Warroad; the making of provision for the increased cost, if any, of operating the existing sewage system of the town of Warroad, and the protection of the waterfront at the town of Baudette, Minnesota. ARTICLE IX The United States and the Dominion of Canada shall each on its own side of the boundary assume responsibility for any damage or injury which may have heretofore resulted to it or to its inhabitants from the fluctuations of the level of Lake of the Woods or of the outflow therefrom. Each shall likewise assume responsibility for any damage or injury which may hereafter result to it or to its inhabitants from the regulation of the level of Lake of the Woods in the manner provided for in the present Convention. ARTICLE X The Governments of the United States and Canada shall each be released from responsibility for any claims or expenses arising in the territory of the other in connection with the matters provided for in Articles VII, VIII, and IX. In consideration, however, of the undertakings of the United States as set forth in Article VIII, the Government of Canada shall pay to the Government of the United States the sum of two hundred and seventy-five thousand dollars ($275,000) in currency of the United States. Should this sum prove insufficient to cover the cost of such undertakings one-half of the excess of such cost over the said sum shall, if the expenditure be incurred within five years of the coming into force of the present Convention, be paid by the Government of Canada. ARTICLE XI No diversion shall henceforth be made of any waters from the Lake of the Woods watershed to any other watershed except by authority of the United States or the Dominion of Canada within their respective territories and with the approval of the International Joint Commission.

ARTICLE XII

The present Convention shall be ratified in accordance with the constitutional methods of the High Contracting Parties and shall take effect on the exchange of the ratifications, which shall take place at Washington or Ottawa as soon as possible. In faith whereof the above named Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention and affixed thereto their respective seals. Done in duplicate at Washington, the 24th day of February, 1925. [SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] ERNEST LAPOINTE

Treaty Series No. 721 [Document 389] Protocol Accompanying the Convention To Regulate the Level of the Lake of the Woods At the moment of signing the Convention between the United States of America, and His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, in respect of the Dominion of Canada, regarding the regulation of the level of Lake of the Woods, the undersigned Plenipotentiaries have agreed as follows: 1. The plans of the necessary works for the enlargement of the outflow capacity of the outlets of Lake of the Woods provided for in Article VII of the Convention, as well as of the necessary works and dams for controlling and regulating the outflow of the water, shall be referred to the International Lake of the Woods Control Board for an engineering report upon their suitability and sufficiency for the purpose of permitting the discharge of not less than forty-seven thousand cubic feet of water per second (47,000 c. f. s.) when the level of the lake is at elevation 1061 sea level datum. Any disagreement between the members of the International Lake of the Woods Control Board in regard to the matters so referred shall be immediately submitted by the Board to the International Joint Commission whose decision shall be final. 2. Should it become necessary to set up a special tribunal to determine the cost of the acquisition of the flowage easement in the United States provided for in Article VIII of the Convention, the Government of Canada shall be afforded an opportunity to be represented thereon. Should the cost be determined by means of the usual judicial procedure in the United States, the Government of Canada shall be given the privilege of representation by counsel in connection therewith. 3. Since Canada is incurring extensive financial obligations in connection with the protective works and measures provided for in the United States along the shores of Lake of the Woods and the banks of Rainy River, under Article VIII of the Convention, the plans, together with the estimates of cost, of all such protective works and measures as the Government of the United States may propose to construct or provide for within five years of the coming into force of the Convention shall be referred to the International Lake of the Woods Control Board for an engineering report upon their suitability and sufficiency for the purpose of the regulation of the level of the

lake under the Convention. Any disagreement between the members of the International Lake of the Woods Control Board in regard to the matters so referred shall be immediately submitted by the Board to the International Joint Commission whose decision shall be final. 4. In order to ensure the fullest measure of cooperation between the International Lake of the Woods Control Board and the Canadian Lake of the Woods Control Board provided for in Article III of the Convention, the Government of Canada will appoint one member of the Canadian Board as its representative on the International Board. 5. Until the outlets of Lake of the Woods have been enlarged in accordance with Article VII of the Convention, the upper limit of the ordinary range in the levels of the lake provided for in Article IV of the Convention shall be elevation 1060.5 sea level datum, and the International Lake of the Woods Control Board may advise the Canadian Lake of the Woods Control Board in respect of the rate of total discharge of water from the lake which may be permitted. In faith whereof the undersigned Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Protocol and affixed thereto their respective seals. Done in duplicate at Washington the 24th day of February, 1925. [SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] ERNEST LAPOINTE

Treaty Series No. 721 [Document 390] Agreement Accompanying the Convention and Protocol To Regulate the Level of the Lake of the Woods At the moment of signing the Convention and Protocol between the United States of America and His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, in respect of the Dominion of Canada, regarding the regulation of the level of Lake of the Woods, the undersigned Plenipotentiaries have agreed that the Government of the United States and the Government of the Dominion of Canada shall, without delay, address to the International Joint Commission identic letters of reference relating to Rainy Lake and other upper waters of the Lake of the Woods watershed as follows: “I have the honor to inform you that, in pursuance of Article 9 of the Treaty of the 11th January 1909, between the United States and Great Britain, the Governments of the United States and Canada have agreed to refer to the International Joint Commission the following questions for examination and report, together with such conclusions and recommendations as may be deemed appropriate: “Question 1. In order to secure the most advantageous use of the waters of Rainy Lake and of the boundary waters flowing into and from Rainy Lake, for domestic and sanitary purposes, for navigation purposes, for fishing purposes, and for power, irrigation and reclamation purposes; and in order to secure the most advantageous use of the shores and harbors of both Rainy Lake and the boundary waters flowing into and from the lake, is it, from an economic standpoint, now practicable and desirable, having regard for all or any of the interests affected thereby, or under what conditions will it become thus practicable and desirable— “(a) To regulate the level of Rainy Lake in such a manner as to permit the upper limit of the ordinary range of the levels to exceed elevation 1108.61 sealevel datum? “(b) To regulate the level of Namakan Lake and the waters controlled by the dams at Kettle falls in such a manner as to permit the upper limit of the ordinary range of the levels to exceed elevation 1120.11 sealevel datum?

“(c) To provide storage facilities upon all or any of the boundary waters above Namakan Lake? “Question 2. If it be found practicable and desirable thus (1) to regulate the level of Rainy Lake, and/or (2) to regulate the level of Namakan Lake and the waters controlled by the dams at Kettle falls, and/or (3) to provide storage facilities upon all or any of the boundary waters above Namakan Lake— “(a) What elevations are recommended? “(b) To what extent will it be necessary to acquire lands and to construct works in order to provide for such elevations and/or storage, and what will be their respective costs? “(c) What interests on each side of the boundary would be benefited? What would be the nature and extent of such benefit in each case? How should the cost be apportioned among the various interests so benefited? “Question 3. What methods of control and operation would be feasible and advisable in order to regulate the volume, use and outflow of the waters in each case in accordance with such recommendations as may be made in answer to questions one and two? “Question 4. What interests on each side of the boundary are benefited by the present storage on Rainy Lake and on the waters controlled by the dams at Kettle falls? What are the nature and extent of such benefits in each case? What is the cost of such storage and how should such cost be apportioned among the various interests so benefited? “Each Government will appoint from its public service such engineering and other technical assistance as may be necessary to enable the Commission to make the desired examination and to submit their report.” IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned have signed this Agreement at Washington this 24th day of February, 1925. CHARLES EVANS HUGHES Secretary of State of the United States of America

ERNEST LAPOINTE Minister of Justice in the Government of the Dominion of Canada Continued protests by the Canadian Government against increased diversion of the waters of the Great Lakes11

the Great Lakes, if and when constructed, and post a guarantee in the way of a bond or certified check in the amount of $1,000,000 as an evidence of its good faith in this matter. (3) The execution of the sewage treatment program and the diversion of water from Lake Michigan shall be under the supervision of the U. S. District Engineer at Chicago, and the diversion of water from Lake Michigan shall be under his direct control in times of flood on the Illinois and Des Plaines Rivers. (4) If, within six months after the issuance of this permit, the City of Chicago does not adopt a program for metering at least ninety percent of its water service and provide for the execution of said program at the average rate of ten percent per annum thereafter, this permit may be revoked without notice. The Secretary desires that the discussion at the hearing be limited strictly to the matter contained in the application for the permit, that is, the amount of water to be granted to Chicago and the conditions upon which the issuance of a permit should be contingent. As the time which can be given each side for the hearing is limited, it is desired that the number of speakers be limited to as few as practicable, and it is hoped that the proponents and opponents of the application will select their speakers with this object in view.

The Government of Canada feel confident that the Government of the United States is fully alive to the advisability of restricting within the narrowest possible limit the amount of water to be diverted from Lake Michigan for use by the Sanitary District of Chicago, and in this connection, they feel certain that no permit will be granted for the diversion of any water not essential to safeguarding the health of the population of that city, and, further, that the period during which such diversion must on this account continue, will be made as short as circumstances permit.

I should be most grateful if you would be so good as to communicate the contents of this note to the interested authorities of the United States Government. I have [etc.] ESME HOWARD

per second from Lake Michigan through the channels of said Sanitary District; AND WHEREAS, In the judgment of the Secretary of War, an annual average diversion of more than 8,500 cubic feet per second should not now be permitted; NOW THEREFORE, this is to certify that, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Engineers, the Secretary of War, under the provisions of the aforesaid statute, hereby authorizes the said Sanitary District of Chicago to divert from Lake Michigan, through its main drainage canal and auxiliary channels, an amount of water not to exceed an annual average of 8,500 cubic feet per second, the instantaneous maximum not to exceed 11,000 cubic feet per second, upon the following conditions: 1. That there shall be no unreasonable interference with navigation by the work herein authorized. 2. That if inspections or any other operations by the United States are necessary in the interests of navigation, all expenses connected therewith shall be borne by the permittee. 3. That no attempt shall be made by the permittee or the owner to forbid the full and free use by the public of any navigable waters of the United States. 4. That the Sanitary District of Chicago shall carry out a program of sewage treatment by artificial processes which will provide the equivalent of the complete (100%) treatment of the sewage of a human population of at least 1,200,000 before the expiration of the permit. 5. That the Sanitary District shall pay its share of the cost of regulating or compensating works to restore the levels or compensate for the lowering of the Great Lakes system, if and when constructed, and post a guarantee in the way of a bond or certified check in the amount of $1,000,000 as an evidence of its good faith in this matter. 6. That the Sanitary District shall submit for the approval of the Chief of Engineers and the Secretary of War plans for controlling works to prevent the discharge of the Chicago River into Lake Michigan in times of heavy storms. These works shall be constructed, in accordance with the approved plans and shall be completed and ready for operation by July 1, 1929. 7. That the execution of the sewage treatment program and the diversion of water from Lake Michigan shall be under the supervision of the U. S. District Engineer at Chicago, and the diversion of water from Lake Michigan shall be under his direct control in times of flood on the Illinois and Des Plaines Rivers.

8. That if, within six months after the issuance of this permit, the City of Chicago does not adopt a program for metering at least ninety per cent of its water service and provide for the execution of said program at the average rate of ten per cent per annum, thereafter, this permit may be revoked without notice. 9. That if, in the judgment of the Chief of Engineers and the Secretary of War, sufficient progress has not been made by the end of each calendar year in the program of sewage treatment prescribed herein so as to insure full compliance with the provisions of condition 4, this permit may be revoked without notice. 10. That this permit is revocable at the will of the Secretary of War, and is subject to such action as may be taken by Congress. 11. That this permit, if not previously revoked or specifically extended, shall cease and be null and void on December 31, 1929. WITNESS my hand this 3rd day of March, 1925. H. TAYLOR Major General, Chief of Engineers WITNESS my hand this 3rd day of March, 1925. JOHN W. WEEKS Secretary of War 13 Not printed.

Second,—By what amount will this average flow of water passing Lockport be immediately reduced under the terms of the permit of 3rd of March; Third,—By what amount will this average flow be further reduced by 31st of December, 1929, the date upon which the new permit terminates. I have [etc.] (For the Ambassador) H. G. CHILTON

and carry into execution a program of metering its water supply. By December 31,

would recognize and permit of a total diversion passing Lockport of 11,000 second feet. While it is understood from your note of June the 15th that the Government of the United States anticipates that at the expiry of a five year period the annual diversion may be reduced between 1,750 and 3,000 second feet, this is far from reassuring since even if the larger suggested reduction becomes effective, the diversion at the beginning of 1930 will still be almost double that authorized by the Secretary of War of the United States when action for an injunction against the Sanitary District of Chicago was commenced in 1908.

Furthermore, the Government of Canada would point out that works dependent on the levels and flow of the Great Lakes System cannot be confidently projected or economically carried out if diversions from the watershed are permitted without mutual assent thereto. Moreover, in this connection the continued and increasing impairment of the natural levels and discharge of the Great Lakes System, due to the diversion from Lake Michigan, raises the question as to the extent to which the Canadian Government would be warranted in giving consideration to any further improvements therein until there is an assurance of definite curtailment of such diversion. In connection with this matter the attention of the Canadian Government has been called to a permit dated the 30th April, 1925, from the United States Acting Secretary of War, authorizing the Sanitary District of Chicago to carry out certain dredging work in the Calumet river system, which it is understood will involve an expenditure of $1,500,000 and enable the Calumet-Sag Channel to bypass 2000 second feet into the main drainage canal. If the report of this large expenditure is correct, it would appear to indicate that the Sanitary District is proceeding in expectation of continued diversion. The Canadian Government is therefore compelled to conclude that despite repeated protests no immediate or definite reduction has been provided and, furthermore, that if the above interpretation of the permit of 3rd March, 1925, is confirmed, the effect will actually be to authorize a greater diversion than is now being made. I accordingly have the honour to request that you will be so good as to communicate the above consideration to the competent authorities of the United States Government and to enquire whether it is not their intention to take measures to ensure immediate as well as more definite and more substantial future curtailment in the amount of water which is being diverted with such serious results from the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence System. I have [etc.]

H. G. Cuno

The expression “measured at the intakes”, used to designate the places where the total actual flow should not exceed that specified in the permit, is hypothetical as it is impracticable to measure the diversion at the numerous intakes with accuracy. For this reason, the practical enforcement of the limitation placed upon the diversion will be carried out at Lockport. Measurements taken there will determine the gross diversion, sanitary and domestic, and, as accurate information is available in regard to the amount of water pumped by the City of Chicago for domestic purposes, the sanitary diversion may be computed by subtracting the domestic diversion from the gross flow at Lockport. The term “diversion” as used in the permit is construed to include the discharge of the Chicago and Calumet Rivers. In view of the methods employed in computing the amount of the diversion the discharge of these streams will be included within the

I shall be grateful if you will cause the foregoing statements to be brought to the attention of the Canadian Government. Accept [etc.] FRANK B. KELLOGG

Intimation by the Canadian Government of its claim to sovereignty in the islands of the North [398] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State Washington, June 15, 1925.

L have [etc.] H.G. Cuntron

The above Sub-District is in charge of a Commissioned officer of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police who resides at any one of the posts, as circumstances demand. All the posts are visited once a year by the Commissioned Officer mentioned and by the officials of the Canadian Department of the Interior. In regard to the duties of members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police stationed in the Eastern Arctic, it may be added that all the Mounted Police Detachments in the Eastern Arctic are Post Offices and Customs Ports, and the Non-Commissioned Officers in charge have been appointed Postmasters and Collectors of Customs. Furthermore, the duties of members of the Force stationed in the Eastern Arctic include the supervision of the welfare of the Eskimo for the Department of Indian Affairs, educating them as far as possible in the White Man’s Laws and issuing destitute relief where necessary, enforcement of all the Ordinances and Regulations of the Northwest Territories, including Game Laws and the protection of Musk Oxen, and the issue of Game, Animal and Bird Licenses to the various Trading Companies, the supervision of liquor permits, the enforcement of the Migratory Birds Convention Act for the Department of the Interior; the enforcement of the Criminal Code and Assistance to the Post Office and Customs Department, as set forth in the last paragraph above, as well as to the Department of Mines and Agriculture in the collection of Eskimo material and ethnological and biological specimens. Members of the Force are also called upon to assist in the taking of the Census and assisting the Director of Meteorological Service in the taking of readings at the different Posts from time to time, and to supply topographical information to the Federal Service. In addition, Police patrols to surrounding settlements and Eskimo villages and also extended patrols to remote points are also made by each detachment for the purpose of obtaining the information required. In bringing the above information to your notice, I have the honour to renew the assurance conveyed to you in my above mentioned note of the Canadian Government’s readiness to afford the MacMillan expedition any assistance within the power of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the other Dominion officers in Canadian Northern territories. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

Regulations to give effect to the convention of June 6, 1924, between the United States and Canada for the suppression of smuggling15

the absence of any collusion, and subject moreover to payment of the expenses of the seizure and detention and to the abandonment of any claims by the owners against the customs, or the customs officers, warehousemen or agents, for compensation or damages for the seizure, detention, warehousing or keeping of the property. ARTICLE IV The High Contracting Parties reciprocally agree to exchange information concerning the names and activities of all persons known or suspected to be engaged in violation of the narcotic laws of the United States or of Canada, respectively. ARTICLE V It is agreed that the customs and other administrative officials of the respective Governments of the United States and of Canada shall upon request be directed to attend as witnesses and to produce such available records and files or certified copies thereof as may be considered essential to the trial of civil or criminal cases, and as may be produced compatibly with the public interest. The cost of transcripts of records, depositions, certificates, and letters rogatory in civil or criminal cases, and the cost of first-class transportation both ways, maintenance and other proper expenses involved in the attendance of such witnesses shall be paid by the nation requesting their attendance at the time of their discharge by the court from further attendance at such trial. Letters rogatory and commissions shall be executed with all possible despatch and copies of official records or documents shall be certified promptly by the appropriate officials in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the respective countries. ARTICLE VI The following offenses are added to the list of offenses numbered 1 to 3 in Article I of the Treaty concluded between the United States and Great Britain on May 18, 1908,16 with reference to reciprocal rights for the United States and Canada in the matters of conveyance of prisoners and wrecking and salvage, that is to say: 4. Offenses against the narcotic laws of the respective Governments. ARTICLE VII

No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be applicable or attached to alcoholic liquors or to vessels, vehicles or persons by reason of the carriage of such liquors when they are in transit under guard by Canadian authorities through the territorial waters of the United States to Skagway, Alaska, and thence by the shortest route, via the White Pass and Yukon Railway, upwards of twenty miles to Canadian territory, and such transit shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit of alcoholic liquors through the Panama Canal or on the Panama Railroad, provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel or vehicle on which they are carried remains within the United States, its territories or possessions, and that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions. ARTICLE VIII This Convention shall be ratified, and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible. The Convention shall come into effect at the expiration of ten days from the date of the exchange of ratifications, and it shall remain in force for one year. If upon the expiration of one year after the Convention shall have been in force no notice is given by either party of a desire to terminate the same, it shall continue in force until thirty days after either party shall have given notice to the other of a desire to terminate the Convention.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention in duplicate and have thereunto affixed their seals. DONE at the city of Washington this sixth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. WHEREAS it is desirable that uniform regulations should be established by the Government of the United States and the Government of the Dominion of Canada to give effect to the provisions of the treaty; AND WHEREAS, the following regulations have been agreed upon by representatives of the two Governments and have been submitted to me for approval on the part of the United States: ARTICLE I Section 1. The officers authorized to furnish, request and receive information as provided in Article I of the Convention shall be as follows:—For the Dominion of Canada, the Deputy Minister of Customs and Excise, the Chief, Customs-Excise Preventive Service

and Collectors of Customs and Excise; for the United States of America, Consuls, Collectors of Customs and United States District Attorneys. In addition, other officers may be designated and authorized, for Canada, by the Minister of Customs and Excise, and for the United States by the Secretary of the Treasury or the Attorney General. Section 2. Advance or immediate information respecting the clearance of vessels to any port shall be so furnished where there is reasonable ground to suspect that the owners or persons in possession of the cargo intend to smuggle or illegally introduce it into Canada or the United States. It shall be the duty of any such officer of either government having reasonable ground to suspect an intent to smuggle or illegally introduce any merchandise into the other country, immediately to inform by telegraph or telephone, at the expense of the receiving government, the appropriate officer of such government, as provided in Section 1. Arrangements may be made to furnish such information to a specially-named officer when it is deemed advisable to do so. Section 3. For the purpose of Section 2, reasonable ground to suspect an intent to smuggle or unlawfully to introduce goods or merchandise shall be deemed to exist not only when the officers of the country from which the goods are being conveyed suspect that unlawful operations are contemplated but also when the Minister of Customs and Excise, for Canada, or the Secretary of the Treasury, for the United States, or the duly authorized representative of either, certifies, one to the other, that he has reasonable grounds for believing that such vessel or the owner or possessor of its cargo or of such goods or merchandise is engaged in or about to engage in such unlawful operations. Section 4. All information furnished under the provisions of this article of the Convention shall be for official use only and may be designated as confidential by the officer furnishing it. The source of all information furnished as confidential shall not be disclosed without the consent of the officer who furnished it and any officer who violates the provisions of this section will be subject to severe disciplinary action. ARTICLE II

Collectors of Customs and Excise of Canada and Collectors of Customs of the United States will refuse to clear any vessel in accordance with the provisions of Article II of the Convention. Lists of articles, the importation of which is prohibited and to which it is desired that the provisions of Article II shall be applied, will be exchanged between the Minister of Customs and Excise of Canada and the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States. ARTICLE III Section 1. A national of the United States or of Canada desiring to make claim under the provisions of Article III of the Convention shall file a petition with the Minister of Customs and Excise or the Secretary of the Treasury, as the case may be, setting out the facts and making request for the return of the property. Section 2. The claimant must produce evidence of his ownership and of the absence of collusion on his part in the theft of the property. Section 3. Upon the submission of satisfactory evidence, the return of the property will be authorized by the appropriate official, provided the claimant pays to the Collector of Customs or Collector or other proper officer of Customs and Excise, as the case may be, all expenses incurred in the seizure and detention of the property and files in writing a waiver and release of all possible claims for compensation and damages incident to the seizure and detention of the property against the Government and any and all Government officers involved. Section 4. Customs officials of the United States or Customs and Excise officials of Canada will give assistance to the nationals of the other Government by permitting the inspection by such nationals of property under seizure; provided the Customs or Customs and Excise officials are satisfied that such requests for inspection are made in good faith. When such stolen property is identified, such nationals will be furnished, so far as known, with the names and description of persons from whom the property was seized and other persons who have had possession of such property subsequent to the theft thereof. ARTICLE IV Section 1. The information to be exchanged under Article IV of the Convention shall be the name, and, where available, the

description, Bertillon measurements, fingerprints, photograph, and record, or other relevant information regarding the following persons: (a) Every person known or suspected to be engaged or about to engage in smuggling or unlawfully importing narcotic drugs from the United States to Canada, or vice versa. (b) Every person arrested for smuggling or unlawfully importing or bringing any narcotic drugs into the United States from Canada, or vice versa. (c) Every person arrested in the United States or in Canada for a serious violation of the narcotic laws of either government, if there is reasonable ground for believing that such person has unlawfully imported or brought in narcotic drugs. Section 2. This information shall be exchanged between the Head, Narcotic Division, Prohibition Unit, Washington, D. C, and the Chief, Narcotic Division, Department of Health, Ottawa, Canada. Section 3. If prompt information is necessary to enable the officers of either government to apprehend a person in the act of smuggling or unlawfully importing narcotic drugs, it may be communicated to the appropriate officers of the other government by mail, or, if necessary, by telegraph or telephone, at the expense of the government receiving the information. A report containing the substance of the communication shall be mailed to the officers named in Section 2. ARTICLE V Section 1. In case documentary evidence or the testimony of any officer or employee of the United States is desired in Canada under the provision of Article V of the Convention, request therefor will be made by the appropriate officer of the Canadian Department of Justice through the Consul General of the United States at Ottawa, to the Secretary of State, who will transmit the request to the head of the Department or independent organization of the United States Government having such evidence or employing such official. After consideration thereof, the head of the Department or

independent organization will make the appropriate order in the premises. Section 2. In case documentary evidence or the testimony of any official of Canada is desired in the United States under the provisions of Article V of the Convention, request therefor will be made by the proper officer of the Department of Justice to the Secretary of State, who will transmit it through the Consul General of the United States at Ottawa to the Minister of the Canadian Government under whom the documentary evidence is to be found or the officer or employee is employed. After consideration thereof the Minister will make the appropriate order in the premises. Section 3. Whenever any officer or employee of the United States is required to go to Canada under the provisions of Article V of the Convention, and whenever any Canadian officer or employee is likewise required to go to the United States, transportation from his official station to the place to which he is required to go, or sufficient money to pay the same, shall be furnished to him by or on behalf of the Government requesting his attendance before he leaves his official station. All other expenses required by Article V to be paid by the requesting nation shall be paid in full before he departs from the place at which his testimony was required. ARTICLE VI Section 1. If, under Article VI of the Convention, a narcotic agent or other officer of either the United States or Canada desires to convey a prisoner charged with an offense against the narcotic laws of his own Government across the territory of the other

ARTICLE VII Section 1. When a shipment of liquors is to be made to Canadian Territory under Article VII of the Convention, a full description of the packages, and contents thereof, will be furnished by Canadian authorities to United States customs authorities at Skagway, Alaska. A second copy thereof will be delivered to and retained by the master of the vessel having such liquors on board for transportation. Section 2. Said shipment, consisting of the packages as listed and described in the document furnished as required by Section 1, will be locked securely in a separate and safe compartment on the vessel transporting the same from the Canadian port to Skagway, Alaska, and the owners and master of the vessel, under penalties of the law of Canada and of the United States, will be responsible for the safe delivery of said liquors to Skagway, Alaska. Section 3. Before leaving Canada, said compartment will be placed under Canadian and United States customs seals, and remain under the two seals continuously until the vessel arrives at its destination at Skagway. Section 4. The shipment will be accompanied on the vessel by one or more guards representing Canadian authorities. Section 5. After arrival of the vessel at Skagway, Alaska, the seals on the compartment will be broken in the presence of an officer of the United States customs service, the Canadian customs officer at Skagway and the master of the vessel or his representative. The packages of liquor will be checked and will be removed from the vessel under supervision of United States and Canadian customs officers to a car of the White Pass and Yukon Railway. Such car will then be securely locked and placed under United States and Canadian customs seals. A Canadian guard or guards will accompany the car and shipment until it arrives in Canadian territory. Upon arrival at the point of exit from the United States the car will be examined by a United States customs officer and, if the seals are found intact, such officer shall certify to that effect upon the carrier’s manifest, allow the car to proceed into Canadian territory, and return to the Deputy Collector at Skagway the mail copy of the carrier’s manifest as a certificate of exportation. If the seals are not found intact, the customs officers of the two

governments shall prepare a joint report stating the condition in which the shipment arrived at such point of exit, and the shipment shall then be allowed to proceed to destination. Section 6. If, at Skagway, or at such point of exit, the shipment is not found intact when checked, the authorities of both Governments will cooperate in proceedings to apprehend and prosecute the person or persons responsible for the loss or diversion of the liquor. NOW, THEREFORE, I, Calvin Coolidge, President of the United States of America, considering it expedient and necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of the said Convention of June 6, 1924, that uniform regulations for that purpose be adopted by the two Governments, do hereby approve the foregoing regulations to govern acts of officers of the United States. CALVIN COOLIDGE THE WHITE HOUSE , September 19, 1925.

Chile:

Contents

Disinclination of the United States to grant asylum during revolutionary crisis in Chile [403] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

An individual fleeing before a mob might be given temporary refuge in an American mission, if he entered the same in the course of flight, until the mob dispersed or until the mission could turn him over to the authorities of the country, de facto or otherwise, who were in a position to protect him from similar out-breaks of mob violence. The fact that a person already in the custody of the local authorities is in danger of mob violence would not suffice to justify intervention by American diplomatic officers. Should the individual break away from the authorities in the face of a mob attack and seek refuge in an American mission he might be given refuge until the authorities were again in a position to resume custody of the fugitive and accord him protection from mob violence. The foregoing principles will guide you hereafter in the relevant situations with which you may be confronted. HUGHES

The Tacna-Arica question

Renewal of civil war in North China and refusal by the United States to lend itself to a policy of intervention [413] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[425] The Netherlands Minister in China (Oudendijk), Senior Minister, to the American Minister (Schurman) Peking, February 5, 1925.

[432] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) Washington, March 28, 1925—noon.

[439] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[446] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[453] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[460] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

“To the masters of the Republic of China. I am certainly gratified for the welcome accorded me by all you gentlemen on my arrival. This time I have not come to fight for a position for myself nor for power. I have come especially to save the country in cooperation with you gentlemen. Thirteen years ago I with all you gentlemen overthrew the Manchu Government. This was done in order to obtain freedom and equality for the people of China but the freedom and equality of the people of China had already been sold to the different nations by the Manchu Government through the unequal treaties. As a result we still occupy the position of a secondary colony. Therefore we must save the nation. The principles involved in saving the country are numerous and there are many methods. It will be very easy to accomplish it. I had the intention of speaking to you gentlemen about these things in detail but as I am now sick it will be best to defer this until I am well. I wish to thank you for your kindness. (Signed) Sun Wen.” 6. Chief Executive issued mandate December 24th promulgating regulations for the reorganization conference whose purpose is stated to be the solution of the complicated situation and the discussion of constructive plans including the organization of a second citizens’ conference, reforms of the military system, financial liquidation, et cetera. This reorganization conference will, it is believed, be composed of militarists and politicians and the scheme receives little popular support and arouses little interest. Sun Yat-sen has made political capital for himself by demanding a popular conference and is sending emissaries to the provinces to explain his views. 7. It is expected that Sun will now hold conferences directly or indirectly not only with Chief Executive but also with Feng and the other leaders of the coup d’état and also with Karakhan. Sun will want to be foremost and will not be particular about platform. He would find great opposition if he should attempt to return to Canton.

Consul at Swatow telegraphed December 30th:

[8?] Soviet propaganda seems to have taken an anti-Christian turn during these Christmas holidays. Consul General at Canton telegraphs as follows December 29: “December 29, 4 p.m. Considerable anti-Christian propaganda in Canton during the holidays including speeches by former governor and other politicians. Several American mission schools annoyed by agitators but no serious disturbance. Report follows by post. Department was not informed.” 9. Similar agitation against Christianity in Chekiang Province; in Hangchow one anti- Christian demonstration was held in which churches were denounced as tools of foreign imperialism and capitalism; at Ningpo there was a violent campaign organized by an “anti-Christian committee” of which the following is typical: “Since the invasion of Christianity in China thousands of men and guns have followed on the heels of the missionaries who come to us clad in black gowns and carrying banners of evangelistic volunteers. Many ports have been yielded; concessions have been granted and millions of dollars of indemnity have been paid. So we must stand against Christianity because of its relation to imperialism.” 10. If there has been any increase of antiforeign feeling there is no evidence of any

4 Inspector General of the Chinese Army, who seized Peking in October 1924 and ended civil war between forces of Wu Pei-fu and Chang Tso-lin. 5 Provisional Chief Executive and Prime Minister of China. 6 Leader of the Kuomintang Party. 7 Soviet Ambassador in China. 9 Not printed.

conceivable, namely, that these soldiers would make no trouble or if they did they would be restrained by the victorious forces of Lu or Sun. 4. Foreign intervention in the way proposed would be a benefit to the present Peking Government and the Anfu Party and disadvantageous to Chi whom it would shut off from the arsenal. It is not improbable that it would be favored by the Japanese. Among the British and some other foreign merchants in Shanghai there has been always strong element in favor of military intervention in China and they may be utilizing the present situation to get foreign governments committed to that program.

were the protest and demand mentioned in your first paragraph made after consultation with the senior foreign naval officers present or were they made on the judgment alone of the consular officers concerned? Also the same information relative to your statement in last paragraph that compliance with the consular demand is essential for security foreign settlement. Fifth, what Chinese forces are now within the radius you define? Sixth, in your meeting who took the lead and why, if such information available? What was the attitude of the different consuls general? 2. I assume you realize the extreme seriousness of your proposal if it entails landing of international army units and their occupation Chinese territory while the powers concerned are at peace with China. Consult with Admiral McVay and telegraph me fully at once in reply to my questions including any other information you may consider necessary or helpful in enabling me to reach a decision concerning any recommendation I may [make?] to the Secretary of State.” 7. We now have Sacramento and two destroyers at Shanghai. Barker, Bone and

8. There are large concentrations of Chinese troops in and near Peking, Tientsin, Hankow and Nanking as well as at Shanghai. 9. I intend sending an assistant military attaché to Shanghai by the first available steamer. Train service very irregular. SCHURMAN

Scuurman

Hoping that Your Excellency will be good enough to inform the other Foreign Ministers in Peking of the above, I avail [etc.] SEAL OF THE WAI CHIAO PU 15 Copy received by the Department on April 6. 16 Not printed. 16a Not printed.

Does the Department desire me to join in a suggestion or request to the Chinese Government in line with consuls’ request? Please telegraph instructions as soon as possible. SCHURMAN

community in Shanghai and the treaty ports. Japan is as much interested in advancing her Chinese trade which has suffered both from general causes and from boycotting. To appeal to both the trading and imperialistic instincts of the Japanese is a clever play on the part of the British Government. There is reason to expect cooperation by France because of French policy toward China. Because of our “hands off” policy, American cooperation is the least to be expected. 5. The British have another motive. Great Britain has been unpopular with the Japanese and has been the object of constant criticism from them ever since the Anglo-Japanese Alliance was abrogated. The policy of the British regarding the base at Singapore has greatly intensified this feeling. The sending of the present British note to the Japanese Government is a means of improving the British position in Japan without disadvantage, unless, indeed, the United States should offer criticism because the British are not adhering to the American policy of masterly inactivity in China. Another consideration is whether the French and Japanese might not use this move to improve their own relations with the Soviet Union. 7. Ostensibly the purpose of the British proposal is to prevent hostilities which now threaten. The means to be used is international consultation or the bringing of diplomatic pressure upon the rival Chinese factions. Japan is to be the primary agency, the Japanese Government being requested to offer constructive proposals for united, peaceable action. 8. As the initiating agent, Japan will consider her own interests and almost certainly will support Chang as she did in last fall’s fighting. If Chang and Tuan need a modification of the arms embargo for the benefit of the national government or a new loan to enable them to carry on, the Japanese would probably give them support. 9. The means proposed for carrying out this suggestion, whether international consultation, peaceful action, or pressure, would not be effective with any party except Chang Tso-lin. He would become the protégé of the foreign governments. All his rivals, especially the Kuomintang, Feng Yu-hsiang, the Communists, radicals, and students (a most powerful factor in the existing political situation) would appeal to racial and national feeling against the foreign imperialists, who, by using the military, would dominate China. I fully agree with you that antiforeign feeling would be aroused in China by the suggested program.

10. The program suggested would not obtain the end sought. It would not prevent hostilities if they are to occur. Foreign powers cannot independently settle China’s political and military problems. China herself alone can solve these problems. The powers can only facilitate a settlement. They should avoid even the appearance of intervening on the side of any faction or group in the conflict which impends, but should give all appropriate recognition and encouragement to any governmental authority which may emerge independently with reasonable likelihood of authority and stability. The first three paragraphs of the Department’s telegram No. 293 of November 25,

actual or potential, of our naval forces in Chinese waters”. In the absence of some actual, or definitely threatened emergency, imperilling American lives, such as the Boxer uprising of 1900, it is unlikely that any other or greater degree of protection will be afforded Americans in China than that specified in that instruction. For the Secretary of State: JOSEPH C. GREW

statement that the Japanese Government had no intention whatever of interfering in the domestic affairs of China and that it had consistently conformed to that policy. (2) Irrespective, however, of the attitude of the Japanese Government toward a proposal to apply diplomatic pressure with a view to the prevention of hostilities, this Government is of the view that pressure limited to joint pacific action would not prove effectual and would in all probability be disregarded by whichever faction sought to profit by taking the offensive. (3) Aside from the question of the doubtful efficacy of the course proposed, this Government cannot escape the conviction that such an effort to influence by external pressure the course of Chinese domestic politics would almost certainly aggravate, and perhaps render critical, the present wide-spread antiforeign sentiment among certain classes of the Chinese people. As the British Government is aware, the last few months have seen a recrudescence of such sentiment, which has manifested itself acutely at various places throughout China and has appeared in different forms, opposing foreign capital, foreign education, and foreign Christian missions. While this Government has no desire to exaggerate the dangers of this situation, it is reluctant to assume the risk of exacerbating such sentiment by adopting a course which seems likely at the same time to prove ineffectual for the purposes in mind, and to afford a basis for a possible charge of favoring one faction as against another. This Government, therefore, while viewing with the greatest sympathy the objects which the British Government has in mind, and not wishing to close the door to a consideration of any practical suggestion which may be evolved, regrets that it cannot see its way to adopt the course of action proposed in your note of March 27. Accept [etc.] FRANK B. KELLOGG

endanger the safety of treaty ports on this waterway. The resulting adverse effects upon the whole position of foreign interests in China hardly require to be emphasized. The aggressive attitude of the Communist Government now installed at Canton is proved by recent events and it is impossible not to feel considerable uneasiness regarding the position of the foreign community at Shanghai [Shameen?] who are on the defensive; the danger presented by Canton is not purely local. The Canton authorities possess in the Whampoa Officers’ Training School, an institution which His Majesty’s Government are reliably informed is a distinctly military asset. It is partly staffed with Russian instructors and must be regarded as the possible nucleus of a military force which, under conditions now prevailing, may seriously affect the whole Chinese situation. Indeed, recent events appear, in the opinion of His Majesty’s Naval authorities, to indicate the possibility of a Russo-Chinese attempt to blockade the passage of the Canton river. In these circumstances, it is subject for consideration whether immediate steps ought not to be taken if possible to avert and, failing prevention, to provide against a combination of dangers which, if they materialize, must inevitably lead to forcible action on a considerable scale for the protection of foreign interests, life and property. In deciding what policy they should adopt to cope with the exigencies of the situation, His Majesty’s Government are above all anxious that their attitude should in all respects possible correspond with that of the United States Government. I am accordingly instructed to enquire whether the United States Government are in general agreement with the foregoing summary and, in the affirmative event, I should be grateful to learn at the earliest opportunity, what steps your Government consider should be taken to meet the situation, together with a statement of their reasons for any action proposed. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

based only upon an immediate community of interest in restricting Chang to Manchuria, and is understood not to involve any reconciliation of antagonism created by Feng’s treachery towards Wu a year ago. 4. I report these somewhat speculative matters merely in order that you may be prepared to envisage the possibilities in the event that a new situation is suddenly created by hostilities in the neighborhood of Shanghai. MACMURRAY 33 Not printed.

35 Nant nrinted.

and Ming Tombs which are now in military zones delimited by Marshal Feng. 4. Respectfully request repetition to War and Navy Department[s]. MACMURRAY 36 Not printed.

International train is under the command of Captain Cope of the American Army forces at Tientsin. 4. Repeat to War and Navy Departments at request of military and naval attachés. (Section two and last.) 1. General Lu Chung-lin informed Netherlands Minister and myself that in the circumstances it was impossible for him to suggest to Marshal Feng immediate withdrawal of his troops from Yangtsun since the struggle for Tientsin is now at a critical stage, an ultimatum having been delivered to Li Ching-lin’s forces either to accept by tonight certain terms offered to them or take the consequences. Lu stated there was every reason to expect heavy fighting tonight nearer Tientsin and expressed grave doubt whether arrangement could be made to get train through. It was finally arranged that Peck, Chinese Secretary of Legation, and Mr. Tang, representing General Lu, should proceed at once by automobile to Yangtsun for the purpose of facilitating the return of train to Peking or if advisable its proceeding to Tientsin. It seems advisable to leave the decision of this point to the discretion of commander of train in consultation with Peck. The British, French, Italian and Japanese Ministers concur in arranging for the return of train if deemed advisable. I have communicated in this sense with General Connor by radio, requesting him to communicate accordingly to the train commander which he can do by radio. 2. According to Lu fighting has advanced some miles beyond Yangtsun towards Tientsin leaving Yangtsun quiet and out of danger. A simultaneous report from commandant of the French post at Yangtsun however is to the effect that the battle continues but that passengers safe and comfortable. 3. Repeat to War, Navy Department, at the request of military, naval attaché. MACMURRAY 39 Telegram in two sections. 40 Brig. Gen. William D. Connor, U. S. Army, commanding American forces in China.

comprise provision for identification, prohibition of close pursuit of international train by Chinese trains, and other provisions quite properly desired by contending forces for their protection. The return of train from Peking to Tientsin scheduled for this morning is again delayed owing to destruction of 22,000 meters of track and part of a bridge. Repeated to Tokyo. MACMURRAY

4. It now appears that Feng forces have today occupied Tientsin.

5. Arrangements have been made by which international Peking train now here should be able to go through to Tientsin immediately upon completion of necessary repairs to the line. MACMURRAY

Decision by the United States and other powers to accredit Ministers to the Provisional Government of China45 45 For previous correspondence concerning relations with the Provisional Government, see ibid. , pp. 416 ff. [465] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)

[470] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)

[477] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

If inquiry should be made of the Department by the Belgian, French or other representatives here, reply will be made as indicated above. KELLOGG

presentation of letters of credence meant de jure recognition. Minister for Foreign Affairs reported to have so expressed himself in respect of Spanish Minister’s recent presentation of letters. MAYER

MAYER

In the light of the above, His Majesty’s Government trust that the United States Government will suspend action as regards the presentation of letters of credence until the question of full recognition, of the Chinese Government is settled, and I have the honour to ask the favour of your early observations on the points raised in this note.” In an interview with the British Ambassador on May 18 concerning this matter I suggested that the letters be addressed to the “Chief Executive of the Provisional Government of China”; that at the time of the presentation of his letters of credence Mr. MacMurray in his formal address, would refer to the declaration communicated on December 454 concerning the provisional character of the present Government. I pointed out that this would seem to be recognizing nothing but the provisional government and the formal address by MacMurray would definitely state that it was just such recognition which is made necessary by the admittedly provisional character of the government. I explained to the British Ambassador that we had to accredit the new Minister to some Government and that this plan would clearly prevent any claim by China that we had extended de jure recognition to a provisional government. He agreed with me that this program would be sufficient to meet the situation but said he would communicate my oral reply to his Government. You may acquaint your colleagues with the above and the French and Belgian Embassies in Washington will likewise be informed. KELLOGG

Acceptance of the Soviet Ambassador as dean of the diplomatic corps at Peking and establishment of an informal organization of Heads of Legation56 56 For previous correspondence concerning relations with the Soviet Ambassador, see Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 443 ff. [479] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)

to a later meeting the necessary notes. I trust the whole subject can be disposed of next week. 4. So long as Soviet Russia claims to be a protocol power it will be necessary to find some modus vivendi with Karakhan when the group is handling protocol business. Those who know Karakhan best think this will not be difficult once he is given recognition as dean, the lack of which he has hitherto keenly felt. 5. Recently Karakhan sent the protocol powers a note protesting against the erection of hurdles by the American guard on what he called the “Russian glacis.” He was informed by powers in reply with appropriate references to the protocols of 190160 and 190461 that there was no “Russian glacis”; that the entire glacis was international property; that the American guard in holding the portion of it adjoining the Russian Legation property were merely discharging the duties which had been assigned them by the senior commandant and that equitation was a part of their military training. SCHURMAN

£8 Not reprinted.

Further consideration by the American and British Governments of means for effectively preventing the traffic in arms with China67 67 For previous correspondence concerning efforts to prevent the traffic in arms with China, see Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 530 ff. [486] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State Washington, March 12, 1925.

His Majesty’s Government would therefore be very glad to know how the United States Government consider that this serious situation can best be met, how they would view a possible proposal to place China on the list of prohibited areas and, failing this, whether they can suggest any other means of effective international cooperation to cope with this evil which experience has shown the Arms Embargo Agreement is insufficient to check. His Majesty’s Government have themselves no intention of bringing forward this proposal but they are earnestly desirous of cooperating with the United States Government in any way possible in order to find an exit from the present impasse.

Sir Esme Howard would be grateful to learn the views of the United States Government on this subject as soon as possible in order to communicate them to Mr. Chamberlain without delay. [ WASHINGTON ,] March 16, 1925.

power to render the embargo more effective. Being convinced that, apart from other considerations, the present disturbed conditions in China, which show no signs of abating, require the rigorous suppression of the export of arms and munitions to that country, this Government likewise purposes to do all that it can to make the embargo thoroughly effective. In this connection, your attention is invited to the action of the United States Court for China at Shanghai, which recently fined and sentenced to a year’s penal servitude the master of the American sailing ship Talbot for a violation of the American laws upon this subject. Accept [etc.] FRANK B. KELLOGG

77 Not printed.

Participation by the United States in efforts to solve problems arising from the disturbances at Shanghai, May 30, 1925 [491] The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State

[503] The Italian Minister in China (Cerruti), Senior Minister, to the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Shen) Peking, June 6, 1925.

[510] The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary of State

[517] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

[565] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[572] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[File copy not signed] 79 Transmitted by the American Minister in China as an enclosure to his despatch No.

C UNNINGHAM

Department suggests that in telegraphing the Legation concerning developments at Shanghai you state whether similar information is being telegraphed the Department. This will avoid duplication. Repeat to Peking. KELLOGG

4. Chinese Government has sent Tsai Ting-kan and Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs Tseng to Shanghai to report on facts and method of peaceful adjustment. On request Legations concerned have asked their consuls at Shanghai to give friendly assistance. Lo, who was recently sent to Foochow by Foreign Office, likewise proceeding Shanghai on similar mission though informally and probably confidentially. MAYER 80 Not printed.

(g) While awaiting further information, we hope that the Chinese Government will continue to envisage this unfortunate incident with the same conciliatory spirit which inspires the arrested [interested] diplomatic representatives to the end that order and tranquillity may be reestablished at Shanghai with the least possible delay.” 2. Unless otherwise instructed will not telegraph in full Chinese Government’s note of June 1st which is going forward next pouch.83 3. Senior minister authorized at a meeting today of Heads of Legation to seek interview with Chief Executive to discuss Shanghai incident in order to show Chinese Government our [apparent omission] and conciliatory attitude. 4. Japanese Minister at meeting stated he had seen Tuan Chi-jui84 yesterday and had told latter that students to blame in Shanghai for not obeying police and attacking station. Tuan replied too many students killed; that he had appointed a committee to investigate and would await report that not advisable for Chinese Government to suppress students “rashly” but would do so “gradually.” 5. According to Rosta, Karakhan85 has just addressed note to Wai Chiao Pu expressing great regret over Shanghai incident, sympathy for killing of students and requesting that his condolences be conveyed to their families. … MAYER 81 Not printed.

[File copy not signed] 86 Transmitted by the American Minister in China as an enclosure to his despatch No.

The Minister said that the purpose of his visit was to ask if we would not make representations to the British Government to avoid extreme measures. I informed him subsequently, through Mr. Lockhart, that we did not feel ourselves in a position to make such representations at the present moment. (The Secretary had told me that he desired to take no step which might in any way interfere with the solidarity of the Powers.) I then told the Minister that our instructions to our authorities in Shanghai were to the effect that they should take adequate measures for the protection of American lives and property, but to do nothing more. The Minister said it would have a very salutary effect if he could be authorized to let this be known in Shanghai. After consulting with the Secretary I asked Mr. Lockhart to inform the Minister, who was then in his office, that the Minister might telegraph to his Government and let it be known in Shanghai that our naval forces and marines were present in Shanghai only for the purpose of protecting American lives and property and that no other action was contemplated at the present time. The Minister said that he considered it unfortunate that we had permitted the publication of Mr. Cunningham’s despatch stating that the killing of the Chinese students was justified. It would have been all right if we had added that the killings were justified in order to protect American lives; that the Chinese students here had

jumped at the conclusion that the attitude of the Consul General was that wholesale murders of Chinese were justified without giving adequate reasons therefor. He said he had explained to the Chinese students the meaning of the Consul General’s message. J[OSEPH] C. G[REW]

diplomatic representatives concerned until receipt of further information. To secure this the interested diplomatic representatives will send to Shanghai without delay a delegation to study the situation and report. Reply gives most explicit assurance that police orders in the Settlement are to use arms only if attacked and that these orders have been renewed and will be strictly enforced and that none more desirous than foreign diplomatic representatives and Settlement authorities to avoid new troubles. 6. I have telegraphed Cunningham that while law and order must be maintained by all necessary force, if conciliatory measures will contribute to bring return to normal conditions I consider these should be used whenever possible. MAYER

Also on June 6th, consular body in replying to Commissioner of Foreign Affairs stated, “There will also as a matter of course be an investigation by the authorities concerned into the action of the police officer in question, besides which the competent courts stand ready to deal with any complaints.” June 7th, Chinese general Chamber of Commerce issued instructions that the situation be maintained while the high commissioners were investigating, which has had an excellent effect. The high-water mark of danger was reached on the 3rd and 4th. Since then ostensibly conditions have inclined to improve in every way except in regard to the strike. Strike is becoming more deep seated and extended, some workers returning, others going out. Shops have remained closed and also native banks. On the 5th shops were closed in the French Concession and reopened on the 7th.

The question of the reduction of the force is being considered this afternoon by the municipal and consular authorities. There are only 15 percent of the Chinese police of the Settlement on strike and 15 percent of the volunteers have been demobilized. The police on June 8th discovered 18 different new handbills all containing antiforeign sentiment. Protestations of organizations have been particularly bitter against British and Japanese as have been the handbills. Other organizations insist that the move is not antiforeign but is a protest against the police action and is directed against British and Japanese. … CUNNINGHAM

demonstrators, places blame on the British and stigmatizes police action as greatest disgrace to China in years. Telegram urges Chief Executive take firm stand; and states that if the British Government confesses crime and makes amends so much the better, but if not signers of telegram will support the union on behalf of justice, humanity, national sovereignty and people’s lives even if signers perish in attempt in order to calm agitation and redress national humiliation. It is quite evident from these telegrams that militarists are making every effort to use present situation in order to cause Chinese people to forget antimilitarist feelings. 5. In this connection I am becoming increasingly concerned with question of harmful reaction upon the anticipated special conference94 of continued student agitation and refusal or inability of Chinese Government to control situation. … I apprehend that continuation of student agitation and despatch of notes by Foreign Office to Heads of Legation will eventually result in eliminating Government’s foreign sympathy and producing an atmosphere calculated to militate against successful conference. The singling out of Great Britain for attack which is increasing in animosity is singularly unfortunate in my opinion since as in the Washington Conference we and China must to a great extent depend upon British cooperation to achieve constructive action in special conference. I fear Chinese Government, so called, has not kept sufficiently in mind the bigger questions in its desire to use the present socalled patriotic agitation of the students and the attitude of the militarists indicated by the two proclamations summarized above to consolidate Government’s position. [Paraphrase.] I talked informally and confidentially yesterday with the secretary of the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I expressed myself to him to the above effect, of course omitting any reference to the desire of the Chinese Government to reap a benefit as suggested above. I suggest that it might be advisable for the Department to call the Chinese Minister’s attention to this matter and to ask him to communicate to his Government on the subject. 6. At the beginning of the Shanghai incident the Japanese were reviled as much as the British but during last two days the British have been given most of the attention. It will be noticed that Chang and Feng did not mention Japan in their telegrams. I have reason to think that there is an effort to weaken the present prestige in China of the United States and the resulting influence of our country with the Chinese Government, the purpose of this effort being to enable Japan to pose as China’s chief foreign friend. [End paraphrase.] 7. Thus far I have believed Chinese feeling is, generally speaking, nationalistic rather than antiforeign with the exception of Great Britain where

again I do not consider it antiforeign in the sense of Boxer days. However the material at hand is very inflammable and a continuance of agitation and its manipulation by distribution of funds and otherwise throughout China may with some new incident create a situation full of menace to foreigners. MAYER

that it will prevent any unfortunate repercussion from the departure of our delegation from Shanghai and in order to demonstrate to the Chinese Government and people our earnest desire to settle the Shanghai incident itself at the earliest moment possible and to cooperate with the Chinese Government [in] the broader questions of a reorganization of the International Settlement if authorized to do so by our Governments. 3. The Heads of Legation decided to constitute the Italian Minister, the French Minister and myself a committee to negotiate with the Chinese Government in the above regard. 4. I believe this morning’s démarche is a very wise step along the line of proper conciliation whenever possible. It likewise divides into two sections, for negotiation with the Chinese Government, the question of the actual shooting affrays themselves at Shanghai and the broader matter of a reorganization of the International Settlement. Not to make this differentiation and maintain it, would be to cause endless confusion and in effect in my opinion jeopardize the success in either direction. I construe the present state of affairs extremely critical; that the prescribed [sic] movement and agitation is essentially nationalist in character rather than antiforeign; that we foreigners must make some concession to the Chinese before the agitation will subside and that if we do not do so speedily there are grave fears for the future. In my opinion the widespread agitation centers psychologically in the Shanghai incident; that therefore we should settle this as satisfactorily as possible at once when it is hoped the agitation throughout the country will subside temporarily at least. 5. The readjustment now going on between China and the foreign powers is greatly accelerated and exacerbated by the Shanghai incident and its widespread repercussion and is likewise being exploited in every manner possible by the Soviets. Just how much they had to do with the actual initiation of the Shanghai incident is at present impossible to say. While the situation in China is not yet out of [hand] I am alarmed at the potentialities unless something is done speedily and satisfactorily as regards a solution thereof. MAYER

Maver

4. Indemnity to the victims (dead and wounded) and to the laborers, merchants, and students who have suffered loss as a result of this affair. 5. Formal apologies. 6. Restitution of the Mixed Court to the Chinese Government. 7. The Chinese employed in the factories and homes of foreigners, seamen, and workers who have struck because of the agitation produced by the incident shall be reinstated without reduction of pay for the period of the strike. 8. Liberal treatment for laborers, i. e., no punishment shall be inflicted if they wish to abstain from work. 9. Regarding the status of the International Settlement: (a) The Chinese shall participate in the Municipal Council and rate payers’ meetings. The rate payers will choose their representatives in proportion to the amount of the taxes paid by them. In voting they will have the same rights and privileges as the foreign voters. (b) In determining the right to vote, examination shall be made to see whether properties actually belong to the titleholder, or whether he is simply an agent or representative. Only the actual owner will have the right to vote and if the property is held by an agent it is the real owner who will vote. 10. The Municipality shall not construct roads outside of the International Settlement; those which are already so constructed shall be ceded back unconditionally to the Chinese Government, which will have the control of them. 11. The regulations concerning the press, the rights of wharfage, and the stock exchanges should be repealed. 12. Chinese in the International Settlement shall have freedom of speech, of assembly, and of the press. 13. The Secretary of the Municipal Council, Benbow-Rowe, shall be dismissed. These 13 demands represent only a part of the questions which must be settled in connection with the Shanghai incident. The Chinese Government is of the opinion that

in order to assure definitely friendly relations between China and the foreign powers and a permanent peace, all the unequal treaties which have been concluded in the past must be revised. For this purpose I have had the honor to address to Your Excellency today a note which you will receive at the same time and which explains the reasons for this demand.98 I beg Your Excellency to be good enough to communicate this note to the interested ministers and hope that negotiations thereon will be opened as soon as possible in order to arrive at a prompt settlement, which is my most heartfelt desire. I avail [etc.] SHEN JUI-LIN 95 Copy (in French) received by the Department on September 9. The Chargé in China reported the receipt of the enclosed note from the Chinese Foreign Office in telegram No. 255, July 2. 96 Supplied by the editor. 96 Supplied by the editor.

question of readjustment of treaty regulations should be included in the anticipated negotiations, that otherwise neither he nor W. W. Yen would consent to serve. I told Dr. Wang that I could not speak authoritatively for my Government in respect of the question he raised having referred the note of June 24th to it for instructions. However I expressed personal opinion that any foreign government, no matter how sympathetically it might be inclined toward the aspirations of the Chinese in regard to readjustment of treaty relations, would need to feel certain that Chinese Government [was] capable of assuming additional obligations and responsibilities which revision of treaties would place upon it before foreign governments could consent to such revision. I asked Dr. Wang whether in his opinion present Chinese Government could satisfy this condition precedent. He replied emphatically that it could; that the source of all trouble and difficulties were [was] the special privileges and immunities of the treaties and once these were removed peace and order would prevail in China and a stable, effective government would ensue. I fear he is overoptimistic if sincere in these expressions and is putting the cart before the horse. 5. Three Chinese delegates referred to above are apparently jockeying for position vis-à-vis Foreign Office in an effort to escape responsibility for the settling of Shanghai incident. From reliable reports it would seem that the Chinese delegates have either resigned or told Foreign Office they will only negotiate Shanghai incident as part of larger subject including revision of the treaty. This makes it most difficult if not impossible for us to hasten settlement of Shanghai incidents in which apparently Chinese Government has lost interest in view of bigger question of treaty revision which it is now pushing to the fore. Should negotiations for settlement of Shanghai incidents not be begun early next week, through continued dilatory tactics of Chinese Government, I believe Heads of Legation must seriously contemplate informing Chinese Government that either latter shall cooperate immediately to [the] end that negotiation be begun, otherwise Heads of Legation will conclude that Chinese Government is willing to rely upon any settlement which foreign authorities may regard as just. In this connection action taken

3. Inspector Everson being a subordinate official could not do otherwise than carry out the orders given him, the more so as he was necessarily apprehensive of the sacking of the Louza police station. He can at most be criticised for a certain lack of judgment in having refused reenforcements owing to his belief that the demonstration would not assume a dangerous character. 4. The diplomatic representatives concerned, being of the opinion that the police regulations are defective especially those dealing with disturbances and riots and that they constitute one of the causes of the incidents, consider that they must be modified and made public. It is indispensable in such circumstances that any recourse to arms by the police should be preceded by a warning (such as the sounding of a bugle) comprehensible to all and capable of being heard at a distance. In acquainting the Municipal Council with the arrangements described above, the diplomatic representatives concerned, desirous of settling the incident in a spirit of justice and equity, recommend to it the immediate adoption of the measures mentioned under numbers 2 and 4 which will, they consider, do much to allay public opinion and bring back a normal state of affairs. Having thus given proof of their sincere desire as far as practicable they are concerned to ascertain and fix the responsibility in the matter. The diplomatic representatives concerned feel bound to declare that they are satisfied that arrangements for the demonstrations were made on Chinese territory. The Chinese Government must, therefore, on their part, take energetic measures to fix responsibility where it belongs and inflict penalties upon the officials responsible. Moreover, in order to prevent the recurrence of similar incidents, it is indispensable that in the future the authorities of the Chinese city and those of the Concession shall maintain a close contact with the object of assuring an effective collaboration for the maintenance of order.” MAYER

4. While appreciating the stress under which Mr. Cunningham is working I cannot but greatly regret his action in derogation of my authority and responsibility if the information given me by my British and Japanese colleagues as above noted is correct.8 MAYER 8 The Acting Secretary of State telegraphed the Chargé in China July 7 as follows:

should be dwelt upon at length and with emphasis and placed in the forefront of the document—immediately following this should come a statement that the Chinese Government must take steps forthwith to fix responsibility and to punish the offenders. Subject to these and to other emendations of a minor nature, His Majesty’s Representative at Peking has been informed that His Majesty’s Government are in agreement with the terms of the proposed communication—provided always that prior to its dispatch, the heads of Missions concerned are fully assured that sufficient evidence is forthcoming to support each finding and that there is no prima facie reason to suppose that the publication of the document will provoke a still more serious situation in Shanghai or elsewhere, particularly by undermining the authority of foreigners occupying positions of grave responsibility in the present crisis. His Majesty’s Government trust that their views, as set out above, will meet with your concurrence, and I am to express the hope that the United States Government will be disposed to address instructions to their representative at Peking similar to those which have already been sent to His Majesty’s Representative. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

council to announce publicly that their action [was] taken after discussion with consular body at Shanghai and with approval of the representatives of the powers concerned at Peking. MacMurray developed this suggestion observing that the chairman of Municipal Council had given him to understand when in Shanghai that Municipal Council would find less difficulty in falling in with desires of Heads of Legation if not compelled to act under obvious pressure. MacMurray further observed that from interviews with Chinese at Shanghai he had gained the impression that Chinese generally would be measurably appeased if Municipal Council would admit some responsibility for the events of May 30th. 4. At this stage of discussion Japanese Minister stated he was informed from Shanghai that Municipal Council intended to resist conclusions of Heads of Legation and French Minister insisted upon the necessity of determining fundamental issue—whether Heads of Legation have or have not power to control action of Municipal Council and in the last resort dismiss it and substitute an administration of the Settlement by the consuls. Both MacMurray and I expressed considerable doubt whether Heads of Legation were legally competent to dismiss Municipal Council. French Minister then proposed identic telegrams to our respective Governments asking for instructions, assuring us of the confidence of our Governments in respect to our attitude in Shanghai incident and our right to dissolve Municipal Council and institute other administrative organ in Shanghai. Both MacMurray and I considered such identic telegrams would be unfortunate as it was in a deplorable belligerent spirit and definitely raised hypothetical question which MacMurray felt Department of State would either be loath to answer or would answer in the negative, thereby preventing us from associating ourselves with our colleagues in any action which Heads of Legation might all believe indicated by resistance on the part of Municipal Council. 5. A long discussion then ensued in which MacMurray supported by Danish colleague expressed the hope that all possibilities of amicable solution between Municipal Council and Heads of Legation should be explored before taking any step which would precipitate issue on the question of control over the Settlement. An impasse appeared to be reached and rather delicate situation arrived at by insistence of French Minister that identic telegrams either should be sent or if no unanimity on the subject the various interested diplomatic representatives would be left to individual action thus breaking up the solidarity heretofore existing among Heads of Legation. 6. At this point senior minister proposed that the representatives of powers having nationals on Municipal Council, namely, Great Britain, Japan and the United States, telegraph identically to their respective consul[s] general in

Shanghai in the sense of my suggestion aforementioned. This proposal was adopted and, in the afternoon after consultation among British and Japanese Ministers, MacMurray and myself, identic telegrams were sent to Shanghai as authorized by Heads of Legation. I sent further telegram to Cunningham giving him background as herein described and urging him to use his best efforts to bring about a successful and amicable arrangement between Heads of Legation and Municipal Council in the manner suggested in the identic telegram. Continuation to follow. MAYER 9 Newly appointed American Minister to China, who had not yet assumed charge of the Legation nor presented his credentials to the Chinese Government.

representatives with respect to matters which are of direct political concern in the relations between China and the powers by virtue of whose authority the Settlement was created and is maintained, the diplomatic representatives find themselves under the necessity of asking of their Governments authorization to reconsider, if need be in consultation with the Chinese authorities, the status of the Settlement administration as now constituted under existing regulations, with a view to the definite establishment of the Settlement upon a basis eliminating any possibility of doubt that the diplomatic representatives have an authority commensurate with their international responsibilities. In requesting such authorization the diplomatic representatives suggest that any exchanges of views on this subject among the interested Governments should be carried on in London in order to expedite a conclusion which is urgently necessary for their guidance in a situation which is rapidly becoming more complicated. 3. [sic] The diplomatic representatives fully realize that negotiations regarding any fundamental change in the land regulations could at the present time be carried on only under the most serious tactical disadvantage vis-à-vis the Chinese but it is in the first place recognized that certain modifications in detail must in fact be considered incidentally to the settlement of the Shanghai crisis; and it is furthermore felt that a knowledge of the danger of inaugurating any fundamental revision of the land regulations will act as a powerful inducement to the Council to reconsider its position.” 4. MacMurray and I earnestly recommend that the Department give the authorization requested, although we are hopeful that the mere possession of such authorization by the several diplomatic representatives would in fact furnish the means of obviating the necessity for availing ourselves of that authorization for the purpose of any fundamental revision of the regulations. 5. It should be recalled that in previous communications to the Chinese Government the diplomatic representatives have agreed to seek the authority of their respective Governments for discussion with the Chinese Government, after settlement of Shanghai incidents and as germane thereto, of some form of reorganization of the Shanghai International Settlement such as inclusion of Chinese on the Municipal Council and the like should the Chinese Government so request. I consider that this constitutes a further argument in favor of our being empowered in such a manner as to be able to prevent Shanghai municipal authorities from rendering abortive our negotiations in respect of matters concerned with the carrying out of major policy in China at this critical time.

Maver

“His Majesty’s Government have carefully considered your telegram number 230 but remain of opinion that apart from the controversy with the Municipal Council a public and judicial inquiry is required to satisfy all concerned that justice is being done. The preliminary inquiries instituted by the diplomatic body and the conclusions formed by them on this report which they have received from their delegation show that there is a clear case for further investigation but the information in possession of His Majesty’s Government is not sufficient to justify themselves in awarding or withholding blame still less in refusing to the Municipal Council the public inquiry for which they have asked. His Majesty’s Government appreciate the difficulties arising from the fact that the diplomatic body have already rejected proposals made from Shanghai for such an inquiry and that the diplomatic body considered the report of their own commission sufficient basis for the conclusions which they wished to publish. His Majesty’s Government are more than anxious to maintain the authority of the diplomatic body but consider that this will be better secured if the initiative in proposing and constituting a judicial inquiry is taken by the diplomatic body and it is explained that the diplomatic commission of inquiry is to be considered as a preliminary inquiry which has made out a prima facie case for a further public judicial inquiry. I therefore propose to endeavor to obtain the consent of the Governments immediately concerned to the appointment of a judicial commission consisting of American, French, Japanese and British judges having known the Far East but if possible not directly connected with Shanghai. I do not think that any Chinese representative should be included as the Chinese Government are not responsible for the administration of the International Settlement and have shown a persistent desire to use the Shanghai incident as an argument in a different and larger issue instead of judging it strictly on its merits. The further communication which would be required to the Municipal Council and which would be published should be on the following lines: It should start by referring to the responsibility of the Chinese owing to the organization of the demonstration on Chinese-administered territory and should say that the inquiries made by the diplomatic body have led them to the conclusion after consultation with their Governments that a public judicial inquiry should be held to establish and make known the facts, fix the responsibilities and satisfy public opinion in China and abroad, that justice will be done and administrative reforms will be effected when required as shown by the results of the inquiry. Pending the result of this inquiry they consider that the police commissioner should be suspended but without loss of pay or prejudice to his position.

In order to maintain solidarity among your colleagues I have discussed action on the above lines with the American, French and Japanese Ambassadors in London to whom I have handed a copy of this telegram in order to secure if possible the issue of similar instructions to the representatives of those Governments at Peking. As soon as I learn the result of this discussion I will give you further instructions.” HOUGHTON 10 Not printed. 11 J. Austen Chamberlain, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

and the diplomatic representatives as would seriously handicap any negotiations for the settlement of the case. 3. Such an inquiry is likely to be opposed, however, by the Italian, French and Belgian Governments whose Ministers consider their prestige and amour propre compromised by any suggestion for reconsideration of the course hitherto pursued and who are disposed to disavow any responsibility in connection with the Shanghai situation if unable to get their way in forcing a direct issue with the Municipal Council. Italian Minister in the meeting today went so far as to say that proposed judicial commission would in fact be a mere agency in behalf of the Governments whose nationals participate in the Shanghai Municipal Council and that he had already advised his Government to withdraw its small naval expedition if Shanghai should so be treated as not in fact an international settlement. 4. In the present querulous temper of the diplomatic body, I am doubtful whether any progress towards settlement can be made except by agreement among the American, British and Japanese Governments in the hope that other Governments, from a viewpoint more dispassionate than other [that?] of their representatives here, will be persuaded to associate themselves with the initiative thus taken by the powers actually most interested in the Shanghai International Settlement. 5. For the reasons indicated, I recommend that our Government accede to the British proposal with a qualification that the commission of inquiry should include a Chinese jurist of high standing. The holding of an inquiry without a Chinese member, or at any rate an offer to admit a Chinese to participate would, I feel sure, have an adverse effect upon Chinese opinion but I believe that to hold a judicial investigation in which Chinese had the opportunity to be represented would be a conciliatory gesture which would favorably influence Chinese sentiment and react advantageously upon our relations. 6. If such an inquiry were to be held without delay, I do not see how it would interfere with plans for Special Conference or Commission on Extraterritoriality. If the inquiry were to coincide with these, it might indeed tend to create a situation tactically disadvantageous for the negotiation of tariff and extraterritorial questions in that we would be compelled to deal with these matters of principle while occupying a defensive position in regard to concrete issues arising out of Shanghai incident. This, however, seems to me preferable to having to negotiate in the atmosphere of distrust which would persist if we were to have taken no adequate measures for the purpose of reaching an adjustment of the Shanghai affair.

7. Should it be decided to have a judicial inquiry, it may be questioned whether we ought not to be represented on it by a judicial officer not connected with Shanghai. In common with what I believe is the general opinion, I have the highest possible regard for Judge Purdy’s integrity and personal suitability and would have absolute confidence in his fairness.12 Chinese opinion, however, is unaccustomed to the conception of judicial impartiality and would almost inevitably assume that no foreign official resident in Shanghai would be able to dissociate himself from the interests and prejudices of the foreign community there. Although I have not consulted Judge Purdy, I have reason to believe that he himself would prefer not to serve on such an inquiry. I would therefore suggest that consideration be given to the possibility of detailing a judge from the Philippines. MACMURRAY 12 Milton Dwight Purdy, Judge of the United States Court in China.

5. This attitude on the part of the Chinese disappoints the hope that they would regard as a conciliatory gesture an offer to have them participate in the inquiry: and I am afraid that if the powers were not committed to such a course of action in consequence of publicity given the assurances, I should now be disposed to recommend that we abandon a course which under present circumstances seems likely to aggravate rather than diminish the feeling among the Chinese. It is doubtless too late now to do that; and our problem is to relieve the tense situation as best we can despite the further difficulty that has arisen. 6. Japanese Minister has now stated that his Government assented on two conditions to the British proposal for the inquiry: First, that it should not stand in the way of early acceptance of the offered resignation of McEuen, the Shanghai police chief whom the Chinese generally regard as responsible for the shooting; and, second, that negotiations for the settlement of Shanghai matters be undertaken as promptly as possible. It is the view of the Japanese Government that pending the result of judicial inquiry into the facts of shooting we might at once take up with the Chinese negotiations concerning indirectly related questions of rendition of Mixed Court and of Chinese representations on Municipal Council. 7. The British Government has telegraphed to its Legation here a draft of a document by which it is proposed the diplomatic body should constitute the commission of inquiry. This draft contemplates not merely that the commission shall be a fact-finding body, but provides further that they shall “make such recommendations as they may think proper as to action which is called for in the circumstances as established by them and as to any steps which should in their opinion be taken by authorities ultimately responsible for administration at International Settlement at Shanghai with a view to preventing similar occurrences in future.” This seems to me to go far beyond the purposes of a judicial inquiry and to confuse the functions of the inquiry with political considerations. Assuming that the Chinese will not participate, the so-called judicial conference would in fact be scarcely more than new foreign agency to reconsider the conclusions already reached by the diplomatic body and now held in abeyance. 8. While the subject of a judicial inquiry is thus beclouded, no progress is being made towards a settlement of Shanghai affairs, the agitations continue, and the more responsible elements among Chinese find themselves increasingly embarrassed in dealing with agitators by reason of what appears to them the evasiveness and lack of candor of the foreign powers in dealing with the present crisis. The situation is drifting dangerously, and it seems to me important that we should try to bring about some solution of the present

muddle. It appears that the British hold the key to the situation, and since their Chargé d’Affaires seems to have exhausted his influence with his own Foreign Office in the course of his contest with the ultraconservative British consulate at Shanghai, I venture to recommend that you urge upon the government at London the necessity for action which will in some degree meet a situation in China which is critical for all foreign interests and particularly harmful to the British. 9. Concretely, I think we should urge upon the British Government the following plan: (a) Resignation of McEuen to be accepted immediately; (b) negotiations to be begun without delay by informing the Foreign Office of our assent in principle to the rendition of Mixed Court and to Chinese representation on Municipal Council; (c) judicial inquiry, if British Government still insists upon it, to be limited to finding of facts. Points (a) and (b) substantially correspond with Japanese conditions referred to in paragraph 6. 10. The British Government seems to have adopted the views of Shanghai interests that McEuen should be retained as chief of police unless and until he may be judicially determined to have been culpable in the shooting affair. This view ignores the fact that in the light of the present crisis in China essential question is not as to his culpability but as to the expediency of retaining him in his post despite the fact that traditional Chinese concepts of official responsibilities point him out as one whose retention or departure from office constitutes a test whether or not the foreigners are sincere in their professions of regret and of desire to settle the Shanghai affair. The Council might well let McEuen go with a pension because so long as he is retained it will be difficult or impossible to negotiate in mutual confidence or good will with the Chinese. His ostensibly voluntary resignation was already in the hands of the Municipal Council when the British Government proposed that action be suspended pending judicial inquiry. If that Government realized what from this viewpoint is apparent as the obvious necessity of his withdrawal from the situation, there should be no difficulty in its bringing about that result. 11. As for commencing negotiations on the subjects indirectly related to the incident of May 30, while withholding discussion of that incident pending the result of the judicial inquiry, I feel that this somewhat illogical order of procedure would be justified by the necessity of putting an end to the delays in commencing negotiations. 12. The judicial inquiry should be very strictly confined to the determination of the facts in connection with the shooting, and in view of the antagonism

aroused among the Chinese it would be prudent to minimize the emphasis placed upon it. 13. If this proposal meets with your approval I suggest that you authorize me to discuss the matter with the Japanese Minister with a view to his asking his Government to make representations in a similar sense to the British Foreign Office. MACMURRAY

Of course we have no intention or wish whatever to screen McEuen but we do feel very strongly that the judicial inquiry which seems essential in order to reach a settlement of the Shanghai riots ought not to be made dependent on the minor question of McEuen’s fate which cannot affect the findings of the inquiry in any way. We are prepared to go very far to meet the views of other powers in order to expedite and facilitate this inquiry to which we attach great importance whereas the McEuen question seems to us here to be secondary matter. But if the United States and Japanese Governments insist on making McEuen’s resignation a condition to the judicial inquiry, they will be insisting on something which we (and they) cannot enforce; and they may well therefore be wrecking the judicial inquiry. As regards (b) in our Ministr[y’s] reply to the Chinese note we stated that we agreed to negotiations commencing forthwith on those articles in the 13 demands which were extraneous to the immediate question of the Shanghai riots. In this connection we agree with you in principle as to the rendition of the Mixed Court and to Chinese representation on the Municipal Council; and we have instructed Peking that negotiations may begin forthwith. As regards (c), the scope of the judicial inquiry, we submitted draft terms of reference to our representatives at Peking to serve as a basis for discussion and not as an unalterable document. These were as follows “to inquire into the origin and character of the disturbances which took place at Shanghai on or about the 30th day of May 1925; the reasons if any that existed for anticipating disorder; the precautions adopted or which might have been adopted to prevent the same; the measures taken to suppress it and the circumstances in which certain persons lost their lives and other persons suffered injuries; to report thereon (to diplomatic body) and to make such recommendations as they may think proper as to the action which is called for in the circumstances established by them and as to any steps which in their opinion should be taken by the authorities primarily or ultimately responsible for the administration of the International Settlement at Shanghai with a view to prevent a similar occurrence in future.” These terms were duly intended to enlarge the scope of our original proposals which were shown in the last paragraph of our aide-mémoire of July 17th16

the Government[s] to act on those recommendations or not as they think fit. In the present instance we thought such a condition the more desirable as the police regulations are believed to be defective. We however only telegraphed terms of reference to our Legation at Peking to serve as a basis of discussions and in order to expedite action. Although for the reasons explained our first impression was that the court of inquiry ought to be asked to make recommendations on matters directly arising out of its ascertainment of the facts, the point of main importance is that the inquiry should not be further postponed and if your Minister and Government remain opposed to this feature of the terms of reference we are ready to fall in with their views. In any case I presume that your Government are ready to agree to rest of the terms of reference. Your Government suggests that the inquiry should be limited to “findings of fact as regards the resignation of McEuen” and on the other hand “to the determination of the facts in connection with the shooting.” I presume the latter is intended, but we do not see how the actual shooting (or shootings) can be separated from the other interconnected occurrences which in their entirety formed the sequence of events now generally known as the Shanghai riots. HOUGHTON 14 Telegram in two sections.

ourselves so far as possible from the policy of obstinately ignoring Chinese sensibilities which has already proved the chief [omission] in the present crisis in China. And unless the British Government is prepared to do its part to prevent Shanghai negotiations proving abortive by exerting its influence upon McEuen and the British members of Municipal Council to obtain in advance the offer of his voluntary retirement in the event of his being vindicated by the inquiry, I feel that we should hold aloof from those negotiations and that I should be instructed not to accept membership on the committee which it is planned should negotiate with the Chinese Government in behalf of interested Legations for the settlement of matters immediately connected with shooting. 6. Concretely I recommend that we should inform British Foreign Office that for sake of avoiding indefinite delay in settlement of the Shanghai affair we will not insist upon McEuen’s resignation before the inquiry; but that we feel so strongly that his retention in his post would perpetuate the Chinese rancour against the position of foreigners throughout China and render abortive any negotiations for the settlement of the Shanghai incident, that we would prefer to hold aloof from any such negotiations unless assured that he will ask to be retired in the event of his vindication by the inquiry. MACMURRAY

preparing its report shall be held in public. (f) The commission is authorized so far as the different legal systems applicable may permit to require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents and to take evidence on oath. (g) The commission may at its discretion permit any person or public body concerned with the subject matter of the inquiry to appear before it either in person or by legal representative and to call and cross-examine witnesses. (h) The findings of the commission should if possible be unanimous. (i) In pursuance of the authorization set forth above we the representatives of the American, British and Japanese Governments do hereby respectively designate . . . . . . . . . ., Sir Henry Gollan21 and . . . . . . . . . . to be members of the said commission.” 3. Please advise me whether this formula is satisfactory, if so definitely empowering me to sign it or any modification of it importing no substantial alteration. 4. I should be glad if you could as soon as possible advise me of the name of the jurist whom I may be authorized to designate for the purpose in behalf of our Government and of the approximate date when he may be available to take part in inquiry. In view of the long delay that has taken place in constituting the commission, even though the fault is not primarily ours, I would urge the utmost expedition in making the necessary arrangements. MACMURRAY

They have therefore authorized their Representatives in Peking to request their American, British, and Japanese Colleagues each to designate a Jurist to be a member of a Commission of Enquiry. I am now desired by my Colleagues to inform Your Excellency that the Heads of Mission concerned have taken this step, and seize this opportunity to hand Your Excellency herewith a certified copy of the terms of reference for the above mentioned Commission at the foot of which the designations of its members are inscribed. The Commission will meet as soon as its members can reach Shanghai. As it is in the interest of all concerned that the findings of this Commission be as full and complete as possible, our respective Governments think it highly desirable that a Chinese Jurist should also be one of its members, and for that purpose I have the honour in the name of the Heads of Mission concerned to express the hope that Your Excellency’s Government may see fit to appoint a Chinese Jurist to sit on the Commission. In conclusion I have to add that the Municipal Council of the International Settlement of Shanghai have bound themselves to abide by the findings of the Commission and that the Chief of Police of the said Settlement Mr. McEuen will be suspended, without prejudice, until the completion of the enquiry. Whilst expressing the hope that Your Excellency’s Government see their way to appoint a member of the Commission of Enquiry and in any case in the interest of justice and to facilitate the work of this Commission as far as possible to expedite the fulfilment of its task, I avail myself [etc.] W. J. OUDENDIJK 23 Copy received by the Department on December 4. 24 Telegram in French; translation supplied by the editor.

Your Excellency is no doubt aware that after the occurrence of the Shanghai incidents my Government lodged a formal protest through the Italian and then Senior Minister with the result that the Diplomatic Representatives of the interested Powers decided to send Delegates to Shanghai to investigate into the incidents and empower them to discuss and settle the case with the Chinese Delegates on the spot. Though the negotiations were brought to a suspense [sic] through the lack of authority on the part of the Diplomatic Delegates to settle the case as stated by them but no question, however, arose in respect to the facts which had been investigated into. When the case was transferred to Peking for settlement the then Senior Minister brought out five points as being suitable for discussion while consultations also took place on the various articles embodied in this Ministry’s despatch of June 24th. last as they are within the scope of the case and admissible for discussion. Afterwards it was given out that the British Government proposed to re-investigate the case by judicial procedure, a proposal [of] which the British Chargé d’Affaires at Peking also subsequently made mention. Consequently my Government instructed by telegraph their Chargé d’Affaires at London to inform the British Government that as the facts of the Shanghai case had already been investigated into con-jointly by the Diplomatic Delegates who also had several discussions with the Chinese Delegates, the re-investigation suggested was unnecessary and would only involve a waste of time: a view I also made known on several occasions to the Representatives at Peking of the interested Powers. To be informed three months after the occurrence of the incidents that the Foreign Governments interested still come to the decision of appointing delegates to investigate into the case by judicial procedure, I beg leave to say that my Government have not wavered from their attitude originally maintained. I avail myself of Your Excellency’s valued channels to transmit the contents of this Note to Your Colleagues, the Heads of Mission concerned, and to express to you, Monsieur le Ministre, the renewed assurances of my very high consideration. [File copy not signed] 26 Copy received by the Department December 4. 27 Supra.

29 The commission consisted of: E. Finley Johnson, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands; Sir Henry C. Gollan, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Hongkong; and Kitaro Suga, Chief Justice of the Hiroshima Appeal Court of Japan.

should be taken up, mutually discussed, and settled. The present situation, from the standpoint of many, is intolerable and until settled will continue to be a source of serious grievances.” Eleventh paragraph, “That the question of extraterritoriality which compels the Chinese people in his [sic] relation with the foreigners and in all of his [sic] disputes with them in which, he [sic] is the aggrieved party to submit to foreign law more or less, should speedily and without delay be mutually discussed and settled. There exists a basis of settlement which would be fair and reasonable to all parties.” Twelfth paragraph, “That the alleged grievance on the part of the Chinese people relating to the loss of sovereignty and territory in the region of the city of Shanghai is also a question which those in authority should not overlook. It is a serious one and its speedy settlement would greatly allay much of the trouble now existing.” Thirteenth paragraph, “That the grievance of the Chinese people concerning unjust treaties negotiated with selfish and perhaps dishonest officials is another question which should be carefully considered, mutually discussed and justly settled by all of the friendly nations of the Chinese people [sic].” Fourteenth paragraph, “That the foreigners in China have failed to take into account the principles of liberty and independence which they themselves have by precept and example spread abroad throughout China, concerning which the young and rising generation have been apt students.” 5. The following three recommendations conclude the report. “First. That after some of the suggestions made in my conclusions above enumerated have been put into effect that the powers and duties and responsibilities of the governing body of Shanghai be more definitely and precisely defined. Second. That considering the knowledge which the commissioner of police, Mr. Kenneth John McEuen, had concerning the excited condition of a large portion of the Chinese population within and immediately without the International Settlement, as evidenced by his daily reports signed by himself as commissioner of police from the 11th day of January last up to and including his report for the 30th day of May last, the daily report furnished by Chief Inspector Givens in his ‘summary of labor, student and Bolshevik activities and diary of events leading to the shooting incident on the Nanking Road near the Louza station on May 30 last’, considering his own admissions in his evidence adduced during the hearing in

relation with the fact that he took no precautionary measures whatever to prevent the disturbances of May 30 last and his absence from his station during the afternoon of that date, I am fully persuaded that he does not have a proper appreciation of his responsibility in the maintenance of peace and good order within his jurisdiction. I would therefore respectfully recommend that he be succeeded by one whose performance of duty shall be more nearly commensurate with his very high responsibilities. Third. Considering the many nationalities living and residing in the International Settlement of Shanghai, it occurs to me that it would be wise and advisable to have the commissioner of police and the deputy commissioner of police selected from among the citizens of two nations so that the blame for disorder and disturbances in the future if they occur cannot be wholly charged to one nation alone.” 6. It is very unfortunate that dicta of a controversial political nature should be contained in a judicial finding intended to be published at this time. I have informally talked the matter over with the senior minister. He and I are in agreement that there is no other course to follow than to have the three reports published. The matter cannot be decided, however, until opportunity is given for the Heads of Legation to discuss the reports. I presume such a discussion will take place soon. In this discussion I shall maintain the attitude indicated above unless I receive instructions to the contrary from the Department.

4. Action along the line indicated would seem to be all the more desirable in view of the fact that Chinese Government have just addressed to senior minister a note containing preposterous demands for a settlement of the incident. Both British and Japanese however send instruction contained in paragraph 3 subject to ratification by their respective Governments. You may consult with your British and Japanese colleagues with a view to the taking of simultaneous action when they advise you they are in a position to do so. I understand from British Minister that Barton favors and considers entirely feasible such action by the Council as is suggested. Let me ask your fullest and most earnest cooperation in bringing about the desired result as expeditiously as possible, the more particularly as there seems to be a danger that agitation regarding the Shanghai incident may be received [revived?] for political purposes. Please keep me fully and promptly advised of action taken and progress of discussions in this connection.” [Paraphrase.] My own preference would have been to have the reports in full published immediately. However my British and Japanese colleagues were not free to take such action. It may be hoped that the plan now adopted in harmony with their instructions will provide a settlement of the Shanghai incident which will be satisfactory and will give as little emphasis as possible to the embarrassing and unnecessary dicta contained in Johnson’s report. This may be accomplished, especially if the Council takes prompt and generous action. [End paraphrase.] MACMURRAY

The Department is informed33 that the British Minister at Peking has informed the American Minister that his Government is withholding authorization for its Consul General at Shanghai to proceed in above manner pending fuller information as to the points on which the reports of the three Judges agree and disagree. The American Minister also reports that the Japanese Minister, at an informal meeting with the British and Dutch Ministers and himself, informed them that, “On November 27 Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs had told British Ambassador that since the reports were not unanimous there was in effect no decision resulting from Judicial inquiry and that he was therefore strongly of the opinion that it would be inadvisable to publish the reports and thus give occasion for the Chinese to play on differences among the interested Powers and that the British Ambassador had concurred.” The American Minister reports that the Japanese Minister promised to urge upon his Government the view of this Government that the terms of reference themselves contemplated the possibility of a divided Court and that it was our profound conviction that it would prove utterly impossible to prevent leakage of the substance of the reports and that the attempt to suppress or edit them would only act infinitely more unfavorably upon foreign interests in China. The above is communicated to you for your information and such use as you care to make of it in discussing matter with British Foreign Office. You will state to the Foreign Office that while it is regrettable that the Commission should have disagreed in its findings this Government feels that it would be most disastrous at the present time, in the face of conditions now existing in China, for the Powers to repeat the procedure which followed the investigation made into the Shanghai incident by the Committee representing the Diplomatic Body in July and to suppress, edit or delay the publication of the findings of the Judicial Commission. Already there has appeared in the press, both in China and in the United States, intimation to the effect that the Powers will refuse to give these reports to the press. You will state to the British Foreign Office that this Government does not feel that it should permit itself to share in the odium of a virtual repudiation of the results of the inquiry which has been publicly conducted by three Judges appointed at the request of the Diplomatic Body. You may add that, howsoever much we may regret the necessity of so doing, this Government will for its part feel obliged, even though there may be no agreement about the publishing of the three reports, to publish the report of the American Judge in the near future.34 KELLOGG 32 Telegram printed supra.

substantially the same as the views embodied in this paragraph. (File No.

35 In this telegram the Minister proposed to publish Mr. Johnson’s report independently on December 15, unless arrangements could meanwhile be made for prompt simultaneous publication of the three reports.

Spread of antiforeign disturbances in China38 38 See also sections entitled “Participation by the United States in efforts to solve problems arising from the disturbances at Shanghai, May 30, 1925,” and “Intensification of antiforeign feeling in Canton after the firing at Shameen,” pp. 647

but as yet it is not apparent. The agitation is purely anti-Christian education or antimission school to date.” 4. For explanation of the challenge of Chinese educators to mission schools see the report of the resolutions, especially resolution number 7, passed by the Tenth National Conference of Chinese Educational Association[s] held at

the children of school age. At the same time Christian educators will recognize that we are facing new conditions.” SCHURMAN

4. I was most emphatic in stating that under no circumstances did the American Government wish to take sides in conflicts between Chinese factions; that I thought our neutrality might be seriously compromised by the step which the Heads of Legation proposed; that it was my opinion that Chang would of necessity be forced to assume control in Peking with or without an expressed welcome from the Heads of Legation concerned if the Communistic menace was as great as my colleagues believed; and that I would not be surprised, in view of my previous experience with him, if Chang were trying again to use the Communistic menace to secure some form of support from the powers for himself. The British Chargé expressed himself categorically in a similar sense. The Italian Minister assured me that he had information entirely independent of that from Chang Tso-lin as to the Communistic menace to foreign lives and property. It was stated by all Heads of Legation that they had no wish to take sides in disputes between factions. They felt, however, that foreign lives and property were in great danger not only in Peking but throughout China and that we must take advantage of all possible assistance both to protect ourselves and to prevent any untoward incident between Chinese and foreigners which would precipitate an antiforeign outburst. 5. My British colleague and I decided after long argument and discussion that we could not assume the responsibility of preventing action desired by the other Heads of Legation. We caused a formula to be adopted, however, for such action by which I believe our neutrality will not be compromised. The Italian Minister was authorized to make confidentially and orally a statement to the representative of Chang Tso-lin, a translation of which follows. [End paraphrase.] “The interested Heads of Legation have taken cognizance of the considerations which Marshal Chang Tso-lin has conveyed to them concerning the necessity for the reestablishment of order in Peking in order to prevent further difficulties and the development of a situation which threatens to become dangerous. They have the honor to make known to him that, preoccupied above all with the question of assuring the safety of their nationals, [they?] shall welcome with satisfaction any support which would be given to the Government for the maintenance of order and for taking appropriate measures to the end that the present agitation may cease.” 6. While the British Chargé d’Affaires and myself do not completely share the apprehension of our colleagues as expressed above I view the situation with a certain alarm because of the undoubted intense Soviet activities for the

purpose of stirring up trouble in all quarter[s], and by reason of the entire paralysis of the present Government in Peking. I am in constant communication with commandant of Legation guard concerning the protection of our nationals in Peking in any eventuality and shall take requisite steps to that end. 7. Respectfully request Department’s views in the premises. MAYER

described above as result of our continuous efforts to arouse Chinese Government from its apathy. 5. No reaction from démarche of Heads of Legation note in paragraph 4, my

ief informed.

Commander in ch MacMorray

involves at once sullenly suspicious attitude towards foreign nations and a rather complacently self-conscious conviction that Chinese have scored once and can do it again when they want to. Representative Chinese talk in more or less detached fashion about the defects and possibilities of mass action, half apologizing for the abatement in the movement of self-assertion and half-threatening recrudescence of it if occasion should arise. I believe there is still the possibility of a new movement which might be set in train by affront to their pride even by some casual accident as the situation is still explosive. 5. The recent after-developments of the situation seem to add confirmation to the belief that the whole crisis through which the Chinese Government have been passing is emotional rather than logical and that it is less concerned with substraction [abstract?] rights and obligations (which are only vaguely understood by any but the exceptionally keen minds among them who for the most part understand also the reasons for abnormal state of things in China) than with appearances and amenities of intercourse. 6. There is of course a development here which, whatever the crudities of its manifestations, is real and must be met. But it is accompanied by much plausible assumption which has no basis whatever in fact. Idealistic though term of about the [apparently garbled groups] possibilities of the Chinese people and sympathetic towards their somewhat elementary yearnings towards nationality, it is a case [sic] nevertheless incumbent upon those who deal with China today to keep in mind that in relation to the present problem China consists of two elements: first, the faction recognized as the government which is in control in Peking and which only wants money to go on with, and second, the articulate element of China’s population which, most of it, holds the so-called government in contempt but is momentarily willing to array itself behind that effigy or [of] sovereignty for the sake of gaining “face” for the ethnic group which calls itself the Chinese nation as opposed to the foreigner. It behoves us therefore to be on our guard against the assumption that a concession to be [the?] government is ipso facto concession to that growing national sentiment with whose healthy development we would be disposed to sympathize. It is in fact quite possible that any concrete concession enabling the present governing faction to consolidate its power over the country would incur the active resentment of the very elements which are urging in the abstract the necessity for such concessions. I venture this observation in view of the considerable amount of American comment reprinted here which advances upon the facile assumption that the problem is to decide whether or not we are prepared to satisfy the legitimate aspirations of the Chinese people. 7. Repeated by mail to Tokyo.

MacMurray 2 Post, p. 799 [Pg

Victory of the radical wing of the Kuomintang in Canton [598] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

Intensification of antiforeign feeling in Canton after the firing at Shameen [620] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

local authorities could be relied upon to protect the foreign concessions steps were taken for defence in the event of trouble. Barricades were constructed on the back bund facing the native city and machine guns were placed at strategic points. The volunteer corps was also called upon to stand by. The procession appeared about 2:30 p.m. It was orderly and at first consisted only of students, Boy Scouts, laborers, et cetera. For about half an hour it continued to pass Shameen and as there was no sign of trouble onlookers began to breathe with more ease, feeling that the danger of an outbreak was over. It was then observed, however, that soldiers were bringing up the rear of the procession and that they were armed. These troops consisted of Whampoa Cadets and ordinary Cantonese contingents. No actual count could be made but it is estimated there were more than a thousand men in line. Just as the first of the troops reached a point in front of the Victoria Hotel near the British bridge the procession stopped, probably because of some congestion ahead. The troops began to show signs of nervousness and the students and civilians nearby seemed to increase their yelling and waving. Suddenly the soldiers were seen to break their formation and a shot rang out. This was followed by several more in rapid succession, and then a perfect din of rifles and machine guns began. It is impossible to say from which side the first shot was fired. The British and other foreigners are practically unanimous in declaring that a Chinese fired first, but the Chinese assert that the shot came from Shameen. At any rate the firing spread rapidly along the bund and the French were hotly engaged almost immediately after the British. Heavy firing lasted about fifteen minutes, bullets smashing into houses facing the canal and striking the trees and roofs of buildings all over the two concessions. The mystery is that more Europeans were not killed or wounded. A large motorboat from the U. S. S. Asheville happened to be lying off the front bund when the shooting commenced and it was soon filled with refugees who were taken out to the ship. A wounded Japanese civilian was also picked up and carried over to a Japanese destroyer lying off the concessions. Other refugees kept crowding on the front bund and soon the boats from the warships were busy transferring people to the river steamer Honam which had been anchored nearby with this very purpose in view.

The Honam sailed early the next morning with several hundred refugees for Hongkong. In the afternoon another steamer left with many women and children so that all who wanted to leave were able to get away. The Chinese section of the Honam’s crew had struck and a detail of twelve men from the U. S. S. Asheville assisted the European officers on the run down to Hongkong. All American and British women have left

Shameen and so have most of those of other nationalities although a few French and Japanese women and children still remain. A few American women and children continue to live in the missions in the suburbs but these are being urged to go. As can well be imagined the shooting has produced much bitterness and excitement amongst the Chinese who suffered such unexpectedly great losses. There does not seem to be so much feeling against the French although a large proportion of the casualties were evidently inflicted by French machine guns. The British are blamed for starting the shooting. The Japanese had no part in the Canton affair but they are blamed for their part in the Shanghai troubles. The boycott is directed against the British, French, and Japanese but not against the Americans. From their side the English insist that the first shots came from the Chinese and that the British officers did everything in their power to stop the firing as soon as possible. They regret the large number of casualties and especially the killing of students, but point out that the concessions were being attacked by fully armed Chinese soldiers who far outnumbered the European defenders. The students were near the soldiers and probably came under an indirect fire. It is estimated by the French that fully a thousand armed Chinese troops were facing Shameen at the moment the shooting commenced. In addition more troops were seen extended down the native bund. The people on Shameen were afraid that there would be trouble while the parade was passing and the Consuls and naval authorities concerned took every possible precaution to prevent an outbreak, and at the same time safeguard the concessions. Everyone deplores the affair which can only serve to increase the difficulties of an already complicated and dangerous situation. No foreigners have gone into the native city since the shooting and it will probably be a long time before they will find it safe to move about freely, except Germans and Russians who will probably wear arm bands indicating their nationality. In the suburbs conditions are easier for the Chinese are more or less personally acquainted with the foreigners they see there. Business is at a standstill. No steps have been taken as yet to open negotiations for a settlement and it will probably be some days before anything can be done. Every effort is now being directed toward the prevention of another outbreak which could easily develop into something far more serious than the affair of June 23. As this is being written the French and British are busily engaged in strengthening the defenses of the two concessions. More barricades are being erected and the system of communication improved. There are rumors that troops are massed in the city behind Shameen and that another demonstration may be expected shortly. The more

responsible leaders are doing their best to calm the people but the students, who are evidently under Russian Soviet influence, are insisting that the Chinese dead must be avenged. No one knows what is going to happen. Each day brings a new crop of rumors, some of which seem reasonable while others are mere nonsense. Shameen is an armed fort to all intents and purposes and it is no exaggeration to say that a state of war exists although there is no active warfare at the moment. The strike is complete on the island and shipping is almost paralyzed, only a few Chinese owned steamers being in operation. The question is, how long is it going to last? Things may go on as they are for weeks and even months. The Chinese are almost if not quite as much inconvenienced as are the foreigners for there is practically no communication with the outside world and food supplies will soon be running low. The Canton affair may and will be adjusted after a fashion, but it is evident there can be no real stability and friendliness in China’s relations with foreigners until some plan is found and put into effect for the readjustment of China’s status with the Powers. I have [etc.] DOUGLAS JENKINS

3. A distinction should be noted between the situation under consideration and that at Shanghai where we take part in and share the responsibility for the administration and protection of the foreign International Settlement. Insofar, however, as concerns Shameen the French and British authorities have insisted on their own sole responsibility. 4. It seems evident that our participation should not be warranted merely for the protection of a French or a British concession. If we could in fact isolate this question from other considerations, no doubt it might be possible that it would be preferable for us to avoid involving ourselves in any sort of dispute to support anything like a territorial claim for any other nation.

5. It appears, however, practically impossible to separate this problem from larger considerations which would be brought into action in any case of this sort if the American forces were either to remain inactive or to retire in the course of an attack possibly directed ostensibly and at first against the British or any other nationality, but, when thoroughly analyzed found to spring from motives in which we and other nations would be implicated to only a lesser degree. Such action would be particularly lacking in courtesy in cases where the lives and property of Americans were in danger of attack. In a case of that sort it would in fact be practically impossible to give adequate protection to American nationals without taking our part in a united plan for defense. 6. Further than the obvious precaution of withholding our naval forces from foreign concessions in which the interests of Americans are not implicated, I acknowledge that no way presents itself by which we can differentiate our own interests from those of other nations, so as to avoid our possible implication as participants in defending any foreign concession where American nationals may have become established. We have considered the possibility of a withdrawal of Americans at any time when an attack threatened, but aside from the regrettable effect that this would have on the feeling of the foreigners and on the possibility of cooperation with other foreign nations whose interests in China are in substance of the same nature as our own, I cannot help thinking that such a withdrawal at a moment of crisis would in itself have a tendency toward encouraging and bringing about separating hostile action on the part of the Chinese, which would finally involve us, beyond doubt, no less than it would the nation first attacked. Though, for the time being, the agitation against the position of foreigners in China is concentrated principally against Japanese and British, it should be remembered that such a distinction is, in great measure, a matter of tactics on the part of the leaders in the agitation; and we should also not forget that to those inspiring the attack its purpose would be perhaps not directly but none the less actually in opposition to American interests and will be a benefit to China. It is especially the case in Canton, which is in great measure under Soviet influence at present, that the motivating force is antagonistic to the “imperialistic and capitalistic” powers and opposed to the entire political and economic system of which the United States forms as large a part as does Great Britain. 7. Hence I am unable to avoid the conclusion that in Canton and other treaty ports where a crisis of like nature might occur, it would be preferable for the United States naval forces to remain in order to protect American citizens and their interests and, with that in view, it would be advisable for them to be authorized to unite in such defense measures as the commander in his discretion may deem necessary to accomplish that end after mediation appears no longer possible. 8. The commander of the South China Patrol has presented this same question of policy to the commander in chief and I am sending him a copy of this telegram.

y as to the Government s por

uld appreciate an early repl

9. I sho MacMurray

Adherence of certain powers to treaties concerning China signed at Washington, February 6, 1922 [635] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Moore)

Request from the Chinese Government to the Washington Conference powers for a readjustment of treaty relations [637] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

undated

[648] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

undated

undated

[664] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[671] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

[678] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton) Washington, August 22, 1925.

At the time when China joined the Allied and Associated Powers in a war waged for upholding the sanctity of international law and the vindication of justice, the Chinese Government was encouraged to hope for a definite improvement of her international status and was happily assured by these powers that they would do all that rests with them to ensure that China would enjoy in her international relations the position and regard due to a great country. Great therefore must be [the] disappointment to her people when after the Great War had been won and the common cause achieved, her own international status should remain unimproved and is in some respects even inferior to that of the defeated nations for in [none] of them do we find the existence of extraterritorial courts, foreign concessions, leased territories and an externally imposed conventional tariff. The Chinese Government has therefore on repeated occasions approached the foreign powers concerned for a readjustment of her treaty relations. Questions of importance for readjustment were submitted by China to the Paris Peace Conference which, while fully recognizing the importance of the questions raised, did not consider that they fall within the province of the Peace Conference. A similar effort was made by the Chinese Minister at the time of the Washington Conference which, though more disposed to consider China’s requests, could not agree to effect any fundamental readjustment; so that as far as substantial results are concerned very little has yet been accomplished. More recently in a note brought both [addressed?] jointly to the representatives in Peking of the signatory powers to the Washington treaties and agreement, shortly after the assumption of office by the Provisional Chief Executive, the Chinese Government again expressed the hope that the friendly powers would give sympathetic consideration to the well-known aspirations of the Chinese people submitted in recent years to different international conferences by the Chinese Government, so that their relations may be further improved to their mutual advantage. The Chinese Government is firmly convinced that with all nations not only can their relations with China be made more cordial but their rights and interests can be better protected and more effectively advanced without rather than with the enjoyment of extraterritorial privileges and immunities. I have the honor to request you to be good enough to transmit the above to your Government in the confident hope that the Government which you have the honor to represent will be as much convinced as the Chinese Government is that the readjustment of China’s treaty relations on an equitable basis in satisfaction of the legitimate national aspirations of the Chinese people would do much to further consolidate her friendly relations with foreign powers and that your Government will also as fully appreciate the mutual advantages that would result from such a course of action and will therefore give an encouraging response to this proposal of the Chinese Government.[”]

2. Representative from Foreign Office assured me that note’s purpose twofold, first, to take action along line of legitimate national aspiration of Chinese, second, confidentially the note was designed to neutralize radical propaganda directed toward immediate cancelation of so-called unequal treaties by evidencing to Chinese people purpose of Chinese Government to initiate action at once toward readjustment of treaty relations with foreign powers in friendly manner consonant with principles of international law. 3. Meeting of Heads of Legation tomorrow at which Chinese note will be discussed. I shall telegraph further thereafter. MAYER

Furthermore, I believe we should affirm in our reply the duty of the respective Governments concerned toward their citizens and subjects who by mutual assent of the Chinese and the respective Governments have acquired in China commercial, educational, and missionary rights of great value and importance both to the citizens and subjects aforementioned and to the Chinese, the successful pursuit of which, if not their very existence, would in all probability be seriously jeopardized should the Governments concerned accede to the complete implication of the Chinese Government’s note of June 24th in this period of chaos and the absence in China of a permanent government able to enforce its mandate throughout the country or even in a considerable portion thereof. We might further with advantage in our reply state that the Governments concerned would be false to their public trust [should they] surrender the privileges and immunities of their citizens and subjects in China at the present time without first assuring themselves of the ability of the Chinese to carry out the burden of normal nationality to which they appear to aspire. Repeated to Tokyo. MAYER

undated On June 30 the Chinese Minister called upon the Secretary by appointment to discuss with him the contents of his note of June 25.73 The Chinese Minister stated, among other things, that he had been advised informally by his Foreign Office, although he had not been authorized to make official representations to this effect, that while that Government had desired greatly that a conference be called to consider the question of treaty revision it was realized that such a conference could not take place at any early date. He stated to the Secretary that this had come to him as a result of a telegraphic inquiry which he had made asking for some explanation of the desires of his Government as set forth in that note. He stated that his Government felt, therefore, that they should not, in striving for the greater end, lose what had already been gained by the treaties signed as the result of the Washington Conference and the resolution calling for the sending of a commission to go into the matter of extraterritoriality. The Secretary stated that the greater question of general treaty revision involved many difficulties. He said that this Government had from the beginning desired to expedite the holding of the Customs Conference provided for by the Washington Conference treaty and the sending of the commission on extraterritoriality, but that the whole matter of the Customs Conference had been delayed pending action by France on the China treaties, while, as regards the commission on extraterritoriality, after the first postponement at China’s request, this Government had been unable to obtain any unanimity on the part of the Powers concerned as regards the fixing of the date for the sending of that commission.

The Chinese Minister asked whether this Government would be willing to urge upon the other interested Powers the hastening of the calling of the conference on tariff matters. The Secretary stated that we would be glad to do this. He said that he was also willing to urge the hastening of the sending of the commission on extraterritoriality. The Chinese Minister stated that he was sure that his Government would receive this information with pleasure. He pointed out, however, that the conference on tariffs, as provided for under the Nine-Power Treaty, did not in fact give to China the fiscal relief that she desired, that what was wanted was complete tariff autonomy. Mr. Johnson suggested that something might be accomplished if the instructions to the conference on tariffs could be amplified to include a request or recommendations upon which a plan for giving complete tariff autonomy might be worked out after the special tasks of the conference had been completed. The Secretary stated that this of course was a matter which would have to be taken under advisement.

The Chinese Minister also stated that the commission on extraterritoriality would be merely asked to make a report, that it did not promise to accomplish anything nor did it bind the Governments to do anything of a concrete nature. Mr. Johnson here suggested that something might be accomplished in this regard also toward meeting the desires of the Chinese, if there could be included in the instructions to the several commissioners a request that they submit with their report recommendations upon which a plan for the gradual relinquishment of extraterritoriality rights might be based. The Secretary stated that this would have to be given consideration. On July 1 the Chinese Minister again saw the Secretary who at this time stated to him that the Chinese Government’s notes would have to be answered by the representatives of the Powers party to the Washington Conference at Peking and he stated that he was instructing the American Legation to urge upon its colleagues at Peking the hastening of the holding of the tariff conference and the early sending of the commission on extraterritoriality. He stated that we had already urged France to hasten action with regard to the treaties. The Secretary did not tell the Chinese Minister that our instructions to Peking recommended the broadening of the powers of the tariff conference or the commission on extraterritoriality to include a request for concrete recommendations leading to an eventual restoration to China of tariff autonomy and the gradual relinquishment of extraterritoriality provisions. N[ELSON] T. J[OHNSON] 73 Not printed; it is substantially the same as the Foreign Office note quoted in telegram

should do no more in their reply than point out that the Commission will be the competent body to examine this question and leave it at that. 5. The above comments, which have also been communicated to the Japanese, French and Belgian Governments, represent the considered views of His Majesty’s Government in the matter, and in bringing them to your notice, I have the honour to enquire whether the United States Government concur therein, and if so, whether they are prepared to send instructions to the United States representative at Peking similar to those which have been already addressed to His Majesty’s Representative. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

Conference powers seemed a rather unwieldy combination. I raised the objection of the national susceptibilities of treaty powers which were not represented in the Washington Conference, experience with regard to which we had had in connection with the joint note of December 9, 1924 from the Washington Conference powers to the Chinese Government.74 I questioned whether it would be beneficial to create a block of Washington Conference powers just in order to expedite results in the present situation as such a block would be either too large or not large enough. 4. Yoshizawa and I agreed fully regarding the attitudes of the French and Italian Governments. The former had completely changed since the settlement of the gold franc issue and now seemed anxious to aid China in every proper way. For this reason the French Minister doubtless would generally be in accord with what I consider to be the American, British, and Japanese policy with respect to China, i. e., a sympathetic attitude toward China’s aspirations, assistance in that direction by proper revision of treaties as fast as the Chinese show ability to fulfill their responsibilities, and the achievement by China of a stable government without foreign interference. Yoshizawa and I agreed that the Italian attitude toward China differed rather sharply from that stated above. We both feel that the Italian Government seems disposed to make the satisfactory settlement by China of the Italian gold franc case and the payment to Italy of certain former Austrian bonds a condition to a sympathetic attitude toward China generally and specifically to wholehearted support to the early convening of the Tariff Conference. Yoshizawa also pointed out that although two months ago France had promised to ratify the Washington Conference treaties she had not yet done so. 5. The Japanese Minister then came to the point which I think was the reason for his appeal to me. He said that he believed his Government contemplated a larger cooperation between the American, British, and Japanese Governments with respect to China than merely cooperation in the affair at Shanghai. He repeated in several different ways this extended idea of cooperation, which gave me every reason to believe that Japan is making a bid on a definite basis for cooperation in China of these three powers. I told Yoshizawa that I could not express an opinion on this very important conception and its many implications but said that I would be glad to comply with his request to report the same for consideration by my Government. At this point I questioned Yoshizawa as to Japan’s attitude toward China. After discussion I summarized its attitude as I saw it as follows: With respect to Manchuria, Japan had taken a position which it believed was vital to Japan’s existence as a nation; but as for the rest of China, Japan wishes it to work out its own destiny free from foreign interference so that an authoritative, stable government may be established, and Japan believes that as concerns treaty readjustment and the like the national aspirations of China should receive sympathetic consideration. Yoshizawa was evidently pleased to confirm this summary as being exactly the attitude of the Japanese Government.

6. I call the Department’s attention to the statement by Waterlow in the third sentence

His Majesty’s Government are in complete sympathy with the aims which these instructions are intended to secure. At the same time, however, I am instructed to inform you that His Majesty’s Government entertain doubts as to the wisdom of laying down now that the Commission should be given such definite terms of reference as those suggested above. It is the opinion of His Majesty’s Government that the Commission should be left free to make its own recommendations, and they consider that any attempt to indicate at this stage of the negotiations that the Powers are prepared to go such lengths in meeting the Chinese demand for the abolition of extraterritoriality would be fraught with danger and liable to be regarded as a capitulation. In these circumstances, His Majesty’s Government are generally disposed to think that the ends common to the United States Government and to themselves can best be secured by concentrating upon the tariff conference, and by keeping the extraterritorial issue in the background, at any rate for the time being. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

anxious to lose no time in taking steps towards this end. But it is obvious that no effective progress can be made so long as the present anti-foreign agitation persists and especially so long as it expresses itself in the forms which imply absence of any responsible authority for the purpose of international consultation and co-operation. The agitation now proceeding, unless the Powers have misjudged it, is pregnant with graver possibilities than the mere disintegration of responsible authority. It seems to be taking the form of an organized movement designed to extort forcibly from the Powers the unconditional abandonment of their rights and obligations conferred upon them by the present treaties. The Powers hope that they are mistaken in this estimation, but they feel it their duty solemnly to warn the Chinese Government that should these apprehensions be justified, an entirely new situation will be created in which not only will the hope of the Powers for constructive co-operation with China be frustrated but they will be obliged to consult together as to the immediate measures necessary to protect their interests until the realisation of these hopes shall again become possible.” I am directed to ascertain whether the United States Government concur in the terms of the above declaration. Any suggestions as to its wording will be gladly received by His Majesty’s Government. Furthermore, I am to explain that if the nine Powers have not agreed within a week on issuing the joint declaration, His Majesty’s Government suggest that it should be made by themselves and the United States and Japanese Governments. In view of this, I am directed to impress upon you the very great urgency of the matter. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

due to the positive control that they exercise over Chinese customs receipts through the conventional tariffs annexed to the several treaties, and the least that these Powers can do is to agree to an early calling of the Conference on Chinese tariff provided for in the Treaty of February 6, 1922. Public opinion in the United States definitely favors some such course. As regards the question of extraterritoriality, this Government feels that definite steps should be taken by the Powers in line with the promises made in the commercial treaties which followed the settlement of the Boxer uprising of 1900. At that time the promise was formally made to China by the Government of the United States that, when it was satisfied that the state of the laws of China, the arrangements for their administration and other considerations warranted, extraterritorial rights would be relinquished.89 The most feasible way in which the question can be approached and considered is to send to China the Commission provided for in Resolution V of the Washington Conference,90 in the expectation that the investigations made by that Commission will help to guide the treaty Powers as to what, if any, steps should be taken as regards the possible relinquishment of extraterritorial rights at this time. You state in your Note of July 3, 1925, that the British Government is somewhat apprehensive lest the Chinese Government interpret a promise to expedite the meeting of the Commission on extraterritoriality as a sign of weakness on the part of the Powers. This Government does not share in that apprehension. It, as well as other Governments which participated in the Washington Conference in the Autumn of 1921, affixed its signature in good faith to the Resolution regarding extraterritoriality in China. It is true that some responsibility for the delay in carrying out the terms of this Resolution must be put to the account of China, which had requested a postponement of one year in calling a conference. However, that year has long since lapsed and nothing has been done to make effective the solemn obligations then assumed. The conditions which now prevail in China differ only in degree from those which prevailed while the Resolution was being adopted and since its adoption. This Government cannot recognize that any such condition prevails which would invalidate its undertakings embodied in the Resolution. This Government cannot believe that a policy which consists in carrying out agreements undertaken in good faith and already overdue can be interpreted as a sign of weakness.

It was in consideration of the above facts that this Government instructed its Legation

program for the consideration by the Governments concerned of the question of extraterritoriality might be based. This Government for its part desires that this be done in order that it can have before it for consideration some feasible plan of action for the future. I venture to hope that the British Government will find itself so far in agreement with the attitude outlined above as to see its way to join this Government in urging the early calling of the Conference on Chinese Tariff and the sending of the Commission referred to above in order that the Powers may at an early date have before them data upon which they can determine their future course in dealing with these two of the many questions raised by the Chinese note.

expedite the sending to China of the Commission provided for in Resolution No. V passed at the Washington Conference. Accept [etc.] FRANK B. KELLOGG 88 The views set forth in this note were repeated in substance, July 14, to the American diplomatic representatives in Japan, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, and Portugal to be communicated to the respective Foreign Offices of those countries for their information.

[Document 651]

The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State24

undated MEMORANDUM 1. The Government of Japan have observed with great satisfaction that since the installation of Marshal Tuan Chi-jui as Provisional Chief Executive of China, various questions of national and international importance, and particularly those concerning the recent “Reconstruction Conference and the Gold Franc, have been finally settled. Should China further succeed in the work of the National Assembly and the Customs Conference, which are expected to be held in due course of time, her position in the family of nations will no doubt be greatly enhanced and strengthened. 2. It is a cause of regret that certain elements of the Chinese people have recently been active in inciting strikes in Japanese cotton mills at Tsingtao, Shanghai and elsewhere. Demands for better terms of employment soon developed into threats and violence against employers and police, and following the unfortunate incident at Shanghai, they have been succeeded by anti-foreign movements directed towards the cancellation of international arrangements. These agitations have spread rapidly to a great many localities and foreigners have everywhere been subjected to constant danger and molestation. 3. It is realized that the Chinese authorities in different places have been making efforts, although with varying degrees of success, to suppress disorder. At the same time, they have freely given their moral, if not material, support to the movements for the revision of treaty relations, regardless of the means employed or of the consequences involved in the support of such movements. The note addressed by the Chinese Foreign Minister to the Japanese Representative at Peking shows the disposition of the Chinese Government to take advantage of the Shanghai incident for urging consideration by the Powers concerned of many sweeping demands which are not directly connected with the incident itself. 4. The Government and people of Japan always look with sympathy on the legitimate national aspirations of the Chinese. The Japanese still retain bitter memories of the regime of extraterritoriality that existed in their own country years ago, and so their minds are naturally receptive to the Chinese appeal for the termination of that system. They are also mindful of the manifold difficulties with which China is now confronted in her domestic and foreign relations, and they trust that Marshal Tuan Chi-jui will appreciate the

patience and self-restraint which they have consistently exercised at this time when such heavy damage has been inflicted upon their countrymen. 5. It will, however, be well understood that the attainment of legitimate national aspirations must be sought through means equally just and honourable. Japan, during a period of twenty years, had devoted all her energy and attention to the completion of judicial reforms before she proceeded to the abolition of extraterritoriality within her own borders. When the results of her labour were made evident, the Powers gladly abandoned the immunity which they had previously enjoyed by treaty. The same immunity is still enjoyed by foreigners in China. It is, however, by no means due to any intention on the part of the Powers to stigmatize the Chinese people. It is based on the actual necessity inherent in and consequent upon the present inefficiency in the administration of justice. No attempt is likely to succeed which is designed to remove any effect without removing its cause. On the other hand, if the Chinese Government should decide to introduce immediately necessary reforms in the administration of justice, and thereby to prepare the way for the termination of extraterritoriality, they may reckon upon the wholehearted co-operation of the Japanese Government in common with the other countries. 6. It further seems extremely unfortunate that the present agitations of the Chinese for the revision of treaty relations should be closely associated with activities looking to the destruction of industrial organization. So long as strikes in factories are no more than a means to secure better conditions of employment, they shall give no occasion for official interference. But when they represent organization to undermine the whole structure of industry, they will prove a cause of serious danger as much to China herself as to other countries. 7. The Japanese Government are of the opinion— (a) that the questions directly connected with the Shanghai incident shall first of all be brought to a final adjustment as quickly as possible; (b) that thereupon, the questions concerning the jurisdiction of the Mixed Court, the organization of the Municipal Council and other kindred matters in Shanghai shall next be taken up and settled in the light of local requirements; (c) that finally the questions of extraterritoriality and of customs tariff shall be disposed of, in conformity with the terms and spirit

of the arrangement reached at the Washington Conference; (d) that all bona fide labour disputes concerning the terms of employment may be left for direct discussion between the representatives of capital and labour, and no agitation from sources outside the immediately interested parties should be permitted to interfere; (e) and that at the same time, it rests with the Chinese Government to carry out fully and firmly their obligations affording protection to the lives and property of foreigners, and to see the realization of China’s just aspirations, with the sympathy and understanding of the Powers. 8. If, as [is] confidently hoped, Marshal Tuan Chi-jui should face the situation with determination on the line of thought and action above suggested, the Government of Japan will be happy to do whatever lies in their power in supporting such a policy conjointly with other Powers.

2. Yoshizawa inquired regarding the willingness of the United States to cooperate in the particular matter under consideration. I told him that personally I believed that my Government would welcome heartily cooperation on the basis contemplated as I understood it, i. e., not an agreement restricting the freedom of action which might be considered by some power to be necessary, not a set of obligations, but rather a state of mind based upon the realization that the powers concerned have common interests and purposes, confidence in each other, and a spirit of accommodation. Yoshizawa said that he was pleased with this tentative expression of my opinion. He suggested that after I had had an opportunity to consider it we should discuss the matter further. 3. As there have been exacting and incessant discussions among the Ministers with respect to the situation at Shanghai, I have not been able to find an opportunity to resume my discussion with my Japanese colleague without giving an impression of emphasis which I am afraid would be misunderstood. I am waiting for a chance for a more apparently spontaneous resumption of my conversation with Yoshizawa. In the meantime I submit to you my own suggestion on behalf of the Japanese Government.

along the same lines with us and are even ready to make further concessions to our views so as to maintain solidarity with us. The British Government likewise has for the same reason shown a willingness in the past to work in harmony with us. The United States, Great Britain, and Japan, apart from Russia, have the largest interest in China and as a result are more disposed to take long views instead of seeking small temporary advantages, as the Italians, for example, do. It seems to me, therefore, that there is an opportunity for these three powers to coordinate their general policies toward China and whenever possible harmonize their individual actions with the purposes which they hold in common. 5. I somewhat fear, however, that the Japanese may have in mind some more definite object involving some sort of tripartite agreement which would deprive us of a freedom of action we would not be willing to relinquish and which would also produce a psychological result that might outgrow the scope of the original agreement, as did the Anglo-Japanese Alliance. My doubt on this score is increased because Yoshizawa seems to have given some emphasis to the differentiation which Japan made between her interests in Manchuria and in the rest of China. There would seem to be no occasion at present for Japan to seek assurances as to the validity of her vested interests in Manchuria, whatever may be the fact as to the greater amount of concern which she may have reason to feel respecting her interests in that area. As the experience of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, the Lansing-Ishii Agreement, and Consortium negotiations indicated, it is not possible to give public recognition to any special concessions or claims regarding a particular region in China without laying the basis for misunderstandings. I consider the chief value of the four-power Pacific pact to be that it replaced the Anglo-Japanese Alliance with an understanding clearly disconnected with the continent of Asia. Furthermore, the Washington Conference prepared the way for the cancelation of the Lansing-Ishii Agreement. I would consider it unfortunate for us to become involved in any new understanding which would in any degree revive the effects of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance and the Lansing-Ishii Agreement. 6. I fear that any agreement definitely identifying ourselves with Great Britain and Japan would be a positive disadvantage to our interests, apart from any question of reviving the understandings mentioned above. This is particularly true at a time when Chinese feeling against both the British and Japanese is aroused to an unexplainable and unnatural degree. I do not think we should seek to disassociate our responsibilities and interests from those of the British and Japanese and, in fact, I have taken the liberty of assuring the British Chargé that we do not intend to try to exploit the agitation against the British to their disadvantage. Nevertheless, I am becoming daily more impressed that it would be unwise to place ourselves in the position of espousing the cause either of the British or of the Japanese. In the present undeveloped stage of Chinese political thinking, hatred first of the British and secondly of the Japanese is the consuming passion. The United States is being eagerly watched to see whether it is pro- Chinese or whether it is pro-British or pro- Japanese. I think we can work honorably

with the British and Japanese and yet not quixotically identify ourselves with them in such a way as to bring upon ourselves a share of the odium in which the Chinese hold them. 7. It is my feeling, therefore, that, while carefully avoiding accepting any commitments or obligations which might hinder us from maintaining our own policies and views regarding China, we should cordially welcome any offer from the British and Japanese to work as far as possible in a spirit of harmony with them. MACMURRAY

foreign lives and property and put an end to strikes and agitations which are harmful to Chinese and foreign commercial interests. (2) of a reminder that the Powers have throughout shown willingness to undertake a full enquiry into the facts of the Shanghai riots and to discuss results with the Chinese Government. Extraneous matters mentioned in the thirteen Articles relating to Shanghai, but not immediately connected with the riots, must form the subject of separate negotiations which the Powers are prepared to undertake at an early date. (3) of the text of the proposed declaration arranged in a manner to suit its context in the reply and revised in accordance with the suggested Japanese amendments which appear in the main to meet such modifications as have been proposed by other Powers.

Whilst disposed to think that the exact text of the reply and the question of publicity can best be left to the discretion of the Corps Diplomatique at Peking His Majesty’s Government consider that the whole matter should be expedited in order that the Chinese may be given no further cause to doubt the sincerity of the Powers with regard to the fulfilment of their obligations under the Washington Treaties. I accordingly have the honour to request that you will be so good as to acquaint me at the earliest possible moment with the attitude of the United States Government towards the above proposals. In the event of the United States Government concurring therein His Majesty’s Government are prepared to recommend the change of procedure as outlined above to the other Powers concerned, the majority of whom have already intimated that they approve action and the draft declaration in the form originally proposed. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

abandonment of rights and interests assured to them by present treaties. Such agitations seem to be pregnant with graver possibilities than the mere disintegration of responsible authority.” In the last sentence the words “not only will” should be deleted and the sentence itself should end with the words “the hope of the Powers for constructive cooperation with China will be frustrated.” His Majesty’s Government approve the above proposed amendments to the draft declaration and in bringing them to your notice, I have the honour to express the hope that the United States Government may also be disposed to concur in their adoption and with the suggestion that the revised text of the declaration should be embodied in the reply to the representations of the Chinese Government. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON 97 The text of the Japanese draft as received by the Department on July 21 is printed on

[Document 657]

The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State22

undated The Washington customs treaty provided for the early convocation of a conference at which, by agreement between China and the Powers, certain economic measures should be adopted for the benefit of China as a whole. The Washington Conference further passed a resolution for the establishment of an international commission to inquire into the existing conditions of the administration of justice in China, with a view to eventual relinquishment by the several Powers of their respective rights of extraterritoriality. The spirit animating the Powers remains today what it was then. Various subsequent changes in the situation which have delayed the meeting of the conference and the commission have not affected the original intentions of the Powers; on the contrary, they have confirmed these intentions, and the Powers declare their willingness to consider sympathetically and helpfully just and reasonable aspirations that the Chinese people may seek to attain through means equally legitimate. The Powers are accordingly anxious to expedite the meeting of the Tariff Conference and the commission on the question of extraterritoriality, with the desire to devise in cooperation with the Chinese people such modifications of the present tariff and judicial arrangements as will give effect to the terms and the spirit of the agreement reached at the Washington Conference, and will materially contribute to the establishment of those conditions of internal stability and international accord which are necessary conditions of the assumption by China of her proper place in the community of nations. But it is obvious that no effective progress toward this end can be made so long as the present agitation threatening the security of foreign lives and property persists in China, and especially so long as it expresses itself in the form of an organized movement designed to extort forcibly from the Powers the unconditional abandonment of the rights and interests assured to them by the present treaties. Such agitation seems to be pregnant with graver possibilities than the mere disintegration of responsible authority. The Powers hope that they are mistaken in this estimate. But they feel it their duty solemnly to warn the Chinese Government that should these apprehensions be justified an entirely new situation will be created in which the hope entertained by the Powers for a new era of constructive cooperation with China will be frustrated. 98 This Japanese draft of the proposed joint declaration in reply to the Chinese note of

protection of the persons and property of foreigners, and the maintenance of conditions which will make it possible for the Conference to function, clearly indicating the definite intention of the Powers to hold the Conference in the manner provided by treaty and placing squarely before the Chinese Government the fact that it will be that Government’s responsibility alone, if conditions remain or become such that the Conference cannot convene as intended. By this method of approach, it is believed that the end desired may be equally as well achieved without at the same time running the risk of creating another issue between the Chinese Government and the Powers, or of a division among the Powers themselves, as to the holding of the Conference. The Government of the United States feels in short that to include in the note an emphatic statement that there can be no discussion of particular reforms, much less a review by the Powers of their treaty relations with China until the Chinese Government has given evidence of its ability and willingness to suppress disorders, strikes and agitations, would tend to defeat its own purpose. It is felt by this Government that the primary effect of convening the customs conference and the Commission on Extraterritoriality would afford the Chinese Government the very means by which it could effectively deal with the situation, and without which it would remain impotent. The conditions laid down by the British Government would in the opinion of the Government of the United States create in the minds of the Chinese Government and people a suspicion that the Powers were merely endeavoring to find grounds for delaying the carrying out of their commitments of the Washington Conference and far from exercising a calming effect on the country would tend to add new stimulus to the disorders, strikes and agitations. The Government of the United States has no objection to the views of the British Government that the reply should indicate the willingness of the Powers to undertake a full inquiry of the facts into the Shanghai riots. The Government of the United States desires to call the attention of the British Government to the fact that the proposed reply to the Chinese note suggested by the Japanese Government, in amendment to the British proposal of July seventh, does not, as does the British proposal, suggest that the Powers are willing to take steps for the comprehensive revision of the treaties at an early opportunity. It feels that some reference should be made to this in the proposed reply. The Government of the United States agrees with the British Government that the exact text of the reply and the question of publicity can best be left to the discretion of the Corps Diplomatique at Peking. In order that the British Government may understand the views of the Government of the United States as to the nature of the reply which it would like to see transmitted to the Chinese Government I quote the following text which is being communicated to Mr. MacMurray at Peking for consideration with the representatives of the other Powers in Peking.99

“Careful consideration has been given to the important questions raised in the note of the Chinese Government by the Government of the United States, which has for some time been aware of the growing feeling in China in favor of a readjustment of the Chinese treaty relations with the foreign Powers, and has watched the growth of that sentiment with a constant and sympathetic interest. It is believed that the Chinese Government does not require to be reminded of the concrete evidence of this interest which has been made manifest on each occasion when a question of treaty revision has occupied the attention of the two countries. The United States is now prepared to consider sympathetically and helpfully the Chinese Government’s proposal for the modification of existing treaties in measure as the Chinese authorities demonstrate their willingness and ability to fulfill their obligations and to assume the protection of foreign rights and interests now safeguarded by the exceptional provisions of those treaties. It is because of a most earnest desire to meet the aspirations of the Chinese Government that the Government of the United States desires to impress upon the Chinese Government the necessity of giving concrete evidence of its ability and willingness to suppress disorders and enforce respect for the safety of foreign lives and property. “My Government sympathizes with the feeling of the Chinese Government that the tariff schedules attached to the various treaties between China, the United States and other Powers have become a severe handicap upon the ability of China to adjust its import tariffs to meet the domestic economic needs of the country. It must not be forgotten, however, that these tariffs were first inaugurated in 1842 and they were a modus operandi originally devised to meet and remedy a condition which had been a fertile source of friction in the relations between the two countries due to the uncertainties connected with the rates and methods of collecting the then existing tariffs. Schedules of those tariffs were seldom available for the information of the merchant, who was hampered in his business by the unusual abrupt and various methods in the assessment and the collection of the duties. It is the belief of my Government that the conventional tariff was welcomed, not alone by the United States and other Powers, but by China, as a diplomatic solution of what had proved to be a very vexatious question. “Since the revision of the treaty relations between the United States and China of 1903, the United States has given particular attention to every evidence of effort on the part of the Chinese Government in the direction of fiscal reform which could be taken as an assurance that the old cause of international friction need no longer be feared and that the conventional tariff could be abandoned.

“It was at the time of the negotiation of the Commercial Treaty of 19031 that the Chinese Government expressed a desire to reform its judiciary system and to bring it into accord with that of western nations. The United States agreed to give every assistance to such reform and stated that it would be prepared to relinquish extraterritorial rights when satisfied that the state of the Chinese laws, the arrangement for their administration and other considerations warranted it in so doing. Having in mind this promise, my Government has observed each measure that the Chinese Government and its people, during the twenty two years which have passed, have taken for the establishment of an independent judiciary and the enactment of laws for the administration of justice. It has been gratified to note the progress that has been made in this connection. The establishment of courts and the enactment of laws, however, do not in themselves meet all the requirements of the situation. Courts cannot function and develop properly or consistently without the aid of a stable government, capable and willing to maintain them and enforce their findings and decisions. It is regretted that the inability of the Chinese Government during the past several years fully to enforce the mandate of its authority has made it difficult for the courts and judiciary already established to function in a normal manner. “The questions of the conventional tariff and the extraterritorial rights under which citizens and subjects of the treaty Powers reside in China are two of the important questions raised by the Chinese Government’s note. Both received consideration at the Washington Conference and it is the belief of the Government of the United States that the most feasible method for dealing with them is by a constant and scrupulous observance of the obligations undertaken at that Conference. To that end the Government of the United States is ready to appoint its delegates to the Special Conference on Chinese tariff matters provided for in the treaty of February 6, 1922,2 and is furthermore ready to accept any reasonable proposal for extending the scope of that Conference to enable it to deal fully and completely with all matters related to its purpose. My Government is also willing, either at the tariff conference or at a subsequent time, to take up the subject of a comprehensive revision of the treaties, looking toward ultimate tariff autonomy. “Before it can form any opinion as to what, if any, steps can be taken to meet the desires of the Chinese Government in regard to the question of extraterritoriality and those special sanctions of the treaties under which its citizens live and conduct their enterprises in China, my Government desires to have before it more complete information than has heretofore been available, and the most feasible way in which the question can be approached and considered is to send to China the commission provided for in Resolution V of the Washington Conference3 in the expectation that the investigation

made by that commission will help to guide the treaty Powers as to what, if any, steps should be taken as regards the relinquishment, by gradual means or otherwise, of extraterritorial rights at this time. My Government is now ready to appoint its commissioner to sit with the commissioners of the other interested governments in accordance with that resolution and hopes that that commission may be able to proceed at an early date to begin the work of collecting data necessary to enable it to make a report. It is prepared to instruct its commissioner to join his colleagues in including in their report recommendations based upon their findings which will enable the governments concerned to consider what, if any, steps may be taken with a view to the relinquishment of extraterritorial rights.” Accept [etc.] FRANK B. KELLOGG 99 The text of the draft reply was also telegraphed to the American diplomatic representatives in Belgium, Denmark, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Peru, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden with instructions that it be communicated to the respective Foreign Offices.

which I apprehend on the part of certain of the colleagues if you were to authorize me in my discretion to say that we are prepared to act in that manner. In that event it seems to me that it would be advisable that no two representatives should send notes in identical terms lest we thereby give the Chinese more convincing evidence of incomplete solidarity among the interested powers than if each were to reply separately. Repeated to Tokyo. MACMURRAY

4. That tendency has recently been vastly complicated however by more subtle elements of feeling latent in the minds of the Chinese and now brought to the surface by an emotional upheaval. Chinese who were heretofore most friendly and congenial with foreigners are now stirred to intolerance and pour out of their memories long

stored-up recollections of abuses and indignities on the part of foreigners towards their people—instances of jostling off the sidewalks, of the kicking of rickshaw coolies, and the like. Even though it expresses itself in political terms, the present crisis of feeling, it seems to me, is to be construed as a revulsion against what the individual Chinese feels to be the offense to his personal dignity and self-esteem implicit in the overbearing attitude of the white man towards the Chinese. It is an inferiority complex which under the stress of an almost nation-wide excitement prompts him to a hysterical selfassertion that is subjective rather than objective, and that involves antiforeign feeling only indirectly and as an incident to the assertion of self. 5. This feeling has been further complicated by the fact that thinking Chinese are aware of the failure they are making in the organization of their national life and morbidly conscious of the poor showing that they have made in the eyes of foreign nations. It is especially true of Chinese human nature that it flinches from recognition of its own deficiencies and by an instinctive subconscious process seeks excuses in the action of others. It is natural and easy for the Chinese to gloss over the miserable political conditions which they realize and resent by reference to such catchwords as unequal treaties or foreign imperialism. 6. Under the impulse of this passionate determination no longer to be “looked down upon” there seems to be coming about a further change in the attitude of the Chinese towards their obligations. It is unfortunately true that for several years they have been growing more lax and indifferent towards such standards of honesty and responsibility as used to be traditional in this country. That was a negative attitude however; now there is apparent a tendency towards positive repudiation of obligations. Not only the professional radicals … but even certain sober and conservative elements appear to be drifting into a state of mind that takes it for granted that treaty obligations must be repudiated as incompatible with the sovereignty and dignity of the nation. Even Hsiung Hsi-ling, once Prime Minister under Yuan Shih-kai, has argued to me that China could not take part in the Special Conference or the Commission on Extraterritoriality as such participation would be an acknowledgement of the right of powers to dictate to China in the matters involved. In the course of our conversation he was altogether frank in acknowledging that China would not for instance be capable now or in the proximate future of fulfilling the judicial functions that would devolve upon her if we were to give up extraterritoriality. But despite this admission he insisted that this inequality in the treaties must be adjusted by China without regard to the pretensions of the powers. 7. A less radical view was presented to me by Sun Pao-chi, who was Minister for Foreign Affairs under Yuan and more recently Prime Minister. He came apparently at the instance of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to whom I had taken occasion to say that we stood upon the provisions of the Washington Conference as affording the means to make progress towards the realization of China’s aspirations in the matter of customs and extraterritoriality. Sun urged that the Washington Conference decisions

which have been in abeyance for three years and more mean nothing to the radical element whose opinions the Government is not in a position to ignore; and that to strengthen the position of the Government against them the powers in their replies to the Chinese Government’s notes of June 248 should at least hold out hopes of a new conference within a year to reconsider the revision of the whole treaty relationship between China and the powers. He was quite candid in making clear the view that this suggestion was designed merely to save the face of the Government and that he did not urge that the powers really go very far in making actual concessions; he seemed to feel that it was more important that the powers should make some sort of an avowal of respect for China’s dignity as a nation even though he acknowledged himself very little concerned with the material extent of any such concessions as might be made. 8. Such expressions of views dispose me to feel that in the present agitation for treaty changes the dominant motive is not a dissatisfaction with the treaties themselves so much as it is a manifestation of discontent with a sense of inferiority which the Chinese have come to feel is symbolized by the special provisions in the treaties. The more intelligent of the Chinese know that those provisions of the treaties arose out of conditions which have scarcely been appreciably modified since then, and that any radical change in them at the present time would seriously jeopardize foreign trade which is now more than ever necessary to their normal economic development, and would induce disputes and difficulties in China’s relations with the foreign powers. Even some of the more radical Chinese with whom I have talked have shown themselves aghast at the suggestion that tariff autonomy for which they clamor would put enormously increased revenues into the hands of whichever military faction might happen at the time to be in control of Central Government. The great bulk of the agitators doubtless do not know what it is that they are asking for in demanding abolition of unequal treaties. The treaty provisions are obnoxious to them not because of what those provisions actually mean but because they seem to represent a stigma of inferiority or afford a convenient political slogan. 9. I present these observations not with any idea of decrying what is genuine and to be respected in the aspirations of the Chinese people but to bring to the attention of the Department the unrealities of the present situation with respect to the Chinese political demands which must in my opinion be treated on a psychological basis rather than from the standpoint of strict logic or of systematic political concept. It is not easy in such a turmoil of nationalistic feeling to determine what is essential and what is incidental. Yet a substantially correct determination must be made if the concessions we are prepared to make are actually to serve the real needs of this people and of our own. 10. Repeated by mail to Tokyo. MACMURRAY

4. Except for saying that there was particular need for good understanding among the three powers in view of the critical situation in China, Yoshizawa gave no indication at all that his Government contemplated more general cooperation. I rather think that the particular object which he stated is really the only immediate object of the Japanese Government, although probably it wishes gradually to develop and extend American-British-Japanese cooperation. Very likely the more general suggestions made to Mayer,

In reminding Mr. Palairet that the original object of the Powers’ declaration was to warn the Chinese Government that the former stand by the Washington principles and are not to be coerced into further concessions, he has been informed that His Majesty’s Government would like particularly to retain the passage included in the Anglo- Japanese draft reply referring to strikes and agitations. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

I stated that the phraseology in our proposed draft regarding the broadening of the scope of the conference was based on the language of the British proposition referred

2. The latter telegram reached me while in conversation with the Japanese Minister, who called yesterday evening to read me a copy of a telegram by which his Government instructed Matsudaira to explain to you the difficulty which the Japanese Government finds in assenting to the American draft insofar as it conveys a formal promise to consider tariff autonomy at the Special Conference. As the Japanese Ambassador will no doubt make clear, his Government feels that tariff autonomy, on the removal of all conventional restrictions upon the tariffs leviable by the Chinese Government, is a theoretical desideratum scarcely possible of realization in connection with the Special Conference, and that we should at least be cautious in holding out hopes of accomplishing what may or may not prove feasible—the more so as concession on this point, in advance of any practical experience beyond the strikes and boycotts which the agitators have inaugurated with a view to forcing their point, might tend to encourage and sanction such methods and even justify and make possible the use of tariff discriminations as a means of influencing future negotiations between China and the powers. 5. Japanese Minister said that this introduction into our draft note to the Chinese Government (which of course means full publicity) of our willingness to consider tariff autonomy was a surprise to his Government; and he added Shidehara had asked him whether I would not be willing to convey to you my personal opinion on the question. 6. I trust the Department will not misunderstand my saying that, since this further development of its views in the matter of the Chinese tariff, I have felt a mental reservation on this particular point. Conceding theoretical rightness of the Chinese

tariff autonomy, I frankly acknowledge my doubts of the tactical expediency of making public avowal of the willingness to adopt that theorem at a moment when we are being argued and bullied into accepting it by a radical group which has no real faith in its own propaganda and would resent it if we granted their demands under circumstances which gave the advantages of this concession to any of the several military cliques which are likely to profit by it. … Either way the kaleidoscope falls, the majority of agitators would feel that we foreigners had backed the party momentarily in power. I

would be worth while agreeing with the Japanese rather than insisting upon taking a separate and probably isolated position on this issue. 10. Japanese Minister expressed to me his Government’s hope that I would not distribute among interested colleagues our draft reply to the Chinese Government until some agreement had been reached among channels of Japanese and American Governments. In order not to preclude possibility of agreement among those three Governments, which I judge important for the purpose in view, I am withholding communication of your draft to my colleagues until I hear further from you. I urgently request instructions. MACMURRAY

the scope of the Conference, is endeavoring as a last resort to bring about a reconsideration of this matter on the part of this Government by referring to your conversation in Tokyo expressing views held by the Department prior to consideration of Chinese proposals of June 24. I have just received a note from British Embassy14 informing me of instructions which the British Government have communicated to their Chargé in Peking for his guidance in discussing with you American draft. The note states, inter alia, that British Chargé has been “informed that his Majesty’s Government disapprove the statement in the American draft reply that the Extraterritorial Commission will be instructed to make recommendations to enable the Powers to consider what steps may be taken for relinquishing their extraterritorial rights, inasmuch as my Government feel that the commission should be allowed to make such recommendations as may appear to them desirable without any lead from the Powers.” You should point out to British Chargé that language of American draft states that this Government desires to instruct its commissioner to include in his report recommendations based upon the findings of the commission which will enable the Governments concerned to consider “what, if any, steps may be taken” and not “what steps may be taken.” The British note also objects to the use of the term tariff autonomy. This objection will be met, it seems to me, by

4. If these modifications are acceptable to you I suggest that you inquire through the Embassy at London whether they would with other amendments already approved bring the British Foreign Office to adopt our draft. MACMURRAY

Accept [etc. ]

Frank B. Kettoce

1’ This reference is to the last sentence of the note.

date its investigation into the existing conditions of the administration of justice in China and to make a report which will serve as a basis for the recommendations to be made, in pursuance of the resolution, for the purpose of enabling the Governments concerned to consider what, if any, steps may be taken with a view to the relinquishment of extraterritorial rights”. The American Ambassador at London has been instructed to communicate the above amendments to the British Foreign Office and to state that it is hoped that with these amendments the British Government will find itself able to accept the American draft and so instruct its Chargé at Peking. WASHINGTON , August 6, 1925. 18 Telegram of August 5; not printed.

“1. No discussion of principle bearing on the conventional rights of the Powers can be accepted before the complete reestablishment of order. “2. Such a revision cannot be envisaged except in so far as the Chinese Government conscious and mindful of its responsibilities will seem to be in a position to assume effectively the obligations which are incumbent upon a sovereign state for the protection of foreigners throughout entire territory of a thoroughly open China. “3. As soon as the reestablishment of order is effected the conference for the revision of the customs can be evoked at once. “It will be given power to examine, after the accomplishment of its normal task, the conditions under which China will be able to obtain gradually in the future new customs agencies until it recovers its customs autonomy. “4. The conditions under which China will gradually be able to obtain the relinquishment of extraterritoriality will be examined before its adjournment by the commission on extraterritoriality naturally qualified for this work.” In a later report of August 6 the American Embassy at Paris stated20 that it had been informed by the Chief of the French Cabinet, Mr. Leger: “That when the French Government had received the draft declaration proposed by the British prior to the receipt of our text, they had informed the British their text was acceptable suggesting only a slight modification which he indicated had reference to the reestablishment of China’s financial credit. He added that they had later received the Japanese draft; that as the differences of opinion involved only the preamble or declaration of principle he presumed these differences would be thrashed out in Peking. Leger further said they considered our draft too mild and liberal in tone; that the British was perhaps too sharp and states that French Government therefore favored the Japanese draft as a good compromise.” KELLOGG 19 Telegram not printed. 19 Telegram not printed. 19 Telegram not printed. 20 Telegram not printed. 20 Telegram not printed.

I am to add that His Majesty’s Government would regard it as most unfortunate if the replies of all the Powers were not identical. They regard this as an essential sign of solidity, in the interests of which they are prepared to defer to the United States draft. I am also to emphasise the fact that His Majesty’s Government are most anxious to expedite the reply to the Chinese Government. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

inevitably draw attention to the differences existing among the Powers. This, in the opinion of my Government, would be more likely to encourage the pretensions of China than a carefully drafted identic undertaking to cooperate in furthering the aspirations of that country. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

wish to make. I hope that this will mean that the Powers, through their representatives at Peking, will be able now to reach an early conclusion as to their replies to the Chinese proposals of June 24. I have instructed the American Minister at Peking as to our views in this matter. Accept [etc.] JOSEPH C. GREW 23 Apparently the last phrase in this sentence was intended to be the opening phrase in the next paragraph.

those tariffs were seldom available for the information of foreign merchants, who were hampered in their business by the irregular and arbitrary methods adopted in the assessment and the collection of the duties. It is believed that these conventional tariffs were welcomed not only by the United States and the other Powers but by China as a happy solution of a question which for more than forty years had vexed the relations between China and the other countries. The last commercial treaty affecting the tariffs between the United States and China was made in 190329 and various treaties with other Powers were made substantially at the same time. The rates under these treaties have been revised twice since that time. There seems to be some confusion in the public mind as to just what rights Americans and other foreigners enjoy under the extraterritorial provisions of the treaties with China. I do not have the time to describe in detail the conditions under which foreign merchants lived and carried on their trade in China during the sixty-odd years prior to 1842, the year when immunities as to persons and property, now termed extraterritorial rights, first appeared in a formal treaty between China and a Western Power. It is sufficient for me to say that the account of the relations between resident foreign merchants in China and the Chinese authorities of that period is replete with incidents involving conflicting claims, the foreigner claiming exemption from Chinese law and the Chinese claiming jurisdiction over him and his property. To borrow the language of the Encyclopædia Britannica30 as quoted in Webster’s Dictionary31 “extraterritoriality” is defined as a term of international law “used to denominate certain immunities from the application of the rule that every person is subject for all acts done within the boundary [boundaries] of a state to its local laws.” Insofar as China is concerned the British Treaty of Nanking of 1842 marks the legalized beginning of the system of extraterritorial rights in China. Extraterritorial rights as applicable to Americans were first defined in the American Treaty of 1844 which stipulates clearly the method by which the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the United States Government was to be exercised. Article XXI of that Treaty reads as follows: “Subjects of China who may be guilty of any criminal act toward citizens of the United States, shall be arrested and punished by the Chinese authorities according to the laws of China; and citizens of the United States, who may commit any crime in China, shall be subject to be tried and punished only by the Consul, or other public functionary of the United States thereto authorized, according to the laws of the United States. And in order to the prevention of all controversy and disaffection, justice shall be equitably and impartially administered on both sides.” With respect to civil suits, between Americans, or between Americans and citizens or subjects of other non-Chinese States, Article XXV of the same treaty provides:

“All questions in regard to rights, whether of property or person, arising between citizens of the United States in China, shall be subject to the jurisdiction of and regulated by the authorities of their own Government. And all controversies occurring in China between citizens of the United States and the subjects of any other Government shall be regulated by the treaties existing between the United States and such Governments respectively, without interference on the part of China.” As to disputes between citizens of the United States and subjects of China, the same treaty further provides, Article XXIV as follows: “And if controversies arise between citizens of the United States and subjects of China, which can not be amicably settled otherwise, the same shall be examined and decided conformably to justice and equity by the public officers of the two nations acting in conjunction.” This last provision was made more specific in the Treaty of 1880,32 Article IV, which reads as follows: “When controversies arise in the Chinese Empire between citizens of the United States and subjects of His Imperial Majesty, which need to be examined and decided by the public officers of the two nations, it is agreed between the Governments of the United States and China that such cases shall be tried by the proper official of the nationality of the defendant. The properly authorized official of the plaintiff’s nationality shall be freely permitted to attend the trial, and shall be treated with the courtesy due to his position. He shall be granted all proper facilities for watching the proceedings in the interests of justice. If he so desires, he shall have the right to present, to examine, and to cross-examine witnesses. If he is dissatisfied with the proceedings, he shall be permitted to protest against them in detail. The law administered will be the law of the nationality of the officer trying the case.” Here, as in the case of the conventional tariffs, the Government of the United States introduced into its treaty with China special provisions, not for the purpose of hampering or otherwise limiting the sovereign rights of a friendly nation, but merely as a modus operandi intended to remedy a vexatious condition which had for many years proved what seemed an almost insurmountable obstacle to the maintenance of friendly relations between the two countries. There was not then—and there is not now—any desire permanently to limit the sovereignty of China. Pursuant to these treaties Congress has enacted the necessary laws to enable the American Consuls in China to perform the necessary judicial functions attendant upon the hearing and settling of complaints brought against American citizens by the Chinese. The extraterritorial

judicial machinery of the Consular Courts was added to and made more efficient when Congress completed the obligations assumed by the United States and created at Shanghai the United States Court for China which has both original and appellant jurisdiction in cases where American citizens are defendants in China. In the Commercial Treaty of 1903 between the United States and China, it was agreed as follows: “The Government of China having expressed a strong desire to reform its judicial system and to bring it into accord with that of western nations, the United States agrees to give every assistance to such reform and will also be prepared to relinquish the extraterritorial rights when satisfied that the state of the Chinese laws, the arrangement[s] for their administration, and other considerations warrant it in so doing.” Following this treaty there have been a growing demand in China and an agitation for the abolition of conventional tariffs, of extraterritorial rights, and other special privileges enjoyed by foreigners in China. There have been of late years an advance in education and a growing feeling of nationalism to which is largely due the demand for revision of the treaties in these respects. China, having taken part with the Allies in the Great War, presented these demands at the Versailles Conference, but the Powers declined to consider them, holding that they were outside the province of that Conference. When the Washington Conference was called by President Harding, it included the consideration of certain Pacific and Far Eastern questions, China again asked for a modification of the treaty rights of foreign Powers particularly as regards the tariff and extraterritorial rights. At that Conference, certain treaties were made: One between the nine participating Powers relating to principles and policies to be followed in matters concerning China and the other between the same Powers relating to the Chinese customs tariff, and a resolution was unanimously adopted in relation to extraterritoriality.33 In Article I of the Treaty in relation to the principles and policies to be followed in matters concerning China, it is provided that: “The Contracting Powers, other than China agree: (1) To respect the sovereignty, the independence, and the territorial and administrative integrity of China; (2) To provide the fullest and most unembarrassed opportunity to China to develop and maintain for herself an effective and stable government; (3) To use their influence for the purpose of effectually establishing and maintaining the principle of equal opportunity for the

commerce and industry of all nations throughout the territory of China; (4) To refrain from taking advantage of conditions in China in order to seek special rights or privileges which would abridge the rights of subjects or citizens of friendly States, and from countenancing action inimical to the security of such States.” The Treaty in relation to the Chinese tariffs in substance provided for a certain revision of the duties, which has already taken place,34 and for the calling of a special conference on the question of abolition of likin, a local transportation tax in China, and granting in lieu thereof certain additional surtaxes to China. This convention was to be called within three months after the ratification of the treaty by all the Powers. These treaties were made in February 1922. They have been ratified by all the Powers and came into force on August 5, 1925, by the deposit on that day of the ratifications with the Department of State in Washington. Resolution V of the Washington Conference, provided in substance that within three months after the adjournment of the Conference, the participating Powers should establish a Commission, to which each Government should appoint one member, to inquire into the present practice of extraterritorial jurisdiction in China and into the laws, judicial system, and methods of judicial administration of China with a view to reporting to the Governments of the several Powers their findings of fact in regard to these matters and their recommendations as to such means as they may find suitable to improve existing conditions of administration of justice in China and to assist and further the efforts of the Chinese Government to effect such legislation and judicial reforms as would warrant the several Powers in relinquishing, either progressively or otherwise, their respective rights of extraterritoriality. The appointment of these delegates to the Conference should have been made in May 1922 but China requested a postponement of one year. All the Powers agreed to a postponement but it proved impossible to obtain any unanimity on the part of the Powers as to a new date and no date has ever been fixed. China now asks for the execution of these treaties and resolutions and, in addition, demands that the various Powers take up with China a general revision of the treaties to the end that ultimately the conventional tariff may be abolished and extraterritorial rights given up. The Washington Treaty between the nine Powers relating to Chinese Customs tariff having been ratified by all the Powers and ratifications exchanged in Washington on August 5, 1925, that Treaty came into force and the Special Conference has been called to meet in Peking on October 26, 1925. The United States has appointed as its representatives John V. A. MacMurray, American Minister to China, and Silas H. Strawn, a lawyer of Chicago. The Treaty provides for a Special Conference to prepare the way for putting into effect the provisions of previous treaties whereby China agreed to abolish likin and the Powers, in return, consent to an increase in the tariff duties.

These prior treaty stipulations had not been executed because China had failed to do away with likin. Another of the duties of the Special Conference is to determine the conditions under which a surtax on imports to be imposed pending the abolition of likin is to be levied. In the invitation which China has issued to the Powers for that Conference35 which is to take place at Peking on October 26, China recalls the fact that its delegates at the Washington Conference when assenting to the terms which eventually were written into the Washington Treaty, stated at the 17th meeting of the Committee on Pacific and Far Eastern questions of the Washington Conference, that it was not their intention to relinquish their position, but that they intended on all appropriate occasions in the future to bring up again for consideration the desire of the Chinese Government regarding tariff autonomy, and it asks that this matter be favorably considered by the forthcoming Special Conference. I believe that the Powers have all come to the conclusion that the Conference will have to be broadened beyond the strict letter of the Washington Treaty. For its own part, this Government is willing, either at this Conference or at some subsequent time, to consider with China a comprehensive revision of the treaties dealing with the entire subject of the tariff. China is also demanding the abolition of the privileges of extraterritoriality by foreign Governments. This question of extraterritoriality was considered, as I have shown, in our Treaty of 1903, where we promised we would give every assistance to China that we could in the reform of her judicial system and be prepared to relinquish extraterritorial rights when satisfied that the state of the Chinese laws, the arrangements for their administration and other considerations would warrant us in so doing. This subject took more concrete form at the Washington Conference, as I have shown, by Resolution V. Under that Resolution, as before stated, it was provided that a special commission should be appointed to investigate the question of extraterritoriality and Chinese laws and judicial system and to make recommendations as to the means they may find suitable to improve the laws and judicial system of China and to assist and further the efforts of the Chinese Government to effect such legislation as would warrant the relinquishment, either progressively or otherwise, by the Powers of their respective rights of extraterritoriality. The United States is willing to take up the subject and examine it and has appointed as its special commissioner for this purpose Mr. Silas H. Strawn, of Chicago, an eminent lawyer, who is also going to participate in the Tariff Conference. This Government is willing through this Commission to examine the whole question of extraterritoriality and desires the Commission to make a speedy report with recommendations upon their findings which will enable this Government to consider what if any steps may be taken with a view to the relinquishment of its extraterritorial rights. I know, in a general way, that within the last few years China has made some progress in the enactment of laws, in reform of her judicial proceedings, in the education of judges and lawyers, with a view to fulfilling her aspirations to be relieved of these extraterritorial restrictions upon the exercise of her sovereign powers. I believe the people of this country sympathize with these aspirations of the Chinese people and that this Government would be willing to give up these extraterritorial

rights as soon as China shall demonstrate that her laws and the administration of the laws and judicial system are adequate for the protection of foreign lives and property within China. China has invited commerce and development and, of course, it is her duty as a sovereign nation to fulfill her obligations under the laws of nations and to protect foreigners in their lives and property. I am sure that the United States has always been most desirous to respect and uphold Chinese sovereign rights and the development of a stable government. I know that I have since I became Secretary of State worked earnestly to carry out the provisions of the treaties and resolutions adopted at the Washington Conference with respect to the holding of the Tariff Conference and the appointment of the Commission on Extraterritoriality. Unfortunately the conditions in China have not been such as to further her aspirations in these respects. I shall not attempt, of course, to review the various changes in government, the fall of the empire and the establishment of the republic, but simply to call attention to the fact that within the last few months, there have been riots and antiforeign demonstrations which have caused loss of life, not only of foreigners but of Chinese. There has been a recurrence of anti-foreign demonstrations such as has [have] not existed since the Boxer Rebellion. The Powers have been compelled to protect their nationals by armed force. I believe the Chinese Provisional Government has made an effort to restrain this anti-foreign hostility and disorders but its efforts have not been completely successful. Nevertheless, I do not believe that these unfortunate conditions should constitute a reason why the United States and the other Powers should not scrupulously adhere to the pledges they made to China in the Washington Conference to meet her in the spirit of helpfulness with the hope that she may realize her ambitions. These are some of the problems which will have to be settled in the near future, and, for one, I am willing to face them now, to meet the representatives of the Chinese Government frankly and discuss the whole subject. But these conventional tariffs, extraterritorial rights and foreign settlements have come about through treaty arrangements with China under which thousands of Americans and foreigners have taken up their residence and carried on their business within that country. The United States owes to them the duty of adequate protection and; the Chinese Government must have a realization of its sovereign obligations according to the law of all civilized nations. In the discussion and settlement of these problems, one of the most difficult questions is whether China now has a stable Government capable of carrying out these treaty obligations. I am very sure that the people of the United States do not wish to control, by treaty or otherwise, the internal policies of China, to fix its tariffs, or establish and administer courts but that they look forward to the day when this will not be necessary. 26 For release after delivery of the Secretary’s address.

conventional tariff was welcomed not alone by the Powers but also by China as a diplomatic solution of what had proved to be a very vexatious question. Since the conclusion, in 1902 and 1903, of the commercial treaties referred to in Article II of the Treaty relating to the Chinese Customs Tariff, signed on February 6, 1922, my Government has given particular attention to every evidence of effort on the part of the Chinese Government in the direction of fiscal reforms which could be taken as an assurance that the old causes of international friction need no longer be feared and that the conventional tariff could be abandoned. It was at the time of the negotiation of those treaties that the Chinese Government expressed a desire to reform its judiciary system and to bring it into accord with that of Western nations. The Powers party to those Treaties agreed to give every assistance to such reform and stated that they would be prepared to relinquish extraterritorial rights when satisfied that the state of the Chinese laws, the arrangements for their administration and other considerations warranted them in so doing. The Powers have since then observed attentively each measure that the Chinese Government, during the twenty-two years which have passed, has taken for the establishment of an independent judiciary and the enactment of laws for the administration of justice. The establishment of courts and the enactment of laws, however, do not in themselves meet all the requirements of the situation. Courts cannot function and develop properly or consistently without the aid of a stable Government capable and willing to maintain them and enforce their findings and decisions. It is regretted that the inability of the Chinese Government during the past few years fully to enforce the mandate of its authority has made it difficult for the courts and judiciary already established to function in a normal manner. The questions of the conventional tariffs and of the extraterritorial rights under which nationals of the treaty Powers reside in China are two of the important questions raised by the Chinese Government’s note. Both received consideration at the Washington Conference, and it is the belief of the Government of the United States that the most feasible method for dealing with them is by a constant and scrupulous observance of the obligations undertaken at that Conference. To that end the Government of the United States is ready to appoint its delegates to the Special Conference on Chinese Tariff matters provided for in the Treaty of February 6, 1922, and is furthermore willing either at that Conference or at a subsequent time to consider and discuss any reasonable proposal that may be made by the Chinese Government for a revision of the Treaties on the subject of the tariff. Before it can form any opinion as to what, if any, steps can be taken to meet the desire of the Chinese Government in regard to the question of extraterritoriality and those special safeguards of the treaties under which its nationals live and conduct their enterprises in China, my Government desires to have before it more complete

information than has heretofore been available: and the most feasible way in which the question can be approached and considered is to send to China the Commission provided for in Resolution V of the Washington Conference, in the expectation that the investigation made by that Commission will help to guide the Treaty Powers as to what, if any, steps should be taken as regards the relinquishment by gradual means or otherwise of extraterritorial rights at that time. My Government is now ready to appoint its Commissioner to sit with the Commissioners of the other interested Governments in accordance with that Resolution. It hopes that that Commission may be able to begin at an early date its investigation into the existing conditions of the administration of justice in China and to make a report which will serve as a basis for the recommendations to be made in pursuance of the Resolution for the purpose of enabling the Governments concerned to consider what, if any, steps may be taken with a view to the relinquishment of extraterritorial rights. I avail myself [etc.] J. V. A. MACMURRAY 36 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Minister in China in his despatch No.

The Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff37 The powers represented at the Conference were China, the United States, Belgium, Denmark, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden. The American delegates were John V. A. MacMurray and Silas H. Strawn; the American technical advisers were Mahlon F. Perkins, Stanley K. Hornbeck, and Arthur H. Evans. [The minutes of the Conference were published under the title, The Special Conference

42 Mahlon F. Perkins, of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, who had been sent to London to confer with the British Foreign Office regarding the Special Conference for the Revision of the Chinese Customs Tariff. 43 S. P. P. Waterlow, head of the Far Eastern Department of the British Foreign Office. 44 Victor Wellesley, Assistant Under Secretary of State in the British Foreign Office. 45 Not printed.

worked out and none can be until full data of claims are available. In considering such debts no distinction can justly be maintained between external and internal. Both must be dealt with on the same basis. 6. Debts of Finance Department and of Communications cannot be distinguished because of the fallacious assumption that the railways’ earnings are adequate. Due to political conditions we know that they are quite inadequate. 7. Each claim should be established on its individual merits based on the amount actually received by the Chinese Government. 8. While the conference cannot legally act as a judicial body, in practice it may have to do so through full cooperation between the powers. Shidehara expressed agreement with the general statement of the situation, the proposed treatment of it politically and adjustment of debt claims. He said he knew of some sham debts where no money passed. He suggested a convening of the Extraterritoriality Commission without delay. MacMurray answered that it seemed they should not sit at the same time because one would be played off against the other and would interfere with the best results and encourage the Chinese to attempt to control the action of each; that it would be better if the Extraterritorial Commission were convened at a fixed date after the completion of the work of the economic conference. Shidehara answered “perhaps that would be the better way of treatment.” As to the British claim that the two and one-half percent should be a part of the customs revenues, which would thus be deposited in certain banks, Shidehara responded “That means that it would go to the custodian bank. I think we might well align ourselves with you on this point.” MacMurray further suggested that the two and a half percent is described as a surtax, the amount, time and disposition of which the conference is specifically authorized to fix and clearly there is no reason for increasing the security of the secured loans. Shidehara then suggested that an additional two and a half percent would have the effect of a substantial protection to the industries of China and it occurred to him that to be accompanied by this protective feature the powers might propose a countervailing excise tax of two and a half percent on domestic productions for the benefit of the provinces. This would be agreeable to them and might help to induce them to surrender at an earlier date the likin. Shidehara further suggested that an average of seven and one-half percent duty on all imports is very high, as high in fact as the average duty in high tariff countries like the United States—and a 12 percent duty is unheard of

MacMurray suggested that this might raise a number of political and other questions on which we should reserve judgment. While the provinces would be glad to have this additional income, not the surrender of the likin but other means of increasing revenues might result; and the people might regard this as a further burden attributable to foreign influence. MacMurray left this morning for Kobe to rejoin his ship for Shanghai. Copy to Peking. BANCROFT 46 Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs. 46a Edwin L. Neville, first secretary of Embassy in Japan. 47 John V. A. MacMurray, newly appointed Minister to China, en route to his post. 48 Surtax provided for by art. III of the Chinese customs treaty, Foreign Relations, 1922,

American Legation at Peking. It must be borne in mind, however, that the purposes of the Special Conference and the scope of its activities as they now stand are defined by treaty and are a matter of treaty obligation. The work of the Conference cannot, therefore, be modified or extended without the concurrence of the governments of all Powers signatory to the Treaty. It is my hope that, either before the opening of the Conference or during the course of its sessions, agreement may be obtained which will enable the various delegations to take up for discussion such further matters relating to its purpose as will constitute a program sufficiently liberal in its agenda to satisfy the demands of the conservative elements of the Chinese people and at the same time not be subversive of the fundamental rights and interests of all the Powers concerned. With this contingency in mind, you are being equipped with full powers to negotiate with the representatives of the Chinese and other signatory or adherent Powers, and to conclude such agreements as may be adopted by the Special Conference, the same to be submitted to the President of the United States for his ratification by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. Such negotiations on your part will eventually call for further instructions; for the present instructions have been framed with a view to your guidance merely in matters specified in the Treaty, the agreements of the Conference in regard to which do not appear to call for subsequent approval by the Senate. I am of the opinion that the ultimate interests of the United States will best be served by your work being approached in the broadest spirit and with the purpose of rendering the utmost possible contribution to the improvement of trade and of the general welfare in China in so far as these matters may be promoted by the decisions reached in the Conference. The primary function of the Conference is described in Paragraph 1 of Article II of the Customs Treaty wherein it is clearly indicated that its main objective is the amelioration of conditions of trade through the diminution and ultimate removal of local taxation on merchandise in transit. Although in the treaties referred to in Article II, China agreed to abolish likin and the Powers concerned agreed in return to consent to an increase in the import tariff to 12½ percent ad valorem, likin has in fact never been abolished; and, in recent years, numerous other forms of taxation, such as “sales taxes” and “protection fees”, have been additionally imposed upon goods offered for sale which have in effect nullified to a certain extent the provisions of the conventional tariff. From such information as is available on the subject, it appears doubtful whether the Chinese Government, however desirous of so doing, is now, or in the near future will be, able to take any effective measures for the abolition of likin or even to make any substantial progress toward that end. Nevertheless, such an assumption, however well justified it may seem from a survey of existing conditions in China, cannot be taken as an established fact. It is my earnest hope that the contrary may prove to be the case. The Chinese Government must be given an opportunity to present such plans as it may have formulated on the subject; and these proposals should receive your careful and sympathetic consideration. They should, however, be studied strictly in the light of their practical applicability to conditions now existing in China. It is essential that any

scheme which may be adopted by the Conference have a reasonable promise of fulfillment; for I desire to avoid the conclusion of any new agreements which may remain inoperative as have the pertinent provisions on the subject in the treaties above referred to in Article II. In dealing with the question of the abolition of likin, I am of the opinion that the representatives of the Powers other than China are entitled to negotiate with the Chinese representatives on the subject of an increase in tariff, beyond the 2½ percent surtax specifically authorized in the treaty, up to a maximum rate of 12½ percent as contemplated in the treaties referred to in Article 2 of the treaty. Such negotiations appear to be justified in view of the language employed in Article II that the Conference is to “prepare the way for the speedy abolition of likin …57 with a view to levying the surtaxes provided in those articles.” The Treaty would not however appear to contemplate negotiations of this character apart from, or except in conjunction with, a satisfactory plan for the abolition of likin. Such arrangements as might be concluded with respect to any plan going beyond the 2½ percent surtax specified in the Treaty could, of course, not be definitive as in the case of the levying of the 2½ percent surtax and would have to be submitted for the ratification of the various governments concerned in accordance with their respective constitutional methods. With regard to the authority granted in Article 3 of the Treaty to levy a surtax on dutiable imports at the rate of 2½ percent ad valorem and at 5 percent ad valorem in the case of luxuries, it is not my desire to restrict the scope of your discretion by precise directions. The following observations are, however, offered as indicative of the trend of my thought upon this subject. In the first place, I am of the opinion that the levying of the surtax is substantially mandatory upon the Conference and that, notwithstanding the possible existence of conditions which might lead the Conference to a contrary view, the Conference would not be acting in complete good faith, were it to take advantage of the broad terms of its charter to impose such conditions either as to the date of the application of the surtax or the disposition of the new revenues as would, in effect, nullify the plain intent of the Treaty that China is to receive the increases stated. In this connection it is to be noted that, although the levying of the surtax is by implication allied with the subject of the interim provisions to be applied prior to the abolition of likin, the Treaty does not specifically condition the levying of the surtax upon any measures to be taken with respect to likin; and the Conference is given a free hand to levy the surtax “as from such date, for such purposes, and subject to such conditions as it may determine.” I regard the choice of this language as fortunate, particularly in view of recent developments in the political situation; for it gives the Conference full authority to make such a disposition of the additional revenues as will suit the exigencies of the times. The assignment of the revenues to be derived from the 2½ percent surtax as compensation to local authorities in any plan for the abolition of likin would not appear

to be practicable in view of the insufficiency of the revenues available from the surtax even if it were so used in toto. Should, however, the Conference discuss and conclude arrangements whereby some reasonable plan were evolved for the diminution and gradual removal of the present vexatious restrictions upon domestic trade and in return therefor the Powers concerned were to consent to an increase, graduated or otherwise, of the tariff to a maximum of 12½ percent ad valorem, I should be inclined to feel that the assignment of these revenues, to such an extent and in such a manner as might be necessary to the practical working out of such a scheme, would perhaps prove to be the most beneficial purpose to be served. As I have stated above, I should not be satisfied with a mere paper arrangement or with any plan which did not have a reasonable promise of measurable success in application and which was not calculated to facilitate trade or exercise a tranquillizing and stabilizing effect upon the political situation. The matter has been brought to my attention of using the revenues from the 2½ percent surtax for the purpose of refunding the large unsecured debt of the Chinese Government, or at least for refunding the external portion of that debt. I am informed that the amount of existing unsecured and inadequately secured obligations of the Chinese Government to American citizens is in the vicinity of $30,000,000; largely consisting of loans in default and of debts incurred for materials supplied to the Chinese Government. These creditors are of the opinion that there is no reasonable prospect of these claims being liquidated through other means than by the revenues available from the 2½ percent surtax. I am informed, furthermore, that the nationals of other Powers have claims aggregating large sums, the Japanese claims equaling approximately the claims of all other foreign nationals combined. The Treaty providing for the Special Conference did not of course contemplate an increase of the Chinese Customs Tariff for the purpose of satisfying foreign claims against China. There is no express provision in that Treaty that the claims to which I have referred are to be considered in connection with the conditions under which the 2½ percent surtax is to be levied; and it would not appear that any Delegation to the Conference could of right insist upon a consideration of these claims. On the other hand, it would appear that the Conference has full authority, if it so desires, to consider such claims under the broad scope given it to determine the conditions under which the surtax is to be levied. I am inclined to the view that the Conference should discuss the general advisability of using the surtax revenues for the refunding of China’s unsecured obligations and should consider the question of the sufficiency of these new revenues for this purpose. The unsecured obligations, with rapidly increasing interest, threaten to reach proportions which may soon make it almost impossible to relieve the acute financial situation of the Chinese Government. This debt must, unless repudiation is contemplated, be recognized as an obligation which the Chinese people as a whole will have to meet. The earlier the matter is studied and some attempt made to find a solution, the better it will be for all parties in interest. It is fully recognized that the subject must be handled in the light of the political situation and not merely as a purely

financial problem. I desire especially to avoid having the impression created that the principal motive on the part of the Powers in assenting to an increase in the tariff is to find means to collect the debts of their respective nationals. The Conference should not lay itself open to the charge of being a Debt Collecting Commission. In this connection, it would be essential to treat the subject of the unsecured debt as a whole and not to lay emphasis solely upon the external debt. It is of course not now possible to say whether it will prove practicable to deal with the unsecured debt through relief afforded by revenues from the surtax. The practical aspect of the question must be studied by those who are qualified to make such investigations. It is hoped that such studies as may be made will result in the formation of a plan which may be used to alleviate the present financial emergency of the Chinese Government and at the same time safeguard the fundamental and legitimate interests of its creditors. Whatever may be the outcome of the matter, I am of the opinion that the subject should not be left outside the scope of the discussions of the Conference. The subject of cooperation with the other Delegations to the Conference, I regard as one of great importance. Without effective cooperation on the part of China and of the Powers I doubt if it will be possible for the Conference to attain any high degree of success. I desire, however, that, while exhibiting toward all a most liberal spirit of cooperation, you should retain your complete independence and avoid the possibility of any charge that the American Government is taking sides for or against any other government represented at the Conference. FRANK B. KELLOGG 57 Omission indicated in the original instruction.

4. While I hope soon to be in a position to give more definite information as to the plans of the Chinese Government in regard to the conference it may be useful to the Department to know what I gather to be the tentative program of the administration. There has been worked out (apparently under the inspiration of W. W. Yen and Liang) a fairly coherent project involving the following points: A. Renunciation in principle by the treaty powers of all right of restriction upon the customs tariffs leviable by China. B. Undertaking by the Chinese Government to levy, at any rate for a specific period of years and after a transitional period of perhaps two or three years, graduated “scientific” tariff involving a free list and some four or five classifications up to rate of 30-odd percent on luxuries which my Chinese informants state would be in all tantamount to an average of between 8 and 9 percent on imports. C. Likin and other internal taxes on trade to be abolished forthwith.

D. Arrangements to be made by the Central Government with the several provinces whereby in exchange for the abolition of internal taxes, provinces would receive in due ratio an equivalent portion of increase in customs revenue amounting to approximately 60 percent of the anticipated Mexican dollars 100,000,000 annually to be collected by the customs. E. The remaining 40 percent of increase to be devoted to purposes of a loan for the funding of the external debt, domestic obligations of the Government being taken care of separately by charges upon the salt and other revenues. 5. In the course of informal conversations I have taken occasion to intimate that in exercising its prerogative in initiating agenda of the Special Conference the Chinese Government would be well advised to avoid presenting at the outset the point-blank issue as to what the Chinese call “tariff autonomy” lest a somewhat academic point should thereafter overshadow the conference and create an atmosphere of antagonism between Chinese and foreign opinion. It is my impression however that as a result of pressure which this administration is not courageous enough to oppose, the Chinese will find themselves impelled to make the best compromise they can between a sweeping claim for idealistic formula of “tariff autonomy” and a practical proposal for tariff arrangements which the powers could accept without too great an apprehension that present or a future administration would tax foreign trade out of existence under the plea of financial necessities and with complete disregard of the consequences that might thereafter recoil upon a succeeding administration. 6. The above prognostications and suggestions are made purely tentatively in order to enable the Department and Strawn to consider the matter as fully as may be possible in the light of information at hand to date. I assume that the Department has kept Strawn fully advised of the abnormal political or psychological situation which must necessarily constitute a background to the work of the conference. MACMURRAY

on. Do you suggest that I give any publicity here to such views beyond what I have done in my speech at Detroit? KELLOGG 58 Latter not printed. 59 Not printed.

question of principle concerning which the primary purpose of the Chinese is to formulate a vœu, should be mentioned alone under the heading A in the following form: ‘the Chinese Government, referring to the declaration made by its delegation at the Washington Conference, proposes to submit to the Special Conference the question of tariff autonomy’; the explanatory formula which follows would disappear. The abolition of likin would figure under the heading B; heading C would include the temporary measures at present indicated under paragraph B, to which would be added the two ‘related matters’. Finally, a heading D would refer to the board of reference provided for in resolution IV of the Washington agreement.63 These modifications are intended (1) to give to the Chinese Government reference to autonomy the value of a wish only, which will not commit the foreign governments; (2) to separate the question of likin from that of autonomy to which the Chinese apparently wish to link it; (3) to mention the board of reference which did not figure in the Chinese draft. The interested representatives request their Governments to authorize them to continue on these bases the unofficial conversations begun with the Chinese Government for the definite drawing up of the programme.” 4. I concur in the advisability of the modifications suggested and feel that the agenda as thus modified might be adopted if it were made clear in the terms of acceptance that the determination of the question of “tariff autonomy” is not to be made a condition precedent to the consideration of the matters for which provision was made by the treaty, but will be considered in connection with those questions. 5. I request your instructions. 6. Repeated to Tokyo for the information of the Embassy and of Strawn. MACMURRAY

which are anxious to conciliate nationalistic feeling by forcing the issue on the question of tariff autonomy. 4. In consequence of this confusion of purposes it now seems probable that the Chinese will enter the conference without any definite program of action asking initially that the principal [principle of?] tariff autonomy be conceded but presenting no concrete plan by which foreign trade would be safeguarded against arbitrary exactions by either central or local authorities whether at the ports or in transit through the interior. It is to [be] apprehended that the insistence of the idealists upon an unqualified concession of tariff autonomy such as none of the powers could accept in justice to their own legitimate interests may precipitate a situation in which a new outburst of demagogue fervor may make it impossible for the more practical elements of the Chinese Government to propose any satisfactory conditions for such a concession. 5. In anticipation of the possibility of obtaining tariff autonomy the Government is considering and has allowed to become public a [apparent omission] of regulations governing levy of tariffs which contemplate imposition of duties ranging up to 40 percent and higher in case of wines and tobacco. Tariff attached to these regulations has not been made public. I understood however that the duty on cotton goods has been reduced to less than present 5 percent as bait to England and Japan whereas very high rate on tobacco was explained to my informant by a Chinese official with the statement that this item principally interests us [U. S.?] which is already benevolently disposed. I should welcome such instructions or suggestions as the Department may be able to give for guidance of delegation in meeting such forms of discrimination which cannot be met by most-favored-nation clause. Copy by mail to Tokyo. MACMURRAY

provided like products from other countries were taxed proportionally. As suggested in paragraph 1 of this telegram, it is important, of course, pending agreement in principle to avoid bickering over such matters. For the protection of American interests it is also important that there shall be no deals between the Chinese and powers not in the conference that under any new tariff would place American trade at an unfair disadvantage. It is difficult for the Department to instruct you further on this point until it receives further advices regarding developments. Follow this question closely and keep us fully informed. (b) Probably the question of restrictions on imports or exports will not come up. The following is, however, mentioned for your guidance: The position which the Department has taken is that such restrictions, for example licensing or prohibitions, if maintained, shall provide that with respect to commodities, valuations, and quantities the United States shall receive as favorable treatment as is given to any other country. In this connection see recent modi vivendi, such as the exchange of notes with Greece,73 printed as Treaty Series No. 706. (c) The Department has hesitated to include provisions regarding discrimination through classification of commodities in our treaties, as with the American practice of tariff-making it is doubtful whether it is practical to give assurance that our legislation would not through inadvertence contravene such provisions. It would, however, lessen the danger of discrimination by classification if a provision were included to the effect that the principles of most-favored-nation treatment shall be liberally interpreted and that neither customs rates nor classifications shall be used by either of the contracting parties as a means of discrimination against the commerce of the other. 4. The Department believes that agreement with respect to most-favorednation treatment should be reciprocal, that China should be given such treatment as well as granting it to others. 5. Telegraph to the Department for instructions if any question as to national treatment of shipping is presented. As the situation develops you will be given more specific instructions.

KELLOGG

The Minister for Foreign Affairs next addressed the conference, and, after thanking the delegates for the honor of selecting him to preside and extending a warm welcome to the delegates and their respective staffs, he referred to the many international conferences which have been held since the close of the Great War. He spoke particularly of the Locarno Conference; because, as he stated, its achievements are still fresh in our memory and have resulted in the readjustment of the relations between the interested powers in the light of and in harmony with the new conditions which have arisen since the signing of the Versailles Treaty. He said further that the Washington Conference has had a more direct effect on the Pacific and the Far East than any other conference. In referring to the Chinese customs tariff he said: “I am inclined to think, and I feel confident that my opinion is [shared] by all of you present, that the treaty tariff regime in China, inaugurated some eighty years ago to meet a condition which no longer exists today, is entirely out-ofdate and should not be allowed to continue to prevail. I, therefore, venture to hope that you, the distinguished delegates of this conference, inspired by the spirit of good will and sympathy and availing yourselves of the opportunity now offered, will arrive at [a] readjustment of the Chinese customs questions so that China may be enabled at an early date to exercise her sovereign rights of tariff autonomy.” In concluding, he said that Dr. C. T. Wang, one of the Chinese delegates to the conference, would lay before it on behalf of the Chinese Government certain proposals for the settlement of the Chinese customs questions and that he was firmly convinced that the conference, animated by the spirit of justice, would agree to the proposal[s]. C. T. Wang spoke next and referred to the presentation of the question of tariff autonomy at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 and also at the Washington Conference. He stated that it remains a matter of regret to the Chinese Government that the tariff proposals have not been accepted, in that he offered [sic] section 1 of article I of the nine-power treaty relating to principles and policies, and stated that, placing full reliance on the spirit of the nine-power treaty, the Chinese Government makes the following proposals for the removal of the restrictions imposed by existing treaties affecting the customs tariff: The customs participating powers formally declare to the Government of the Republic of China their respect for its tariff autonomy and agree to the removal of all the tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties. The “Government of the Republic of China agrees to the abolition of likin simultaneously with the enforcement of the Chinese national tariff law which shall take effect not later than the 1st day of January, 1929.

Previous to the enforcement of the Chinese national tariff law, an interim surtax of 5 percent on ordinary goods, 30 percent on A grade luxuries (namely, wine, tobacco) and 20 percent on B grade luxuries shall be levied in addition to the present customs tariff at 5 percent ad valorem. The collection of the above-mentioned interim surtaxes shall begin three months from the date of signature. The decisions relative to the above four articles shall be carried into effect from the date of signature. Chinese tariff law referred to in proposals 2 and 3 in Wang’s speech is a law promulgated October 24, 1925, by the Chief Executive of the revolutionary government and will be telegraphed tomorrow or later.75 Following Dr. Wang’s address, the American Minister spoke as follows: “It is with a particular satisfaction that we of the American delegation take our place[s] in this conference called in pursuance of one of the treaties concluded at the Washington Conference [and] with the object of effectuating the purpose[s] of that treaty. [It] is our earnest hope that the work of the present conference may be carried on in the same spirit of mutual good will, hopefulness, and confidence, which characterized the proceedings at Washington. There lies before this assembly a definite task imposed by the customs tariff treaty. We, for our part, approach these duties with [a] hearty good will, determined to do our share in bringing into practical operation the principles and the purposes established by the treaty. In so doing we are prepared to consider carefully, with open minds and in a generous spirit, any reasonable plan which may be proposed with a view to realizing [the] hopes and inspirations [aspirations] of the Chinese people in regard to the customs tariff of China. We are hopeful that the deliberations of this conference, actuated by mutual respect and sympathetic understanding, may result in arrangement[s] that, while safeguarding the just interests of the foreign nations, may also be the means of assisting the Chinese people in developing and maintaining a sound national life.” The French Minister in his address laid special emphasis on the necessity for the financial rehabilitation of China. He confined himself in the main to pleasant references to the conference and to the program of work.

The British Minister in his speech referred to the kind words of welcome spoken by Marshal Tuan and the Minister of Foreign Affairs and concluded as follows: “This Customs Tariff Conference is, as you all know, the outcome of an engagement solemnly entered into by the nine powers including China which participated in the Washington Conference and its scope and objects were clearly laid down and defined in the treaties signed by those powers on the 6th of February 1922. His Britannic Majesty’s Government, in accepting the invitation of the Chinese Government to take part in this conference and in appointing their delegates thereto, have been actuated by precisely the same motives which impelled him [them] to join in the resolutions respecting China adopted at Washington and to becoming [become] cosignatories of the Washington treaties; merely [namely] their earnest desire to assist the Chinese nation in the realization of its legitimate aspirations as [and] in the achievement of resolutions [results] beneficial to China as a whole. His Majesty’s Government wish the British delegates to approach the conference in a generous and sympathetic spirit and I am authorized to state that this delegation be [is] prepared to discuss the question of tariff autonomy either at this conference or, if that cannot be arranged, at [a] later date. We are anxious that the conclusions reached by this conference may make it possible for the Chinese [to] establish a thoroughly sound fiscal system and [to] raise adequate revenues for the needs of the Central Government and also [those of] the provincial authorities. One of the essential aims of the conference as laid down in the Washington treaty is the elaboration of measures leading to the abolition of likin and other internal levies on trade and in the view of His Majesty’s Government this must necessarily entail some readjustment of the fiscal relations between the Central Government and the provinces which will take into due account the financial necessities of the component parts of this great Republic. We are convinced that British interests and Chinese interests are essentially the same. We have no doubt that it is in British interests only less than in Chinese interests to promote the establishment of a united, independent, orderly and prosperous China. We naturally recognize that the attainment of this aim lies in the hands of the Chinese themselves, but so far as British assistance may be practicable and may be desired, I can assure you that the wholehearted cooperation of this delegation is at the disposal of the Chinese delegation and of all our other colleagues.”

Mr. Hioki, chairman of the Japanese delegation, stated that his delegation have come here with the curious [serious] conviction that some definite results [in] the direction of a common purpose and a common understanding between China and other powers may well be attained at the present conference. He pledged that delegation’s wholehearted cooperation to this end and predicted that [deliberations of] the conference will be marked on all sides by fairness and moderation in spirit and simplicity and directness in method. He stated that Japan has always watched with keen interest every effort made by the Chinese people for the realization of their legitimate national aspirations. He stated also that Japan had at one time been subjected to unilateral restrictions upon her freedom of action in matters of fiscal and judicial administration and referred particularly to the fact that the present tariff restrictions in China had their counterpart in Japanese history of tariff restrictions in Japan and their relinquishment finally in 1911. Concluding this historical résumé he said: “China is still following the same paths that we once pursued. The difficulties, the embarrassment[s], and the perplexities that confront China today have once been ours. The Japanese delegation will approach the problems before this conference with sympathy and understanding and with intimate apprehension of the Chinese position. I am happy to state at the outset that the Japanese delegation are fully prepared to consider in the friendliest way the question of tariff autonomy which appears in the agenda presented by the Chinese delegation.” Mr. Hioki then referred to certain provisions of the customs treaty particularly articles II and III concerning respectively likin and the 2½ [percent] surtax which he stated could provide additional revenue of approximately 99 [29] million dollars in silver. He made reference also to a general readjustment of Chinese finances and stated that the Japanese delegation would on another occasion make concrete suggestions on this subject. He stated also that the Japanese delegation would not be disinclined to take up any proposals which might be put forward with a view to the levying of a reasonable surtax, higher than 2½ [percent], pointing out that such a proposal might be considered as falling within the terms of article II of the treaty. He remarked, however, that since this would constitute an intermediate step prior to the total abolition of likin, it would be requisite for China to effectuate at least a partial abolition of likin as well as to fulfill certain conditions provided for in the treaties between China and other powers. Mr. Hioki here returned to the question of tariff autonomy and reiterated the statement that the Japanese delegation will consider sympathetically and helpfully any reasonable plan of the Chinese Government in this regard but stated that the goal could be reached only by successive stages and that immediate and unconditional surrender by the powers of their existing treaty rights is not within the contemplation of China herself. Mr. Hioki then proposed the following alternative plan:

“First. That a statutory tariff on a fair and reasonable basis be established for general application subject to the provisions of a special conventional tariff on certain specified articles to be agreed upon separately between China and each of the powers directly interested; or Secondly. That a graduated tariff so devised as to be acceptable to the powers concerned be established at an average rate of not more than 12½ per centum ad valorem and generally in a manner consistent with the provisions of article II of the Washington Treaty.” Mr. Hioki also said that: “The inauguration of a regime of tariff autonomy in China implies the existence of an adequately strong and unified government, and presupposes a complete removal of all restrictions which might impede the [freedom of] intercourse of [and] trade between China and other powers.” He expressed the hope that: “Endowed with remarkable qualities of self-government and supported by the growth of [nationalism now] so manifestly asserting itself in the country, the Chinese people will succeed in the accomplishing of reforms toward these ends, as much desirable for their own welfare as for the common good of all nations.” In conclusion, Mr. Hioki stated: “I desire to reaffirm, on behalf of the Japanese delegation, our faith in the spirit of friendliness which animates this important gathering. We ardently hope and believe that by frank discussion and neighborly cooperation, by mutual assistance and concession and by the exercise of due respect for one another’s rights and interests, the present conference will find equitable solution for every problem before it to the satisfaction of all and thus demonstrate its will to live and let live.” The Belgian delegate, Mr. Le Maire de Warzée Hermaile; the Danish delegate, Mr. Henrik de Kauffmann; the Italian delegate, Mr. Vittorio Cerruti; the Netherlands delegate, Mr. W. J. Oudendijk; the Norwegian delegate, Mr. Johan Michelet; the Portuguese delegate, Mr. Joâo Antonio de Bianchi; the Spanish delegate, Mr. Justo Garrido y Cisneros; and the Swedish delegate, Mr. Ewerlöf, all made brief addresses referring to the work which lies before the conference and the sympathetic and hopeful attitude in which they approached it. Upon the conclusion of the above-mentioned addresses Mr. Hawkling Yen was chosen secretary general of the conference by acclamation. A committee on program and procedure consisting of Mr. C. T. Wang, for the Chinese delegation, and the chairmen

of the other delegations was chosen and is to meet tomorrow. The conference then adjourned subject to call. MACMURRAY

AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION] 76 Not printed; the text of the agenda transmitted in this telegram is the same as that

goods of the same amount as the said bounty, in addition to the duties prescribed in [the] tariff. ARTICLE 8. In event the prices of foreign articles are intentionally and unreasonably lowered to such an extent that the Government considers it a disturbance to the market, it may by mandate impose a duty equal to the proper prices, in addition to the duties prescribed in the tariff. ARTICLE 9. Articles unentered in the tariff shall be subject to a tariff on the same scale as goods of the same or similar nature listed in the tariff. ARTICLE 10. The following articles shall be exempt from import duty: Articles belonging to chiefs of foreign states and their suites visiting China; articles for the personal use of foreign ambassadors or ministers accredited to China or articles for the official use of foreign ambassador’s [embassies or] legations; arms, ammunitions, powder, explosives and munitions of war of every description imported by the Government; articles purchased or donated for relief purposes; samples of merchandise which are only fit to be used as such; native articles reimported within three years after exportation without any change in character and form; exported articles shipped by vessels which cleared from Chinese ports, but brought back on account of damage or danger to the vessel. ARTICLE 11. The following articles, if imported for reexport within one year, shall be exempted from import duty, but a deposit must be made at the time of importation of an amount equivalent to the amount of import duty payable: Articles imported for the purpose of having work done thereon; articles imported for repair; articles imported for the purpose of scientific research; articles imported for trial. ARTICLE 12. The import of the articles specified hereunder is prohibited: Salt; opium, utensils for smoking opium, poppy seeds, morphine, Chin Tan, hung wan, pai wan, and all pills containing morphine, opium or cocaine; counterfeit, altered or imitation coins, paper money or other negotiable papers; books, pictures, carvings and other articles injurious to public safety or morals. ARTICLE 13. The importation of arms, ammunitions, powders, explosives and other munitions of war of every description is

prohibited, except by the Government. ARTICLE 14. The importation of the following articles is prohibited except with special permission of the Government: Saltpetre, chlorate of potash, sulphur, zinc (powder, spelter), hydrochloric acid, nitric acid, sulphuric acid, yearrow [yellow] phosphorus and explosives for industrial purposes. ARTICLE 15. The following articles may be imported in reasonable quantities after analysis and joint certification by Governmentregistered medical practitioners, druggists and chemists as to their proper use and after report to and further examination by the customs authorities: Morphine; cocaine and hypodermic syringes; antiopium pills containing morphine, opium or cocaine; stovaine; heroin; strychnine; thebaine; cghanja; hashish; bhang; cannabis indica; tincture of opium; laudanum; codeine; dionin; and all other derivatives of opium and cocaine. ARTICLE 16. Date on which the present law shall be put into operation shall be determined by mandate. ARTICLE 17. On the date this law is put into force, the national tariff regulations promulgated on December 25th, the Sixth Year of the Republic of China, 1917, shall become null and void.” “Law regulating the import duty on tobacco and wine: [ARTICLE 1. Foreign tobacco and wine on] importation same into any open port in China shall be subject to an import duty according to the tariff given in this law. ARTICLE 2. The import duty on tobacco and wine shall range from 50 percent to 80 percent ad valorem. ARTICLE 3. Duty-paying value shall be fixed, converted or adjusted on the basis of the average wholesale prices prevailing during the preceding year. ARTICLE 4. The date on which this law shall take effect will be promulgated by mandate.” The following press communiqué was issued by the [secretary] general of the conference today:

“The committee on program and procedure appointed by the conference in its

and that a second special conference on the Chinese customs tariff shall be held May 1, 1928, at Peking to ascertain the facts in that regard. (g) Secure a declaration by China of its purpose to maintain in its present form the Chinese Customs Administration. (h) Secure agreement that Custom Administration shall refund unauthorized likin payments should likin not be abolished and provinces try to impose likin in addition to the customs dues. 3. Revenue derived from surtax to be used (1) to pay the rebates mentioned under section (h); (2) to give the provinces compensation for the abolition of likin; (3) to refund unsecured debt; (4) for the Central Government’s administrative expenses. 4. As you fully realize, the Chinese Government is so lacking in stability that there is great danger that this or a succeeding government may renounce the treaties unless we concede some of the demands. 5. We request telegraphic instructions as soon as possible. AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]

number of those countries requiring separate arrangements with regard to special tariffs. [In reviewing] the history of Japanese recovery of tariff autonomy, I brought out the fact that the revised treaties of 1894 between Japan and [the] Powers did not come into effect until after 5 years from the date of signature and remained in force for the following 12 years. We believe this precedent deserves our attention; China may well take a similar course. In his speech at the opening session, Doctor C. T. Wang indicated the determination of the Chinese Government to effect the abolition of likin and to bring about the enforcement of a Chinese national tariff law within 3 years. China within such a [preparatory] period may conclude with other Power[s] treaties along the lines of [the] first plan, which will become operative simultaneously with the enforcement of the Chinese national tariff law. The new treaties will supersede the existing treaties between China and other Powers and will remove unilateral restrictions imposed upon China with respect to customs tariff. In case the first alternative is approved by the present conference, it is the intention of the Japanese delegation to suggest that during such period, prior to the enforcement of the Chinese statutory tariff, an interim surtax be levied in accordance with the provisions of article 3 of the Washington treaty. The second plan suggested by us proposes the establishment of a tariff regime [which] would be, in a general manner, consistent with the stipulations of the treaties of 1902 and 1903 between China and the other Powers. In [case] this plan should be adopted, we would propose the inauguration of a graduated tariff since a uniform tariff at the rate provided for by these treaties is unreasonable and unscientific [and] works to the detriment of trade between China and foreign countries. When we compare these two alternative plans, it appears to us that the first plan is to be preferred to the second. The latter plan is based on the treaties between China and other powers conclude[d] more than 20 years ago. Their stipulations seem difficult in more [some] cases of being put into practice and not exactly in harmony with the present economic conditions. For instance, these treaties provide for not only the maintenance, but for an increase in the rate, of the existing export duty, [which] is entirely incompatible

with modern practices. Moreover, in devising a common schedule of tariff by readjustment of the numerous complicated and conflicting interests of the powers, the plan would encounter serious obstacles, perhaps impossible of being overcome within the time that is at the disposal of this conference. On the contrary, under the first plan, the steps to be taken would be definitely decided upon at this conference. At the same time, it would give each interested Power ample time, during the preparatory period, for arriving at a separate agreement with the Chinese Government on the subject of special tariff, while China, upon the abolition of likin and the removal of other obstructions to trade, will be able to enforce a national customs tariff law with the full accord of the Powers. It is by far the simpler and more practicable means [to] set China on the direct road to tariff autonomy.’ Mr. Strawn, in [behalf] of the American delegation, expressed willingness to go beyond the Washington treaty, and to accord to China relief, but wished to be fully advised as to the plans for the abolition of likin which must be accomplished coincidently with the institution of tariff [autonomy]. Mr. Kauffmann, Danish delegate, who spoke after Mr. Strawn, made a statement virtually to the same effect. The Belgian delegate accepted in principle the proposal to accord China tariff autonomy enforcement, suggesting that a transitory period should precede it[s] going into force and expressing the hope that this period be as short as possible. The French delegate [said] that he was prepared to consider it [in] the most friendly and generous spirit and to submit to his Government any reasonable proposals which might be put forward by the Chinese to meet their aspirations in regard to the customs tariff. Mr. Oudendijk stated that the right of tariff autonomy [is] an inherent sovereign right and that the Netherlands Government would do its best to arrive at a satisfactory settlement of the question. The Italian [delegate] said that the proposals would be examined in the friendliest spirit and that the complete abolition of likin must precede full tariff autonomy. The Portuguese delegate said that he expected that the proposals issued at the conference will lead; to complete tariff autonomy.

The Norwegian delegate gave his assent in principle to proposal Number one of the Chinese program but requested more definite information. The Spanish delegate said that he would give support to all resolutions favorable to China adopted at this conference. The Swedish delegate withheld definite commitments in the absence of instructions from his Government. The British delegate took a similar attitude, saying, however, that the British delegation was prepared to discuss the proposals to establish tariff autonomy in the widest spirit but wished time to consider them. Following the presentation of these views, Dr. Wang read the following memorandum on the abolition of likin: ‘1. Measures leading to the abolition of likin and the dates. Inasmuch [as] the Special Conference [on] Chinese Customs, being inspired by the spirit of the Washington Conference [in] its respect for China’s sovereignty, is aiming at tariff autonomy, there should be a determination to abolish likin which prejudices the economic growth of the Chinese people, so that their productive energy may thereby be developed. On the other hand, likin and commut[ation] tax or duty partaking of the nature of likin hitherto collected by the provinces constitute the main source of revenue for the province[s]. Therefore, it appears impossible to abolish such taxes all at once. It is necessary to divide into different period[s] within which to execute the plan of likin abolition, for the authorities concerned of the Central Government have to examine carefully all the details relating to likin such as the various original denominations, rules governing their collecting, location of the barriers, forms of certificates and passes, and the receipts, et cetera. After such examination, different steps have to be taken. It is now proposed that, in conformity with the annexed table relating to the procedure for likin abolition, the different provinces should, beginning from December, 1925, and within a period of six months, prepare reports, and, at the same time, commissioners should be sent to the provinces for investigation. The results of the investigations should, within another period of six months, be conjointly examined by the Ministry of Finance and the

Commission for the Reorganization of Finance. A fund should be provided enough to compensate likin for one year. At the end of February, 1928, the plan for likin abolition will be completely executed. 2. Means for the compensation of the abolition of likin and the fund for the same purpose. Although no accurate statistics are available [as to] the revenues derivable from likin for the different provinces, the approximate total amount [is] estimated at 70 million silver dollars per year. It is feared that after the abolition of likin the [provincial revenue] might suffer a great loss. The Central Government should, therefore, provide in advance a special fund to compensate the losses after investigation, and to remit the various [quotas] to the different provinces according to their respective annual deficits resulting from likin abolition. For this purpose, two different periods are proposed. During the first period, a portion of the increased customs revenue derivable from the surtaxes should [be] appropriated for compensation as stated in [the] first paragraph for one year. During the second period, when tariff autonomy [is] put into force, appropriation should be made out of the customs revenue itself. It is evident that after the means for the compensation of likin have been revised, a reliable fund will thereby be secured so that the provincial revenues will not be affected and likin can actually be abolished.’ Following this statement a memorandum was submitted showing in detail the measures to be taken by the Chinese Government in the interim period before the going into force of tariff autonomy, [such as] issuance of bonds for the compensation of likin abolishment and for constructive purposes, distribution of funds to various provinces as compensation for likin, the abolition of inland transit dues—which contemplates a gradual abolishment of all such taxes.” MACMURRAY 78 Telegram in three sections.

The British delegate made the following statement: “The British delegation, recognizing the inherent right of all independent and sovereign states to tariff autonomy, and considering that the fulfilment of the provisions of the treaty of Washington of February 6th, 1922, will constitute a step towards the attainment by China of such autonomy, formally declare that, in addition to the carrying out of the terms of that treaty, they are willing to submit to the ratification of their Government such further measures as may be devised and agreed upon at this conference, with a view to ensuring within a reasonable period the full realization of China’s claim to complete liberty of action in matters relating to her tariff.” The Swedish delegate declared himself in accord with the British delegate’s statement. Mr. Hioki, the Japanese delegate, presented the following proposal on behalf of the Japanese delegation: “1. The contracting powers, other than China, hereby solemnly declare their recognition of the principle that, as an inherent right of a sovereign state, China is to enjoy full autonomy with respect to customs tariff. 2. China shall recover the exercise of her tariff autonomy in the manner indicated in the following paragraphs. 3. China shall establish immediately a national tariff law with a schedule appertaining thereto, to be put into force within a period of three years and upon the abolition of likin by China, as declared by her.

4. During the interim period mentioned in the preceding paragraph, China may levy on articles of import a surtax as authorized in paragraph 2 of article 3 of the Washington treaty. 5. During the same interim period, China, on the one hand, and the other contracting powers, on the other, shall conclude severally treaties, which may incorporate reciprocal conventional tariffs to be applied on certain special articles if so desired by both parties. The new treaties so concluded shall continue in force for a certain definite period. 6. The national tariff law mentioned in paragraph 3 shall become operative, so far as the treaty powers are concerned, simultaneously with the enforcement of the treaties above mentioned. 7. The new treaties to be concluded shall supersede the existing treaties between China and the other contracting powers in matters relating to customs tariff.” Following this presentation Mr. MacMurray, on behalf of the American delegation, proposed the following plan: “The Chinese delegation have asked, in Dr. Wang’s speech at the opening session of this conference, on October 26, that the powers declare their respect for the principle of China’s tariff autonomy and agree to the removal of tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties. They have affirmed that it is the intention of the Chinese Government to abolish likin. They have asked that interim surtaxes be levied and that agreements which may be concluded at this conference shall be made effective at an early date. Desiring to follow out as closely and as far as possible the programme which has been proposed by the Chinese delegation, and hoping that this conference may arrive at agreements which will make possible the realization of China’s aspirations and at the same time properly safeguard the legitimate interests of all powers and people who will be affected: We are prepared, in accordance with the provisions of the Washington treaty, to authorize at once the levying of the surtax of 2½% and, as soon as the requisite schedules can be prepared, to authorize the levying of a surtax of 5% on luxuries. We are prepared to proceed at once with the negotiation of such an agreement or agreements as may be necessary for making effective other provisions of the Washington treaties of February 6, 1922.

We affirm the principle of respect for China’s tariff autonomy and are prepared to negotiate a new treaty that shall give effect to that principle and which shall make provision for the abolition of likin, for the removal of tariff restrictions contained in treaties and for putting into effect of the Chinese national tariff law. To carry out the provisions of the Washington treaty and at the same time proceed with the larger programme contemplated, we suggest: I. That the powers, other than China, authorize the levying of a

provinces in lieu of likin. 6. That if likin be collected anywhere in violation of agreements entered into for its abolition, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a refund from the Customs Administration of the full amount which he paid as likin. 7. That the increase in the customs revenues derived from the increase in rates of duty shall be devoted to the following purposes: (a) Compensation to the provinces in lieu of likin; (b) Payment of rebate charges; (c) Refunding of the unsecured debts; (d) Administrative expenses of the Central Government. 8. That, subject to the fulfillment of the provisions of

“There is no greater detriment to the economic development of China than the likin system, since it constitutes a great obstacle to the wide distribution of goods and the expansion of commerce, and results in diminishing the productive power of the country and impoverishing the people. The sources of revenue and the purchasing power of a nation are both dependent upon the productiveness of its people. In China, this productiveness is now so seriously affected by this obnoxious likin tax that her sources of revenue are exhausted, her revenue decreased, her purchasing power weakened, and her international trade crippled. In the history of economics, development began with the family and passed on to the community; then it extended to the nation and thence to the entire world. Today this development has reached the national stage and it is gradually approaching the international phase. Unfortunately in China, owing to the existence of this obnoxious tax, the output of raw materials and manufactured articles is insufficient to meet the demands of the nation and of the world—a state of things which is much to be deplored. The Chinese people have for years been clamouring for the abolition of this tax, and the Central Government has created a Financial Rehabilitation Commission composed of representatives of the military and civil authorities of the whole country. It is fully recognized that no half-way measures would meet the situation and that, if the problem is not thoroughly dealt with, there would be no possibility of improving the welfare of the nation. After mature consideration it has been decided to abolish the likin system, so that the economic welfare of the people as well as foreign commerce may alike be benefited, the foundations of national finance firmly established, and the international relations of the country likewise strengthened. The Chinese Government hereby declares that the abolition of likin will be completely carried out not later than the first day of the first month of the 18th year of the Republic (1929).” The committee then adjourned subject to the call of the chairman. The committee on provincial [provisional] measures will meet on Friday, November 6. MACMURRAY 79 This telegram was received badly garbled. The quotations as here printed have been corrected, without indicating changes, on the basis of the minutes of the committee as published in The Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff, pp. 87 ff. 80 Telegram in four sections.

to the demand of the foreign powers that restoration of tariff autonomy be made conditional on the ability of China to abolish likin. 2. [Paraphrase.] It is likely that the Chinese delegation will insist that granting of tariff autonomy will not be dependent upon the abolition of likin, that the powers must not insist upon any conditions with respect thereto as indicated in our plan but must accept China’s word for it that likin will be abolished. The Chinese may also insist upon their proposal that in the event of the abolition of the present Customs Administration a tariff commission shall take over the custody of the customs funds. We do not feel that we can accept such a plan, as virtually it would amount to our consenting to the denunciation of all China’s tariff treaties. We feel that if China should really be determined upon repudiating treaty obligations we should not acquiesce but should allow the entire responsibility for such action to rest clearly upon China. We think that with the possible exception of the Japanese all the powers agree with us. The Japanese believe that the abolition of likin is impossible and the indications are that they will take their chances on likin and insist upon their plan for a conventional tariff. We do not believe the Chinese will accept the Japanese proposal. [End paraphrase.] AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]

Subsequently the committee resolved itself into the subcommittee on purposes and it was decided to appoint two technical committees: one on likin and another on other purposes. The meeting adjourned at 12:15 subject to the call of the Chair.” AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]

affairs until the present Cabinet should be re-formed,83 when greater progress could be made. AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]

Convening of the Commission on Extraterritoriality in China, provided for by resolution V of the Washington Conference86 86 For previous correspondence regarding the meeting of the Commission on Extraterritoriality in China, see Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 521 ff. [725] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)

end has named as its Commissioner an eminent American lawyer, Mr. Silas H. Strawn of Chicago. In order that the Commission may begin its work with as little delay as possible, the Government of the United States suggests that December 18, 1925, be accepted by the interested Powers as the date upon which it will commence its functions at Peking. As regards the manner in which the Commission will perform its work, the Government of the United States believes that this should be left to the Commission which should be guided [as?] to its duties and the intentions of the Governments by the letter and spirit of Resolution V and the Powers’ note to China of September 4th.” You will express the hope of this Government that the Government of Japan will find itself able to accept the date mentioned and that it will inform you so that this information can be communicated to the Chinese Government. KELLOGG 90 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in Peru, and also to the Ambassador in France with instructions to repeat to the diplomatic representatives in Belgium, Denmark, Great Britain, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden.

Continued support by the United States to the Federal Telegraph Company in efforts to obtain execution of its contract with the Chinese Government98

undated

[776] The Japanese Embas

sy_to the Department of State

undated

(b) It is further held by the American Government that the claim of the Mitsui Company in question is incompatible with the basic principle of equal opportunity laid down in Article 3 of the Nine-Power Treaty of Washington.1 It should, however, be observed that the Mitsui contracts had been concluded long before an agreed definition of the principle of equal opportunity was adopted at the Washington Conference. Moreover, the prohibition of monopoly or of preference contained in the first paragraph of the cited Article of the Nine-Power Treaty is qualified by the provisions in the second paragraph of the same Article, which permit the acquisition of such properties or rights as may be necessary to the conduct of a particular commercial, industrial or financial undertaking, and which, in the opinion of the Japanese Government, properly cover the case of wireless enterprise. (c) The Japanese Government are not unmindful of the needs of the United States to secure an efficient radio service across the Pacific, to supplement the present inadequate cable service. The plan of the Mitsui Company is intended exactly to supply such needs, and if any exclusive authorization to the nationals of one foreign country to work a wireless station in China should appear objectionable to the United States, the Japanese Government have already manifested their readiness to see the abandonment of the system of such exclusive operation by Japanese of the station constructed by the Mitsui Company. With this feature of exclusive operation definitely eliminated, there should remain no grounds for apprehension of discriminatory treatment, as among nationalities, in the working of the station. 3. It is reported that the cost of construction fixed at U. S. $5,417,500 in the original contract of the Federal Telegraph Company was, under the supplementary agreement, raised to U. S. $13,000,000, one-half of which is to be charged to the liability of China. She has already incurred obligations to the Mitsui and the Chinese National Radio Telegraph Company to an amount of approximately $7,000,000 Silver. Upon the completion of the undertaking now contemplated by the Federal Telegraph Company, the whole indebtedness of China on account of wireless installations will thus reach the substantial figure of some $20,000,000 Silver. This would surely aggravate the financial difficulties of the Chinese Government, which are already assuming serious proportions. It is also believed that the general conditions in China do not require or justify the immediate establishment of two high power wireless stations in that country. The unwisdom of such an extensive program will be evident when it is considered that even in the whole region of the highly commercialized Pacific Coast of the United States, there is only one trans-oceanic wireless station open for public use. 4. The Japanese Government are unable to bring themselves to the conclusion that they are in any way precluded from extending support to the present claim of the Mitsui

Company. It has, however, now become manifest that any longer delay in the adjustment of the controversy will serve no useful purpose, either for the contending parties themselves or for China which is primarily responsible for this situation. Holding to the principle of international co-operation instead of international competition, and desiring to help China out of her present difficulty, the Japanese Government are willing to approach the question from a new angle that may lead to a speedy and practical settlement of the dispute. 5. Accordingly, without prejudice to the legal merits of the case, the Japanese Government now desire to propose that the principles governing the Consortium be applied to the contracts secured by the Mitsui Company and the Federal Telegraph Company. These contracts are thus to be pooled and superseded by a loan agreement for wireless enterprise in China of the same nature as ordinary railway loans that may be undertaken by the Consortium.

The parties to the proposed loan agreement shall be, on the one side, the Chinese Government and, on the other, a financial group representing American, British, French and Japanese interests. The financial group is to consist of the Federal Telegraph Company, the Marconi Company, the French General Wireless Telegraph Company and the Mitsui Company, and is to be constituted upon full communication and understanding with the Consortium. The operation of wireless telegraphy in question shall be placed under the exclusive control of the Chinese Government, while the financial group is to supply the services of engineers and accountants, in order to assist China in the enterprise. 6. The proposed solution is believed to be in line with the known policy of the American Government to promote international co-operation, and with all basic principles embodied in the Nine-Power Treaty of Washington. It provides, at the same time, for a lightening of China’s indebtedness, as much desirable for herself as for all nations interested in the stabilization of that country. If, as is confidently hoped, the plan outlined is found acceptable, the Japanese Government will be happy to suggest further particulars of the measures for making it effective. They are also prepared to give serious and friendly consideration to any counter proposals that may be advanced by the American Government in order to compose the pending differences. In any case, they attach great importance to an early settlement of the question, which so long as it remains unadjusted, tends to disturb the relations of solidarity and mutual confidence among all the Powers concerned. WASHINGTON , December 24, 1924.

99 For texts of the contracts, see List of Contracts of American Nationals With the Chinese Government, etc., annex viii (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1925).

which Japan appears insanely jealous. In consequence of the Department’s stand as expressed in section 2 of the experts’ recommendations7 and

support hitherto given it by the American Government. In any event I earnestly advise the Department to defer action until Davis and Moss have arrived in Peking, for I still believe the Chinese Government desires purely Chinese-American control trans-Pacific radio even though Federal contract may require modification. 8. Repeated to Tokyo. SCHURMAN

for everyone having concern in the foreign and domestic wireless field including telephony and broadcasting. Seemingly it would be desirable that an official observer represent the Legation of the nationality of each participating company. (4) The submission by the Government of China of a comprehensive proposal could advantageously initiate the discussion at this conference. The Chinese Government, I think, would itself be willing to issue to the companies which are concerned invitations to be represented at the conference, should the plan for a conference be brought to the Chinese Government’s attention as a solution of the existing complications between the nations which are obstructing wireless communications development. Regarding this consideration, it is my respectful proposal that a suggestion be made to the Chinese Minister in Washington that if invitations were issued by the Chinese Government to such a round-table conference, the Department would give no opposition to American interests participating but, on the other hand, would have hope of an outcome of success. It is my opinion that approach by this method is superior to offering such proposals in Peking. (5) I see the several following advantages in the convoking of such a conference: When centered on a common object the combined business acumen of the several representatives should be able to work an adjustment of their various interests so that that object would be achieved. The American representatives would, with their present attitude toward the Federal agreement, be so placed with regard to making concessions as to set a commendable example. The respective Governments, through their official observers, would be in a position to make provision that there would be no violation of international policies such as open door, elimination of spheres of interest, etc. (6) It is my belief that there would be embodied in an understanding arrived at in this way the most satisfactory feature of the proposal made by the Japanese, that the prestige of each participant would be conserved, the dignity of China would be enhanced, and that the most for the actual development of radio would be promised thereby. SCHURMAN

In furnishing you with the above exposition of the situation as it is seen by my Government, I would add that a similar communication is being addressed to the Japanese Government by His Majesty’s Ambassador at Tokio. I have [etc.] ESME HOWARD 16 Not printed.

Memorandum of December 24, 1924. Maintaining the claim of the Federal Company to establish radio stations in China in disregard of the exclusive right previously granted by the Chinese Government to the Mitsui Company, the American counter-project proceeds to divide radio business between the two companies. The plan formulated by the American Government is simply an operating arrangement and it assumes the complete abandonment by the Mitsui Company of its legal position relative to the establishment of radio stations in China, without any corresponding concession on the part of the Federal Company. 5. It would appear further that the American counter-project is intended to secure for the Federal Company the exclusive control of all radio stations to be constructed by the company as well as a monopoly of the radio service between the United States and China. Upon careful review of the whole question, the Japanese Government have now reached the conclusion that such an arrangement would not make for the maintenance of China’s administrative integrity or for the extension of fair and impartial treatment of the other Powers equally interested in the question. On the contrary, it seems likely to revive the international rivalry and misunderstanding that in the past have proved so harmful to the stabilization of China. 6. Again, the Japanese Government are not convinced of the immediate need for China, in the present state of her economic and financial conditions, for two or more high power radio stations for external communications. The expenditure to be charged to China under the Federal contract can not fail to intensify the strain on her already overburdened treasury. Experience in many countries has shown that, as purely commercial undertaking, radio communication is not financially profitable, at least for a number of years after its initiation.

8. The Japanese Government, however, do not feel themselves at liberty to make any overtures to China for the settlement of the question, without the full understanding and cooperation of the United States. They fear that if they took such independent action at Peking, it would place the Chinese Government in an embarrassing position, and would, moreover, be a fruitful source of popular misgiving. It seems to the Japanese Government only natural and more likely to attain the desired result, that the parties having conflicting claims to the radio enterprise in China should first agree between themselves, at least upon the general principles governing the adjustment of these claims, subject to the approval of the Chinese Government. 9. Doubt is expressed by the American Government as to the feasibility of the Japanese proposals. The Japanese Government will welcome any suggestion for the modification of such terms of their proposals as may appear unworkable to the American Government. But, they place great importance upon the elimination from any radio arrangements in China of such features of foreign control or of monopoly as the counter-proposals of the American Government would appear to involve. They further re-emphasize the point that they deem it highly desirable, for China and for all Powers interested in that country, to adopt such a solution as will lighten her financial liability. 10. The question of radio facilities in China formed a subject of discussion at the Washington Conference, and the British and French Governments, which took active part in that discussion, are no doubt keenly interested in the outcome of the present exchange of views between Tokio and Washington. Accordingly, it has occurred to the Japanese Government that if it is more essentially the matter of feasibility than any question of principle, which seems unconvincing to the American Government in the consideration of the Japanese proposals submitted on December 24, 1924, it might be useful to call a meeting of representatives of the American, British, French and Japanese radio interests, with instructions to examine in common accord the feasibility of the Japanese proposals, and to work out detailed terms of adjustment for recommendation to their respective Governments. In making this suggestion, the Japanese Government have no other desire than to reach a practical solution of the difficulty that will best serve the lasting interests of China and will at the same time secure friendly cooperation among the Powers interested in radio enterprise in that country. WASHINGTON , June 1, 1925.

accept the recommendations of the wireless experts when taken as a whole, they cannot but feel, in the light of the present difficulties, that the suggestion of the American representatives on this particular point would in practice militate against the above mentioned principle of equality of opportunity and encourage the powers to claim from the Chinese Government a monopoly of the wireless traffic between themselves and China. Such action on the part of the powers would materially increase the difficulties of the situation and result in the infliction of a considerable injustice on China. His Majesty’s Government are confident that this aspect of the matter will not have escaped the notice of the United States Government, and in drawing your attention to the standpoint of His Majesty’s Government as regards the interests of the Marconi Company, I have the honour to request that I may be informed at an early date of the attitude of the United States Government towards the question of the future development of wireless telegraphy in China and to express the hope that their views on the subject may coincide with those of His Majesty’s Government, who are prepared to give their whole-hearted support to the proposals submitted in the above mentioned Japanese memorandum of December 24th last, for the solution of the complicated and far-reaching political issues which this problem involves. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

3. Minister for Foreign Affairs first proposed we should adjust our differences with the Japanese before asking further attention to the matter on the part of the Chinese. I told him I saw no prospect of a satisfactory adjustment until the Chinese gave our interests the locus standi to which they were entitled by the terms of their contracts. 4. He then suggested that the Chinese might propose to the two conflicting national interests some basis of accommodation. I pointed out that no such proposal could well be fair to us so long as we occupied a merely theoretical position while the Japanese had a station actually functioning. [Paraphrase] 5. Information from a source considered reliable has come to representatives of the Federal Telegraph Company that this matter was taken up today by the Minister for Foreign Affairs with Tuan Chi-jui, emphasizing that we are not at present negotiating with the Japanese and under existing conditions do not foresee possibility of reaching a satisfactory understanding with them. It is reported that Tuan has said that the Chinese Government would take up the question with the Japanese if the Americans and Japanese could not come to an agreement. 6. If this proves to be true we will be confronted by a clear disregard of our contract rights and there will be little if any likelihood of obtaining a reconsideration … It may be necessary in that case to decide whether to induce the Chinese to submit proposals to the Radio Corporation and Mitsui Company for the accommodation of their conflicting interests or to authorize the Radio Corporation to negotiate directly with the Mitsui Company for arrangements on a business basis. Arrangements of this nature would not recognize any monopoly and would include the setting up of an independent American-Chinese circuit. 7. Possibly the Chinese Minister at Washington might be persuaded to telegraph his Government and to point out the seriousness of subordinating valid American rights to the veto of Japan. 8. Repeated as No. 72 to Tokyo. MACMURRAY

cooperation with us in giving practical effect to the open door; a failure to proceed with respect to the contract would now create a doubt. 3. The Minister for Foreign Affairs protested that there was no matter of principle involved but only a practical question of finding a way around the obstacle interposed by the Japanese; and he at first said he saw no necessity for my seeing the Chief Executive. 4. I told him that we could not accept that view and that it was in order to make clear to the Chief Executive our conviction as to the political importance of the matter that I asked for an interview. The Minister with manifest displeasure consented to arrange for it to take place in about a week. 5. I am hopeful that this interview may have made some impression upon the Minister for Foreign Affairs who has hitherto been wholly indifferent to the matter. MACMURRAY 22 Neither printed.

foreign countries should be transmitted by the Japanese station, this “provisional arrangement” to be subject to modification only upon 6 months’ notice and upon agreement by both (repeat both) parties as to the cancellation of any of the terms of the agreement. This seems clearly to mean a monopoly of Chinese overseas wireless in favor of Japanese interests for so long as they care to maintain that predominance. 5. The situation would of course lead to the result that in the event of the formation of “wireless consortium” Japan would enter the field as the possessor of all ostensible rights, whereas we would be in a position to show no more than a grievance against the bad faith of the present administration of the Chinese Government. MACMURRAY

6. So recently [as] the 24th instant His Excellency the Chief Executive assured me that contract in question was recognized as valid and would be put into effect. While welcoming this renewed assurance in view of the importance that attaches to this matter not only as one involving a contractual obligation to American nationals but also as affording a test of the principle of the equality of opportunity in China, I must repeat that it is now necessary to know definitely whether early effect will be given to the contract. As I have explained both to you and to His Excellency the Chief Executive, time is important to the American companies concerned; and a further reason for making clear the position of the Chinese Government in this matter had now arisen in consequence of the fact that the American Government is at the present time under the necessity of taking stock of international situation in China and formulating policies for its own guidance in dealing with the records [sic] to be discussed at the Special Conference.24 7. With a view to assuring itself whether or not it can count upon the continued support and cooperation of the Chinese Government in maintaining the principle of equality of opportunity which is the basis of Washington Conference treaties and of the forthcoming Special Conference to be held thereunder, my Government has instructed me to ask for an early and definite statement whether the Chinese Government will without hesitation give effect to the Federal contract, and, if so, on what date may it expect such action to be taken. 8. I earnestly request your express authorization to present the matter in this way. 9. Copy by mail to Tokyo for information. 10. I suggest informing Radio Corporation of the substance of the above. MACMURRAY

delay give effect to the Federal contract, and, if so, what date may such action be expected. I beg now to reiterate that request.” 5. I suggest substance of above be conveyed to Radio Corporation. 6. Copy mailed to Tokyo. MACMURRAY 25 Infra.

In his letter Harbord does not mention the request of Davis, transmitted in your 356, August 27, 4 p.m., that Young communicate with the Mitsui Company. The first part of the letter indicates that the Radio Corporation objects to the Chinese proposal of August 28. The Department is waiting for a report as to the results of your representations to the Chinese Foreign Office and Chief Executive before answering Harbord’s letter. KELLOGG 28 Gen. James G. Harbord, president of the Radio Corporation of America. 29 Telegram No. 356 not printed.

3. In the hope that the administration may even yet be made conscious of its responsibilities and of its interest in this matter, I shall nevertheless continue my efforts and trust that you may be able allow some few days longer before accepting as definitive and conclusive the failure of the Chinese Government to deal with this matter in good faith. 4. Copy by mail to Tokio.

MacMurray

four years ago; and that the question presents itself to us not as a matter of bargaining but as a means of determining whether and to what extent the facts of the situation would warrant us in adopting policy more favorable to Chinese aspirations than the actual terms of the treaty obligations that we have undertaken and which we will, of course, fulfill. 5. Copy by mail to Tokio. MACMURRAY

agree to put it in writing he would consult with the Ministers of Communications and Foreign Affairs tomorrow morning with a view to having the Federal wireless contract put into effect. 5. I told Tuan that I would be quite prepared to arrange an exchange of notes with the Minister of Foreign Affairs by which he would give a favorable reply to my repeated inquiries as to whether the Federal contract is to be put into effect; and in acknowledgment I would write that the American interests, with the sympathetic approval of our Government, would be ready, after the necessary steps had been taken to make the contract effective, to enter into discussions with Mitsui Company representatives and the Chinese Ministry of Communications in order to reach an accommodation of their respective interests in the hope that effective business arrangements would be made which would be fair and profitable to all interested parties. 6. Tuan urged that for the time being the matter should be treated as absolutely confidential save for the discussions which would be necessary with the local representatives of the Federal wireless interests. His reason for keeping the matter confidential was evidently the desire to avoid antagonisms which premature publicity might arouse. 7. I shall inform you at once of any definite developments resulting from the assurances which Tuan gave me. 8. I am mailing to Tokyo copy of this telegram. MACMURRAY

the company may take possession of the land necessary for the construction of the main station” and that the Foreign Minister concurred in this explanation. 2. As soon as we had reached an agreement in principle on these documents the Minister for Foreign Affairs said that in consideration of his having done this much for our interests he felt warranted in asking me for a definite statement of our Government’s attitude in regard to the forthcoming conference. I told him that the exchange of these documents did not in itself place us under any obligations and that I wished to make this clear to him in order that he might if necessary reconsider the matter before making the exchange. I recalled that the proposed documents call upon Chinese Government to do nothing new—in fact placed some conditions and qualifications upon what the Chinese Government was already definitely obligated to do; and that it was simply a matter of bringing about the fulfillment by that Government of obligations whose nonfulfillment had led us to doubt the willingness or ability of the Chinese Government to live up to the further duties which it would naturally have to assume in connection with aspirations which it is seeking to realize at the conference. I added that in this aspect of matter the making of a new promise was a hopeful indication of desire of the Chinese to keep faith with us, but that of course their performance of the obligations thus newly undertaken would afford a measure of the confidence with which we may feel warranted in dealing with them in the conference. [3?] He then urged that this new evidence of Chinese good will ought at least to be a basis for our discussing and considering frankly with the Chinese authorities the program of the conference, and he outlined in very general terms the program in view. Upon his asking for my comment on it I stated that it was impossible for me to form an opinion of a general program without any details making possible judgment as to the practicability of its various items and said that I would of course be glad to receive from the Chinese experts detailed explanations of their proposals but that until such details had been considered by my Government and by the delegation it would manifestly be impossible to give more than a general assurance of our good will and desire to be of help to China. 4. He indicated some disappointment that unwillingness to make a more definite commitment as to our attitude on the general program or on the particular item of “tariff autonomy.” It is entirely possible that failing to receive from us some new consideration for the observance of our existing rights the Chinese Government may even

yet refuse to proceed with the proposed interchange of notes. 5. Not repeated to Tokyo. MACMURRAY 30 Not printed.

The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State24

undated (1) The Japanese Government are gratified to note that the proposals contained in the memorandum of the Waichiaopu dated August 28, 192532 for the adjustment of the question of wireless telegraphy in China are in substantial agreement with the plan suggested in the Memoranda of the

(3) The only difference of any importance between the Japanese and Chinese proposals is thus reduced to the question as to whether British and French radio interests, besides Japanese and American, shall be invited to participate in the new loan agreement in which the existing contracts of the Mitsui and of the Federal are to be merged. The Japanese Government hold to the belief that it is highly desirable, for the promotion of international good understanding, no less than for the development of China’s own radio enterprise, to enlist the friendly co-operation of British and French interests. The fairness of the claim of these two nations to participate in the proposed arrangement must be admitted, while their support is certainly required in order to secure the satisfactory working of Chinese radio enterprise in its relation with Europe. It need hardly be pointed out that the co-operation of the four-Power radio interests on the lines indicated can not, in any sense, be taken as a measure implying any degree of international control, or international administration, of wireless telegraphy in China, which is as strongly deprecated by the Japanese Government as by the Chinese Government. (4) Should the foregoing observations meet the approval of China, the Japanese Government, on their part, will be happy to do whatever lies in their power, in co-operation with the Chinese Government, to expedite a solution of the long pending difficulty. Being satisfied that it is not so much a question of principle as of detail which separates the Japanese and Chinese proposals under review, the Japanese Government are encouraged in the hope that a fair and speedy adjustment could be arrived at, if the same basic principle now found acceptable to both Governments will commend itself equally to a favourable reception on the part of the American Government.

[Document 776]

The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State22

undated The American Government appears to be under the apprehension that the Japanese proposal embodied in the memorandum of the Japanese Embassy, Washington, dated December 24th, 1924, may not commend itself to the Chinese Government. An examination, however, of the Chinese proposal recently made to the United States and Japan shows that the Chinese Government has as its aim to manage and work on its own account the Chinese radio stations to be established with foreign loans, and that the main purpose of the Chinese proposal is in substantial agreement with that of the Japanese proposal. It is thus believed to mark a step forward toward the adjustment of the question of wireless telegraphy in China. In these circumstances, it is most earnestly hoped that this long pending controversy may speedily be settled on the basis of the Japanese proposal above alluded to. With this hope in view, the Japanese Government ventures to suggest again that as set forth in the last paragraph of the Memorandum of the Japanese Embassy, Washington, dated June 1st, 1925, the Japanese proposal be submitted to a meeting of representatives of the radio interests of the various countries concerned to be examined and reported as to its feasibility.

Executive order by President Coolidge remitting further payments by China on the Boxer indemnity35 35 For previous correspondence concerning the remission of the Boxer. Indemnity, see Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 551 ff.

of State a copy of the constitution of the Board40 referred to in his communication of June 14, 1924, above mentioned, which Board, he stated, had been designated “The China Foundation for the Promotion of Education and Culture”; and WHEREAS, the

Colombia:

Contents

Boundary dispute with Nicaragua

Boundary dispute with Panama

Anglo-Persian Oil Co.: Activities and negotiations, 493

Arms and munitions (see also under China), conference for the supervision of international traffic in, May 4–June 17, U. S. participation:

Military and Naval Committee, recommendation for separate

Discussion of tentative arrangement, 524–526

Colombia–Peru. See under Boundary disputes.

Chile (see also Tacna-Arica question): Revolutionary crisis: Asylum, requests for extension by United States, 581–

presentation of credentials, 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of

Japanese pressure on Chinese Government and possible results, reports concerning, 894 [Pg. 894

Acquiescence of France, Japan, and Italy, 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc.

include portions of Doc. 559, Doc. 560, and Doc.

Press articles, U. S. assertion regarding, 664 [Pg. 664

U. S. Chargé’s opinions regarding agitation in Shanghai,

Text, 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 699]; modifications,

Commission to revise rules of warfare, U. S. unsuccessful efforts to secure adoption of rules drafted by: Communications to U. S. representative in France and other

Conferences, international: American states, international conferences of, U. S. opposition to

Germany (see also Belgium: German reparation payments; U. S. customs attachés: Diplomatic status): Commission on Extraterritoriality in China,

U. S.–Canada, convention of June 6, 1924, U. S. Executive order

Naval armament limitation (see also Disarmament conference), scrapping of

São Paulo, Brazil, State of, disapproval by Department of State of proposed

Strawn, Silas H., appointment as U. S. member of Commission on

Americans in Chile and Peru, U. S. admonition to, 377

of United States and of General Pershing, 416–

Troops in Tacna and Arica, 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of

Bills of lading, international convention for the unification of certain rules relating to: Text, with protocol of signature and

U. S.–Bulgaria, extradition treaty, 1924, possible relation to U. S.

Objections of Great Britain, France, Sweden, and

U. S. warships (see also China), question of dispatch to Chilean ports, 583

Suggestions and opinions of U. S.

Treaties relating to China. See under China: Washington Conference. Treaty for the limitation of naval armament, scrapping of ships in
