488
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
which has taken place and said that a solution to this problem would
be useful in light of our relations.
10. Cultural exchanges: Puja expressed the hope that the cultural
agreement would be “filled.” He said Hungary follows an open door
policy and is ready for exchanges. The Secretary replied that the USG
feels strongly the importance of cultural exchanges and is pleased at
the progress being made.6
11. Puja visit: The Secretary said he hoped Puja would come to the
Special Session on Disarmament and that, if he did, he would come
to Washington to meet with the Secretary.
12. Middle East. Puja requested a briefing on the U.S. view of the
Middle East. The Secretary replied that Sadat’s visit to Israel was a
major breakthrough in that it helped to remove distrust which has
been a principle obstacle to negotiations. The Israeli reaction was real
and spontaneous, and there has been a fundamental change in the
perceptions of both sides. Difficult problems remain and must be solved
by long and hard negotiations. The initial discussions have not dealt
with the most serious problems. The upcoming meetings between
Foreign Ministers and Defense Ministers will be a proper forum to
carry on discussions.
13. The U.S. hopes to make progress through the establishment
of a set of principles designed to create a framework for further
negotiations.
A. Nature of peace: There is a difference of views on this principle,
but it is a subject on which agreement can be reached.
B. Withdrawal from occupied territories: The Secretary did not
discuss this principle other than to mention it.
C. Resolution of the Palestinian question in all respects: This princi-
ple is the most difficult. He referred to the President’s Aswan formula-
tion to which we do not yet have the reaction from all parties. We
have received privately generally positive reactions. Drafting is still
ahead of us, but this new formulation is a start and can serve as a basis.
14. The Secretary said that during his upcoming 2–3 day visit to
Jerusalem beginning Jan 15, he would press hard for a resolution of the
above principles. He added that the U.S. believes that a comprehensive
settlement is the only solution. A piecemeal settlement would not last
long. We hope that a general agreement on the above set of principles
6 In telegram 4293 from Budapest, December 12, 1977, the Embassy reported that
U.S. and Hungarian negotiators reached an ad referendum agreement on textual changes
to the “Agreement on Cooperation in Culture, Education, Science and Technology” for
the 1978–1979 period. The agreement was signed by Assistant Secretary Hartman on
April 6, 1977. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770463–0438)
