126 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan have been vigorously supportive of the Soviets. On January 24, the Czechoslovaks postponed the late February visit of FRG Foreign Minister Genscher, citing the international situation created by the NATO TNF decision and by the “unconcealed threats” contained in the President’s State of the Union speech. —We should keep under active review the tabling of a new proposal on a claims settlement with Czechoslovakia which would also result in the return to Czechoslovakia of 18.4 million metric tons of Nazi-looted gold. This would finally compensate the American claimants and also open avenues to increase U.S. access to Czechoslovakia. (There are indications that Czechoslovakia may want to resolve this issue quickly, and the present price of gold could enable us to obtain a significantly higher settlement. Because of recent repressive actions by the Czechoslovak Government in the area of human rights and their position on Afghanistan, however, it is currently not possible for us to proceed on this issue.) GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC The GDR position on Iran has been one of non-demonstrative support for the observance of international law while its media has sympathized with anti-US sentiment in Iran and warned of US military retaliation. Concerning Afghanistan, the GDR has praised the Soviet invasion as necessary in light of CIA-backed counterrevolutionary activity based in Pakistan. As a new member of the UN Security Council, the GDR joined the Soviet Union in voting against the resolution condemning the invasion of Afghanistan. The GDR’s position on Iran and Afghanistan should be balanced against our stake in maintaining the progress made recently in important areas of bilateral relations (e.g., humanitarian cases and US claims). Depending on future GDR steps in these areas, it would seem appropriate to continue our current deliberate pace toward handling GDR issues, with final actions on all individual issues being reviewed in light of the conditions at that time. We should —Continue to send diplomatic and protocolary signals of displeasure with GDR support for the Soviets. —Proceed with CSCE consultations at a lower level. —Fulfill our promise to permit a GDR Embassy branch commercial office in New York City in return for a reciprocal option for a U.S. office. —Depending upon the outcome of the export licensing policy review, continue US participation in the Leipzig Fair in 1981. —Proceed with the negotiation of a cultural agreement. [N.B. Some IG members feel that negotiation of a cultural agreement with the GDR
