Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II more numerous and more politically aware are craving and now demanding their place in the sun—not just for the benefit of their own physical condition, but for basic human rights.”3 4. At his news conference held on January 31,4 Secretary Vance discussed the issue of human rights as follows: Qte. On the issue of human rights, the President has often expressed his deep concern in this area, and has reaffirmed that deep concern in the inauguration address. “We will speak frankly about injustice, both at home and abroad. We do not intend, however, to be strident or polemical, but we do believe that an abiding respect for human rights is a human value of fundamental importance, and that it must be nourished. We will not comment on each and every issue, but we will from time to time comment, when we see a threat to human rights, when we believe it is constructive to do so. Unqte. 5. Reflecting the high priority which has been assigned to human rights, we will be developing new policies and seeking new opportunities for the promotion of human rights in the world through the UN Human Rights Commission and other UN organs dealing with human rights questions, such as ECOSOC and the General Assembly. Our policies will be based upon the principle of equal rights for all peoples everywhere. We must avoid selective application of this principle in the United Nations. 6. We are conscious of the Charter commitment of all United Nations members to promote respect for basic human rights. While we recognize the virtues of diversity and do not expect uniform acceptance of our own standards, we cannot in any case ignore such basic transgressions of internationally recognized human rights as genocide, apartheid, torture, jailing of people for their beliefs, denials of fair treatment to minorities and denials of the right to emigrate and the right to worship, or denial of many other basic rights and freedoms. Basic civil and political human rights reinforce and promote basic economic rights and needs of peoples, and vice versa. Consequently, we will also seek to provide leadership in the pursuit of measures to alleviate suffering and deprivation due to lack of food and economic opportunity, to environmental abuses and to deficient health care. And finally, we will firmly and vigorously advocate the concept of majority rule in places such as Southern Africa where that concept is not yet realized. 3 The President’s inaugural address is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 1–4. An excerpt of the President’s inaugural address is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy.
