24
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
more numerous and more politically aware are craving and now de-
manding their place in the sun—not just for the benefit of their own
physical condition, but for basic human rights.”3
4. At his news conference held on January 31,4 Secretary Vance dis-
cussed the issue of human rights as follows:
Qte. On the issue of human rights, the President has often ex-
pressed his deep concern in this area, and has reaffirmed that deep con-
cern in the inauguration address.
“We will speak frankly about injustice, both at home and abroad.
We do not intend, however, to be strident or polemical, but we do be-
lieve that an abiding respect for human rights is a human value of fun-
damental importance, and that it must be nourished. We will not com-
ment on each and every issue, but we will from time to time comment,
when we see a threat to human rights, when we believe it is construc-
tive to do so. Unqte.
5. Reflecting the high priority which has been assigned to human
rights, we will be developing new policies and seeking new opportu-
nities for the promotion of human rights in the world through the UN
Human Rights Commission and other UN organs dealing with human
rights questions, such as ECOSOC and the General Assembly. Our pol-
icies will be based upon the principle of equal rights for all peoples ev-
erywhere. We must avoid selective application of this principle in the
United Nations.
6. We are conscious of the Charter commitment of all United Na-
tions members to promote respect for basic human rights. While we
recognize the virtues of diversity and do not expect uniform acceptance
of our own standards, we cannot in any case ignore such basic trans-
gressions of internationally recognized human rights as genocide,
apartheid, torture, jailing of people for their beliefs, denials of fair treat-
ment to minorities and denials of the right to emigrate and the right to
worship, or denial of many other basic rights and freedoms. Basic civil
and political human rights reinforce and promote basic economic
rights and needs of peoples, and vice versa. Consequently, we will also
seek to provide leadership in the pursuit of measures to alleviate suf-
fering and deprivation due to lack of food and economic opportunity,
to environmental abuses and to deficient health care. And finally, we
will firmly and vigorously advocate the concept of majority rule in
places such as Southern Africa where that concept is not yet realized.
3 The President’s inaugural address is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I,
pp. 1–4. An excerpt of the President’s inaugural address is scheduled for publication in
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy.
4 For a transcript, see Department of State Bulletin, February 21, 1977, pp. 137–146.
