Human Rights
515
only when it also adopts democratic institutions.” This translation re-
veals a hidden premise in the argument—that if a government stops
category one violations,9 but has not restored political rights, then the
U.S. will not make any positive response to the improvements. In fact,
we can and do respond in positive ways. Our exact stance will be a
function of the degree to which the institutions of repression remain in-
tact, the history and traditions of the country, and other factors associ-
ated with the specific case. All of this illustrates why this tactical argu-
ment calls for continuing to make decisions on a case-by-case basis,
taking human rights into account, rather than adopting a general rule
against doing so. The point is that we need not, in every case of this
sort, adopt a general rule against taking human rights into account in
every case when category one violations have ceased.
With respect to export credits, there is no doubt about the validity
of S/P’s argument that denials on human rights grounds have aroused
some business opposition to the human rights policy, especially in the
wake of the Ex-Im disapproval of the Allis Chalmers loan. HA is both
aware and concerned that the human rights policy be implemented in a
way that does not erode crucial domestic political support for it. But we
need to recognize that positive action on the Allis Chalmers loan would
have aroused complaints from Congressional supporters of the human
rights policy. We need to continue to monitor this situation closely.
However, it is premature, at this point, to conclude that the domestic
political problem is so serious that we should totally eliminate the
human rights consideration from export credits for the minimum re-
quired by law.
When a decision is made to restrict an Ex-Im, OPIC, or CCC pro-
gram, we believe a full oral briefing of a high official of the company in
question should be conducted detailing the human rights violations
which have prompted our actions. We should take the initiative to ex-
plain our decision.
Internal Security Forces
The S/P memo argues for a general avoidance of supplying the in-
ternal security forces of governments which deny freedom of expres-
sion to their critics. The concept is correct; the narrow delineation of
only one relevant civil and political liberty is not. It conflicts as well
with PD–30 and implies that security forces of governments which
deny other democratic institutions beyond speech and press, should
not be generally excluded from receiving U.S. material and financial
support.
9 Reference is to the first of the three categories of human rights violations that
Vance set forth in his Law Day speech; see Document 39.
