610  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
personal power, has acquired certain characteristics which are import­
ant to note in gauging the threat posed to US security. Though they 
relate more to manner than to content, these characteristics taken 
together are revealing as to the development of Soviet policy in recent 
years, and as to the changing assumptions about the world situation 
which underlie it.
217. Most striking perhaps has been the fact that the conduct of 
Soviet foreign policy has shown itself more energetic, assertive, and 
rapid both in response and in seizing the initiative. In part, of course, 
this reflects the impress of Khrushchev’s personal style of leadership, 
in part also Soviet consciousness of the USSR’s growing military and 
economic power. But it also reflects the Soviet belief, first, that a more 
dynamic posture would be effective in the present world situation, and 
second, that the main struggle with the West lies at present in the world 
political arena, rather than at the military frontiers between the power 
blocs. Soviet policy has come to employ its propaganda weapons with 
greater aggressiveness and shrewdness, attempting to build the image 
of a “peace-­loving” yet formidable power, confident that by so doing it 
can effectively alter the alignment of political forces in the world.
218. Tactical and ideological flexibility has become another hall­
mark of current Soviet foreign policy. The Soviet leaders have shown 
themselves willing to entertain a variety of new policies without regard 
to positions taken up earlier and have accommodated ideology more 
and more to the changing requirements of policy. Thus in 1956, in 
support of the tactics of peaceful coexistence, they undertook a major 
revision in Communist doctrine: they found that war with capitalist 
states was no longer “fatally inevitable.” They also found it expedient 
to abandon Stalin’s rigid division of the world into the socialist camp 
and the capitalist encirclement; instead of assuming that all countries 
beyond the Bloc were tools of world imperialism, they came to discrim­
inate various shades of political alignment, even among allies of the US.
219. There has also been an extension of the scope of Soviet for­
eign policy. There are no longer any neglected areas in the world as 
there were in Stalin’s time. Since 1955 the Soviet leaders have taken 
major initiatives in the Middle East, and have become far more active 
in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. The Soviet press frequently tells its 
readers that no longer can any issue in the world be resolved without 
taking account of Soviet views. Doubtless there is an element of pro­
paganda bravado for domestic consumption in this, but it also reflects 
an increasing disposition to regard the USSR as now one of two great 
world powers, and therefore entitled to have global concerns. In situ­
ations of crisis everywhere there has been a tendency to put forward 
the Soviet view assertively and to refer to the factor of Soviet military 
power in a more blunt fashion.
