Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III and fiscal policy or through import quotas on oil) would be worse than the problem itself. POSSIBLE RESPONSES TO THE TRADE DEFICIT 1. Short Run. There is little we can do which will substantially reduce the trade deficit over the next year or two. Those policies which would work—such as import restrictions or cutting back on domestic economic growth—are inherently undesirable. 2. Recommendations. Treasury and Commerce are in basic agreement on the following set of responses to the trade deficit: (a) an energy program which will reduce oil imports;4 (b) encouraging the “strong” countries (Japan, West Germany, Switzerland, and The Netherlands) to expand their economies, thereby increasing their imports; (c) encouraging the “strong” countries to allow their exchange rates to rise, thereby reducing the price competitiveness of their exports (that kind of automatic adjustment is a basic purpose of floating exchange rates but it can be thwarted by government intervention in the exchange markets); (d) acting against specific cases of dumping or unfair foreign trade practices; (e) increasing official IMF resources to enable other countries to adjust to their oil problems at reasonable paces without forcing destabilizing cutbacks in their domestic economic policies; (f) pursuing the reduction of barriers to U.S. exports in the MTN and in direct consultation with countries like Japan; (g) increasing the export awareness of U.S. producers and increasing the promotion of U.S. exports; (h) adequate export financing (Commerce supports an expansion of the Export-Import Bank and DISC;5 Treasury, believing that U.S. goods have not lost their competitiveness and that export subsidization would both undermine our efforts to reduce these practices by others and provoke retaliation, would not go as far in expanding the ExIm Bank and thinks DISC contributes virtually nothing and should be eliminated);6 and (i) educating the U.S. public on the problem in order to reduce the possibility of ill-advised political reactions. 4 Carter wrote “good” in the margin adjacent to recommendations (a)–(g) and (i). 5 Carter underlined the abbreviation “DISC” and wrote “no” in the margin. 6 Carter wrote “I agree” in the margin adjacent to this section of the paragraph.
