842
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
2) In the elections for the 17th Majlis at Mahabad the Shah had the
Imam Jomeh of Tehran elected. This is particularly significant when
you remember that Mahabad is inhabited by Sunnites and the Imam
Jomeh is a Shia high priest. Nevertheless, since the Sunni believes that
the Sovereign is the supreme spiritual and secular authority, the Shah’s
decision was accepted by the Sunni Imam Jomeh of Kurdistan and suc-
cessfully carried out. Mossadeq attempted to stop this operation, but
without success. Thus, from the capital of Kurdistan a non-Kurd, who
is a Shia, was elected.
3) For a detailed case study of the elections at Mahabad for the 15th
Majlis, see Attachment B. This case study is an example of how all op-
position to the Shah’s desires is futile, but it also illustrates principles of
action which are utilized throughout Iran.
Within this category, the element of foreign intervention often
crops up. Examples of this are:
(1) Hossein Farhoodi was elected to the 15th Majlis from Dashti-
Meshon in the Bani Toref region, then controlled by the AIOC. The
Shah did not want Farhoodi, Qavam didn’t want him, the military
didn’t back him, he had no money with which to bribe anyone, yet all
other candidates withdrew in deference to the AIOC.
(2) When Soviet troops were stationed in Iran during the war, the
Russians succeeded in sending eight Tudeh deputies to the Majlis.
They were supposed to represent the areas occupied by the Soviets. In
order to achieve this the Soviet Embassy in Tehran came to an agree-
ment with Ali Soheily, then Premier. Original Soviet demands were
much higher than eight deputies but Soheily only allowed eight Tude-
hites to go the 14th Majlis.
(3) Seyyad Zia Tabatabai was elected to the 14th Majlis on orders
from the British Embassy. The Vice-Consul at Yazd was informed that
Seyyid Zia was the British choice and despite the fact that the Shah was
then against him, he was elected.
(4) [1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified]
It should also be noted here that in areas inhabited solely by tribes,
the Chieftains have control over elections. Cases in point are the
Qashqai region and Zanjan.
c. Non-tribal areas. This category is that which is neither subject to
military control nor to the type of influence exercised in big cities. It is
the area fairly close to the big cities but not in tribal districts. The most
important factors here are money and vested interests. Here, the gov-
ernor (Farmandar) is a key figure. In some cases, the government
allows the various candidates in a constituency to fight out their battle.
This happens when they find themselves confronted with several
equally non-objectionable candidates. Officials of the government ac-
