618 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI differ—­range, subceiling on ALCM heavy bombers, and tactical aircraft carrying conventional ALCMs. Burt: There is also the question whether converted heavy bombers can carry conventional ALCMs without counting in START limits. Akhromeyev: We agreed. The 100 converted bombers are outside the 1600. Burt: The counting rules do not pertain to an aircraft that carries non-­nuclear ALCMs and cannot otherwise be classified as a heavy bomber. For example, an F–16 carrying a non-­nuclear ALCM does not count as a heavy bomber. Akhromeyev: It will count as a heavy bomber. Burt: Even if it carries a non-­nuclear ALCM that is distinguishable from a nuclear ALCM? Akhromeyev: This is the third time we have addressed this subject. I know why you keep bringing it up. Any aircraft carrying an ALCM with range equal or in excess of 600 km will be considered a heavy bomber. Bartholomew: It is hard for us to believe an F–16 with a non-­ nuclear ALCM becomes a heavy bomber, and then all other F–16s do as well. This is not a separate issue outside the ALCM question. This is an ALCM fired into the package we are discussing. This is a major difference between us, and I will so report to my Secretary. Akhromeyev: Your observation is correct, but these papers fix the limits of our discussions. This is a central and important question, but it is not the subject for tonight. Burt wants to solve this question here. I understand why you keep asking this question. I will report we reached agreement on ALCM issues on an informal level, and still have two questions outstanding—­the 600 km range limit and the maximum limit on ALCM heavy bombers. Bartholomew: How is it that an issue that Secretary Baker raised with your minister is not part of our agenda. This morning the Secretary referred directly to this position of yours when he said “the Soviet side put forward proposals to the effect that . . . any aircraft with conventional ALCMs are considered heavy bombers and count against the START limits.” Kanter: Let me explain a puzzle I have. An F–16 is not counted in START. A future kind of non-­nuclear ALCM that is distinguishable does not count in START. But if this non-­nuclear ALCM that does not count in START is matched up with an aircraft that does not count in START, the result counts in START. This makes no sense. Akhromeyev: I could engage in detail on tactical aircraft with long-­range missiles. That is a big subject. I am prepared to address it tomorrow in the CFE context. In addition I will report to you tomorrow morning on our position on the 40%—­whether we wish future Soviet ALCM heavy bombers to have the 10 and 20 numbers, or the 8 and 12 numbers and the right to 40% more.
