818 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement seek agreement where it is essential to task at hand and leave our other differences for settlement when we reach that stage? B. Here is an example of what I regard as an area where agreement is essential at this stage. Purpose of proposed declaration is to facilitate peaceful settlement of our disputes by first renouncing use of force in regard to those disputes. Declaration can have this effect only if renun­ ciation of force is unconditionally binding with respect to all our dis­ putes. Neither of us should be able, following issuance of declaration, to claim that peaceful settlement portion applies to a certain dispute but renunciation of force portion does not apply to that same dispute. C. I hope you follow me thus far. Unless words of our declaration have this meaning for both of us, it seems to me that we can only talk in circles. D. However, with respect to this same part of declaration, there is an area where disagreement at this stage is not only permissible but inevitable. With respect to nature and origin of our disputes, you have your views, and I have mine. You have your views as to what kind of a settlement of each these disputes would acceptable. I have mine. Dif­ ferences as to merits of our respective views need not, however, prevent our agreement as to unconditional and binding nature of our commit­ ment not to use force against one another in support of these views. E. Similarly, with respect to last paragraph of my January 12 draft, which is identical with that of your December 1 draft, there are both an area where agreement is necessary and an area where disagreement at this stage is permissible. We must be in agreement in our determination without reservation to seek practical and feasible means of realizing common desire set forth in preceding clauses. We must be in agreement as to desirability of continuing these talks in search for such practical and feasible means. However, we do not at this stage have to determine just what the practical and feasible means are. Must we find what we are going to seek before we begin our search? F. Situation with respect to self-­defense clause is parallel. Should both be able to agree that in conformity with UN Charter and with international law, each of us is entitled to make clear in this declaration that we are not renouncing our right of self-­defense. It is only essential that we agree at this stage that neither of us is renouncing that right. However, here too, as with other clauses, a distinction can be drawn between area where agreement is necessary at this stage and area in which some disagreement is not only permissible but inevitable. G. You have your views as to places and circumstances in which US would, in case of necessity exercise that right. I have my views, which differ from yours, regarding places and circumstances in which your country has claimed exercise of that right. To attempt at this stage to iron out all such differences, past, present, and future, actual and
