740
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
emphasized that the presentation by Foreign Minister Andrei to the
Ambassador earlier in the previous week was the best statement of
the Romanian position and remained valid. He also observed that the
past several days had been marked by constructive calm; he expected
the Gdansk commemoration would not get out of hand and lead to a
pretext for intervention. He was reassured by DAS Barry’s report that
the Gdansk observances had been orderly and non-provocative. Bog-
dan refused to speculate on the effect of a possible Soviet intervention
and would not be drawn into a detailed discussion of the specifics of
a Romanian reaction in that event. Nor would he volunteer any sugges-
tion how he would like the United States to show its support for
Romania in the aftermath of a Soviet intervention in Poland; but he
stressed the need for close consultations prior to the US taking any
action affecting Romania, including the issuance of a statement of
support for Romania’s independent position.
5. Bogdan refused to comment on Foreign Minister Andrei’s trip
to Moscow prior to the Warsaw Pact summit meeting.4 He claimed
Andrei dealt solely with bilateral issues. He allowed that Romania’s
role in the Warsaw Pact summit had been a moderating one, “as it
always is”, but insisted that Romania had not arranged the meeting
or sought in any way to be a moderator between the Soviet Union and
Poland in the present crisis.
Middle East
6. DAS Barry asked the status of Romania’s “initiative” on the
Middle East to convene an international conference to carry forward
the accomplishments of the Camp David Agreements. Barry noted that
the GOR had decided in late summer to postpone taking any action
until after the US elections, and urged that the GOR still not initiate
any action until the new administration had an opportunity to review
the situation in the Middle East.
7. Bogdan claimed that the Romanian “initiative” had never been
more than an “idea” floated to see if the apparent impasse in the Camp
David process could be broken. At present Romania does not want to
undertake any moves in the Middle East because they could lead to
still more turmoil.
8. The Counselor expressed appreciation for Bogdan’s remarks,
noting that the Iraq/Iran war and the corollary arguments among the
Arab States which had grown out of it could contribute to a possible
breakup of larger political blocs in the area and have a general destabi-
4 In telegram 9846 from Bucharest, December 3, Aggrey reported that Andrei was
in Moscow on December 2 for four hours to meet with Brezhnev. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800576–0767)
