Chapter 2, January–June 1989  217
The interagency review of our positions in NSR-14 has focused 
on a review of specific negotiating positions. While that review raised 
some fundamental issues, it did not engage in a systematic reexamina-
tion of the principles and objectives underlying the U.S. position. That 
task is the focus of your NSC meetings on June 14 and June 15.
The NSC’s review the fundamental policy issues surrounding 
START and Defense & Space will help you make a number of decisions 
on specific negotiating positions that are required in order to complete 
instructions to our negotiator for the opening of talks. In addition, if 
you plan to make any significant changes in the current U.S. approach 
or propose new initiatives, this first round of negotiations during your 
Administration would be the ideal time to do so.
The following discussion reviews where we are in the START and 
Defense and Space negotiations, and examines the fundamental policy 
issues.
U.S. START Objectives
The Reagan Administration began the negotiating process by 
repudiating SALT II and seeking to chart a new course in strategic 
arms control. One of the arguments against SALT II was that it was not 
an arms reduction treaty. In effect, SALT set an upper bound on strate-
gic arms—­to levels above what each side had when the negotiations 
began. Thus, a fundamental tenant of START was that it would result in 
equitable and militarily significant reductions. The Reagan-Gorbachev 
agreement to seek “50 percent” reductions grew out of this objective. 
The theme of “deep reductions” was a hallmark of START during the 
Reagan administration.
A second objective was that START should constrain the militarily 
important characteristics of ballistic missiles. This led the U.S. to pro-
pose limits on ballistic missiles, their warheads and their throwweight, 
rather than the SALT II approach of limiting missile launchers (such 
as silos and submarine tubes). For similar reasons, we proposed limits 
on the inventory of missiles in storage, in addition to those deployed 
in launchers. We also proposed far more sweeping and intrusive veri-
fication measures (many of which became the basis for the verification 
provisions agreed in INF).
A third objective was to focus reductions on the most destabiliz-
ing systems: so-­called “fast-­flying” ballistic missiles, especially ICBMs 
which because of their large throwweight and high accuracy could 
each potentially destroy several hardened targets, such as the other 
side’s ICBM silos. (Deep cuts in ballistic missiles also would enhance 
the effectiveness of a future SDI system by constraining the size of the 
threat with which it had to cope.)
