[Here follows the second paragraph of draft article VII quoted infra.]
Fourth paragraph. As you are aware a number of countries, particularly
countries in Central Europe, have established systems of licenses and of
rations or quotas for imports and exports. In some of these countries it has
developed that in practice American commerce has been discriminated
against. In this situation the Department deems it wise to make express
provision in Article VII of the treaty in regard to the treatment which shall
be accorded to American commerce in respect of licenses, quotas and
contingents. In thus attempting to assure for American commerce treatment
which shall be not less favorable than that accorded to other nations in the
matter of licenses and of rations or quotas, this Government is not
proposing to insert in its Treaty with Austria a provision which will be
unique. The same provision will be proposed in treaties of friendship,
commerce and consular rights which the United States will undertake to
negotiate with other countries.
The Department understands that Austria is a party to the International
Convention Relating to the Simplification of Customs Formalities signed at
Geneva November 3, 1923,83 which contains stipulations in regard to
prohibitions, restrictions and licenses, and that the matter of prohibitions
and licenses is also dealt with in Article 9 of the Anglo-Austrian Treaty of
May 22, 1924.84 Under the most favored nation provisions of Article VII of
the draft under negotiation as interpreted by the Department, the obligations
of Austria under the two above mentioned agreements would be extended to
the United States. Accordingly, it is not desired by this Government to
incorporate in extenso in the Treaty of the United States with Austria the
stipulations of the convention and treaty referred to.
This Government desires, however, that you propose to the Austrian
Government that the following paragraph, which is an adaptation and
amplification of a provision contained in the second paragraph of
exchanges of notes signed by the United States with several countries
(Poland, February 10, 1925, Treaty Series No. 727; Finland, May 2, 1925,
Treaty Series No. 715; Estonia, March 2, 1925, Treaty Series No. 722;
Rumania, February 26, 1926, Treaty Series No. 733; Latvia, February 1,
1926, Treaty Series No. 740; Lithuania, December 23, 1925, Treaty Series
