362 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement give benefit of agreed announcement to imprisoned Americans made it meaningless as far as Americans in his country were concerned. 15. I said in view of his government’s continued delay in permitting any of 19 Americans to return, I was becoming more concerned over a statement which he made at our 17th meeting on September 23. He had said that agreed announcement concerned civilians, and not those he termed criminals or persons who had violated laws. He implied that persons in jail were not “civilians” and therefore not covered by pro­ visions of agreed announcement. He did not mention nor even hint at such an interpretation of agreed announcement during course of our discussions prior to September 10 and I wanted to make it clear that I could not accept any such construction of announcement. I asked him to confirm to me that agreed announcement applied to all American civilians whether or not they were in his jails. 16. I said that at our last meeting also he had referred to my pro­ posal, made during course of our discussions, that he specify a defi­ nite period of time within which all Americans in his country would be allowed to leave. As he had pointed out, he refused to specify any length of time. I had expressed to him a number of times my govern­ ment’s dissatisfaction with his government’s refusal to accede to this reasonable proposal. Nevertheless, in interest of advancing these talks and on basis of his assurances that imprisoned Americans would be released expeditiously, my government did consent to issuance of the agreed announcement, even in absence of a specific time limit for release of Americans. His remarks at last meeting made it appear he interpreted my government’s concession in not insisting on a definite time limit as constituting agreement to indefinite delay by his govern­ ment in releasing Americans. I emphatically rejected any such inter­ pretation and stated clearly and unequivocally that my government considered that agreed announcement provided for expeditious depar­ ture from his country of all Americans who desired to return to United States, including those Americans still imprisoned. 17. I said he had also repeated several times at our last meeting that only improved relations between our two countries could enable his government to take “more lenient” attitude toward Americans in prison. It was difficult for us not to interpret this as an intent by his gov­ ernment to disregard explicit terms of our announcement and to hold these human beings as hostages for political advantage. 18. I said my government had issued agreed announcement in good faith, promptly and energetically began to implement it and fully expected that his government would do same. My government attached no political conditions to its carrying out of terms announce­ ment and does not intend to do so. Chinese were permitted to leave United States freely even before issuance of agreed announcement and
