Chile 247 CH–15. Memorandum of a Conversation1  Santiago, January 20, 1959 SUBJECT Economic Program of the Alessandri Administration and Problems Which It Faces PARTICIPANTS Señor Roberto Vergara, Minister of Finance, Economy and Mines Señor Eduardo Figueroa, Chief Assistant to the Minister of Finance Ambassador Walter Muller, the new Ambassador to the United States Ambassador Howe, U.S. Embassy Mr. William Krieg, U.S. Embassy Mr. Raford Herbert, U.S. Embassy Mr. Robert Eakens, U.S. Embassy At a luncheon meeting today, various aspects of the Alessandri Administration’s economic program and the problems it faces, both with International Monetary Fund and from a domestic political standpoint, were discussed at some length. Vergara came to the luncheon straight from the Congress where he had been in constant hearings for several days on the Government’s recently submitted wage and economic and financial legislation. He was frankly discouraged at being caught on the one hand between the attitude of the Congress, which already had weakened the Administration’s program with larger wage adjustments than had been proposed, and on the other by the tighter attitude of the Fund, as reported by Figueroa. Vergara nevertheless felt that in spite of the pressures in Congress the program would go through without being weakened too much, either as a result of restoration by the Senate or use by the President of his veto. At the same time the attitude of Congress made it clear that the program proposed by the Administration was the most that could be hoped for. Figueroa had gone to Buenos Aires on Friday, January 16, for a discussion with representatives of the International Monetary Fund the following day. Costanzo was tied up and was not available but Figueroa has a 9½ hour discussion with Edgar Jones and Eugenio Bertens. [text not declassified] According to Figueroa, the discussion was very discouraging. Figueroa felt the attitude of the Fund had changed greatly, and had 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 398.13/1–2359. Confidential; Limit Distribution. No drafting information appeared on the source text. The memorandum of conversation was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of despatch 732 from Santiago, January 23, 1959, not printed.
