274
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
tion. That message will be prepared for Presidential review today, in
anticipation of its being sent tomorrow. State has prepared a matrix
showing our present understanding of what the allies are prepared to
do. A copy is attached.3 (S)
State also prepared a paper on the steps available to us in invoking
Chapter VII sanctions through the UN. A copy is attached.4 The SCC
was briefed on the President’s interest in taking the necessary prepara-
tions to move on Chapter VII if and when a decision is made and the
President’s preference for seeking maximum sanctions. The SCC did
not believe that seeking Chapter VII sanctions would provide an excuse
for delay of action by the allies since they already seem prepared to
proceed with limited voluntary steps but will be reluctant to go beyond
those measures in any event without Chapter VII authorization. We
will wish to consult in advance with the Soviets5 since a veto could
have serious implications for SALT, as well as preventing sanctions.
We should seek Soviet abstention, if support is not possible. Mr. Cutler
suggested that we move immediately to get a finding by the SC on
Article 396 that the Iranian situation constitutes a threat to the peace,
since the Soviets may be willing to support that. State pointed out that
a call for a finding under Article 39 is, in effect, a call for sanction and
should not be undertaken until we are prepared to follow through
with the entire program.7 (S)
The SCC agreed that it would be useful to wait for several days8
before invoking Chapter VII in order to see the outcome of allied
decisions on voluntary steps, effects of the ICJ ruling, reaction to the
Shah’s departure, and the results of consultations between the new
Iranian Ambassador to the UN, Mansour Farhang, with the Secretary
General. In order to sustain momentum, it would probably be useful
to be prepared to proceed with Chapter VII on about Thursday or
Friday.9 Once the decision is made, the SCC recommended seeking
steps 1 and 2 of the State paper (denial of military sales and credits,
interruption of normal air, rail, post and telecommunications links, and
a selective embargo except for humanitarian items), but stopping short
3 The undated matrix, “Financial Actions Allies are Willing to Take (as of December
14, 1979),” is attached but not printed.
4 Not attached, but see footnote 3, Document 87.
5 Carter underlined the word “consult” and the phrase “with the Soviets” and wrote
in the margin: “We’ll go ahead in any case.”
6 See footnote 3, Document 87.
7 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “I prefer 39 & 7 together, not sequentially.”
8 Carter underlined the word “several” and wrote in the right margin “not too long.”
9 Carter underlined the word “Thursday” [December 20] and wrote in the left
margin: “Thurs ok.”
