334 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Our statements could emphasize themes of strength and the implicit advantages of release, along the following lines: —The holding of hostages is the central issue; there cannot be a resolution of other issues without their release. —This is far more than an issue between the United States and Iran. A principle of deep concern to every nation is involved. But the United States reserves the legal right, and indeed responsibility, to take necessary unilateral actions in defense of its citizens and international principles. —The United States is prepared to seek a resolution of all issues between it and Iran, once the hostages are released. —With the hostages’ release, the way will be clear for Iran to present simultaneously its grievances in any appropriate international forum. —The restraint of any nation cannot be limitless when its people are held captive and humiliated. The U.S. will continue pressures against Iran and continue to expect international support for those pressures until the hostages are released. —The United States does not exclude restoring good relations with Iran. Our relations with Iran will inevitably suffer from the events that have taken place. But we can try to build a better future, once the hostages are released. CONCLUSION Strictly in terms of the hostage situation, the best policy might be one of very slowly escalating pressures while events within Iran demonstrated to Khomeini that the hostage situation diverts from rather than assists the process of consolidating his revolution. But we do not have that kind of time. The effect of Iran on other issues including SALT; the danger that the international community could get used to the idea of the hostages’ being held there; the onset of the primary season here; and the well-being of the hostages . . . all argue for trying to resolve the situation more quickly. I therefore believe we should move relatively soon after Security Council action to further pressures, perhaps including: —Advising Agah to look for a protecting power (now); —Seeking to send an emissary to Iraq (now); —Studying now a selective food embargo (for use in ten days to two weeks); and —Intensifying efforts (now) to convey the message that the revolution is being weakened. This should be coupled with emphasis on the dangers to Islam of the Russian action in Afghanistan. I also believe that we should convey now the kind of message outlined above. It might not work. Rational calculations are difficult
