3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
188
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
1,000 armed Lebanese soldiers in the southern area (Dobrynin: Do they
have that many? The Secretary: Yes, they do now, and they hope to
build this up to 1,400); (4) Those Palestinians who entered Lebanon
since 1969 would be transferred to Syria. Boutros believed the Syrians,
Palestinians and the Lebanese government were close to agreement in
principle along these lines, but did not yet have a definite agreement.
Dobrynin said he would keep us informed on the results of the
current Arafat visit to Moscow.
2. China Trip. In reporting on his trip to China,5 the Secretary said
that it had been particularly interesting to arrive following the Party
Congress. He observed that a new sense of self-confidence could be felt,
following the several trying years that had preceded it. This was now
behind them, and the leaders appeared to be of one mind on how to at-
tack the problems of the future, to which they looked forward with op-
timism, in the light of their support from the country. One could feel
even in the street impressions a sense of a more open situation. In a
pragmatic and less ideological spirit, the leaders will concentrate on in-
ternal goals in the next decade or so, rather than on foreign policy.
The Secretary reported that he had discussed with the Chinese
some international issues, including the recovery of confidence in the
United States; a region-by-region review, beginning with Asia (largely
on Japan and Korea), the Middle East (where the Chinese knowledge
had been sketchy, and some misunderstandings were dispelled), polit-
ical, economic and security aspects of Europe (where Chinese informa-
tion also appeared to be fragmented), Africa (particularly Namibia and
Rhodesia, describing our joint efforts with the British, and our shift to
greater cooperation with the Africans—the Chinese asked many ques-
tions and showed special interest in the subject).
Among non-regional issues, the Secretary reported he had de-
scribed US efforts to widen normal relations with as many countries as
possible, including North Vietnam, Cuba, etc. On the issue of nuclear
proliferation, he said, the Chinese took the same position they had
taken during his previous visit two years ago. He had spoken also of
the human rights issue and other global aspects of US policy.
Among bilateral issues, the Secretary said he had discussed nor-
malization of relations, trade, and cultural relations, claim assets, etc.
No decisions were made on the matter of normalization, he reported,
but the discussion was good and contributed to a better understanding
of each other’s position. It was agreed to continue our consultations in
the future on this subject.
5 August 20–26; for memoranda of conversations from these meetings, see Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIII, China, Documents 47–51.
