1957 1327 by “state of relations” and although I have not the slightest doubt that they would have considered our permitting correspondents to travel to mainland China as a step toward “improvement of relations” I cannot point to any specific statement that says this. However, I have always felt that they would consider travel of correspondents as only one fac­ tor in “improving relations” sufficiently to release all of the Americans. That is, I have never felt that they had in mind releasing all of the Americans in exchange for the travel of correspondents, although, as you know, I felt it might produce the release of a few. I have not gone back over all my messages in this regard, but I regret if I misled you or the Secretary in any way on this. While there was nothing new in today’s meeting I think that you will find much of it very interesting reading. (Incidentally I am sending it by cable as there is no courier from here until Sunday which would mean almost a week until you received it.) You will see that he more thoroughly developed the theme of U.S. “hostility”, pressure, etc. than he ever has in the past. Throughout his presentation I could not but help think of Chou’s remark to [text not declassified] that the release of the Americans would be regarded as a confession of weakness. I think that that remark and Wang’s expansion on it today is the real key to their attitude. You know that I have long felt, and I continue to feel, that whatever other very useful and impor­ tant purposes it may serve, the building up the issue of the release in fact works in the opposite direction. However, we are now so far down this road that I see no choice but to continue what we are doing. They have, of course, behaved very stupidly. The Agreed Announcement gave them a perfect back-drop against which to release them and they would, in fact, have gained enormously if they had done so. I am amazed that they did not have the intelligence to see it. It only goes to prove that they are not “eight feet tall”. However, they have now got themselves in such a box on this that they could not do so even if they desired. I greatly appreciated Walter having spoken to the Secretary and having obtained a re-confirmation of his desires. I am, of course, will­ ing to go on as long as it is thought to be useful. I just wanted to make sure that this was the case. I do well see and appreciate the objectives, and will try to carry them out the best I can. Incidentally, I have just realized that the material on missing Air Force personnel forwarded us in June has not, at least technically, been declassified. Paragraph 2 of Deptel 736 declassified the material sent me with your letter of December 7. However, as the Air Force material had been sent to us previously this does not cover that. Will you con­ firm to me whether I can also consider it declassified so that I can use it as occasion arises.
