46  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Paragraph and Subject
Primary Responsibility
20—Continuity of Government
ODM in collaboration with all 
participating agencies
21—Protection and Dispersal of 
Federal Facilities
ODM in collaboration with all 
participating agencies
22—Continuity of Industry
ODM
23—Stockpiling of Civilian 
Survival Items
ODM in collaboration with 
FCDA
24–27—Civil Defense
FCDA
STATEMENT
of
U.S. POLICY ON CONTINENTAL DEFENSE
SCOPE
1. This statement of policy on “continental defense” does not 
encompass all elements of U.S. or allied strength contributing to the 
defense of North America, but is limited as follows:
a. Only those U.S. policies are included which are essentially 
defensive in nature, i.e., which contribute directly to the defense of the 
North American Continent and to the protection of that element of our 
retaliatory capability based on the North American Continent.
b. This statement of policy does not include programs. The omis­
sion from this statement of programs does not of itself cancel or change 
any program set forth in NSC 5408. However, the responsible agencies 
should review such programs in the light of this policy statement to 
determine whether such programs are currently valid or should be can­
celled or changed.
RELATIVE EMPHASIS
2. The defense of the United States is an integrated complex of 
offensive and defensive elements and of military and non-­military 
measures. Each of these has its proper role in deterring an attack or in 
the defense of the United States should an attack occur. Predominant 
emphasis should continue to be placed upon measures to strengthen 
our effective nuclear retaliatory power as a deterrent and to improve 
our active defenses, as compared with—­but not to the exclusion of—­
passive defense measures. Particular emphasis should be accorded 
those active and passive defense measures essential to the protec­
tion of the U.S. capability for prompt nuclear retaliation. An effective 
North American continental defense system will constitute one of 
the key deterrents to an attack on the North American Continent.
