World Hunger and Food Policy
671
Thus, world hunger is an explosive humanitarian and political
problem, causing either directly or indirectly millions of deaths per
year. In periods of widespread poor harvests and with no coordinated
system of world food reserves to be drawn upon in times of need, cata-
strophic famines are occurring. Even worse, the distribution of avail-
able food is so poor that annually millions starve or are chronically
malnourished. It is estimated that one million people died of hunger in
India in 1972, and the situation that year was worse in Bangladesh.2 In
this setting, the United States’ position as the world’s largest food ex-
porter, as the largest donor in international food and agricultural assist-
ance is highly visible and extremely vulnerable. Serious thought and
strong leadership will be necessary to achieve humanitarian goals
while at the same time avoiding foreign and domestic crises.
Human Rights Discussion:
We have stressed the need for cooperation and achievement of
self-reliance in health care with developing nations. We should also, as
an aspect of our overall human needs strategy, stress the need for
achievement of self-reliance in food production and nutrition. We
might consider the hunger issue as the touchstone of a major thrust in
our foreign policy, and one in which we stress meeting human needs
through increasing self-reliance in food production and nutrition, care-
fully integrated with health care and population policies. This thrust
will complement our human rights policy, and establish a more firm
foundation for it. The human right to food, similar to the right to health
care, is fundamental. We cannot continue to focus on the deprivation of
rights for thousands of political prisoners and relegate to back pages
the unnecessary deaths of millions.
While our affirmations regarding world political rights may be oc-
casionally elusive in terms of implementation, our specific actions in
terms of social rights can be very tangible and concrete.3 We can estab-
lish broad but practical and measurable human needs goals, e.g., pro-
grams of food production and basic nutrition, development of low-cost
health delivery systems, adequate maternal and child health programs,
rural sanitary water supply development, humanitarian food trade
policies, etc. Importantly, this must be done on a government-wide
basis to ensure consistency and comprehensiveness. Implementation
would then follow through the development of a comprehensive global
plan, including goals for the basic human needs of life: adequate and
quality food for everyone, basic health care, education, jobs.
2 Documentation concerning the U.S. response to the 1972 South Asian food crisis is
in Foreign Relations 1969–1976, volume E–7, Documents on South Asia, 1969–1972.
3 Indeed, achievement of worldwide goals in food production will be more readily
understood and felt by the average American. [Footnote in the original.]
