Afghanistan The President said it was important to develop a definition, for ourselves and for our Allies, of a neutralist Afghanistan and try to build world support for it along with a concomitant condemnation of the Soviet military occupation. Such a concept would facilitate enlisting European support for our efforts against the Soviet invasion.2 On the issue of the Europeans, the President thought that now that we have our COCOM proposals, we have an opportunity to test their intentions. The French probably will not accept tighter COCOM rules, but we can put pressure on them as well. The only bright spot, said the President, is our effort to boycott the Olympics. That seems to be gaining momentum every day. As far as the USSR is concerned, the President said that he had been toying with the idea of a frank and tough letter to Brezhnev. It would make clear that there would be no resumption of normal trading and commerce so long as the Soviets are invading Afghanistan. At the same time, the letter would make clear that we are prepared to take steps to improve our relationship if the Soviets are prepared to have a neutral Afghanistan. In the meantime, they must realize that we will take the steps necessary to protect our security, particularly since their actions threaten detente. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.] The Secretary of State said he was clear in his own mind what we want on Afghanistan neutrality, but he did not know whether the 2 In a memorandum to Brzezinski, March 15, in preparation for the NSC meeting, Brement concluded: “The next nine months are going to be the most critical test we have faced with the Soviets since the Korean war.” Brement based this analysis on the assumption that the Soviet leadership, despite its surprise at the initial, vigorously negative worldwide response to the intervention in Afghanistan, would likely dig in its troops there and build both international and political acceptance for the intervention as well as tactical gains in Afghanistan. Brement noted that since January a series of missteps in U.S. policy had turned the tide in the Soviets’ favor. These included: a split between the United States and its European allies over how to respond to the crisis in Afghanistan; ongoing Pakistani susceptibility to Soviet intimidation; and numerous shortcomings in the U.S. ability to punish the USSR with the Olympic boycott and the grain and technology transfer embargoes. To mitigate these problems, Brement counseled that the United States must strengthen Afghan resistance forces with Chinese and Pakistani help; increase pressure on the European allies for a united front; challenge Soviet adventurism elsewhere through covert means; increase the U.S. military presence worldwide; and explore alternative channels for high-level U.S.-Soviet communication. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 1,
