1979  621
135.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 15, 1979
SUBJECT
U.S. Strategic Policy
During the coming months, several basic strategic issues will come 
to you for decision. To prepare the best possible perspective and options 
for your consideration, this month we will have had three PRC meet-
ings on M–X basing and a PRC to review the Consolidated Guidance.2 
By the first week in June, I believe we will be ready for an NSC meeting 
to look at these problems and other imminent strategic decisions in a 
comprehensive manner. The subject of the proposed meeting will be 
“U.S. Strategic Arms Policy and U.S.-Soviet Relations.”
I would propose to begin such a meeting with an overview, briefly 
summarizing CNA–78 and the Consolidated Guidance and reviewing 
the different perspectives of State and Defense. I would propose that 
next we focus (in the context of the three basic strategic problems we 
face: deterrence, crisis bargaining and war management) on the five 
areas in which your decisions are required: M–X basing, TNF, C3I, tar-
getting and a new strategic document. I would propose to concentrate 
particularly on M–X basing and TNF because it will be important to 
have your preliminary decisions on these two issues prior to your 
meeting with Schmidt and the U.S.–USSR Summit.
While we can arrange a follow-­up session on C3I, targetting and a 
new strategic document, we need to consider the latter very carefully 
because both the subject and the timing of its completion will be politi-
cally sensitive. Any attempt to create a new strategic document updat-
ing PD–18 and to provide the direction to American strategic policy 
that NSC–683 did in the early 1950’s will have to be considered very 
carefully and cautiously.4
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency 
File, Box 7, Defense Department: 5–7/79. Top Secret; Sensitive. A handwritten “C” at the 
upper right corner of the memorandum indicates that Carter saw it.
2 For the May 4, May 10, and May 25 PRC meetings on M–X basing, see Docu-
ments 130, 133, and 138. For the May 14 PRC meeting on the Consolidated Guidance, see 
­Document 134.
3 See Foreign Relations, 1950, vol. I, National Security Affairs; Foreign Economic 
­Policy, p. 234.
4 Carter wrote below this paragraph: “I’ll do this after you, Harold and Cy arrange 
for confidentiality.”
