1262
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
380.
Memorandum From the President’s Special Representative
for Middle East Peace Negotiations (Linowitz) to
President Carter1
Washington, June 6, 1980
SUBJECT
Status of Egypt-Israel Autonomy Negotiations
I thought you might want to have this very brief report on where
things stand now with reference to the effort to get the autonomy talks
started again and how we have been going about it.
Ever since the visit of Mubarak,2 I have been working with the Is-
raelis and the Egyptians endeavoring to evolve a satisfactory formula
which might cover the concern expressed by the Egyptians with refer-
ence to the Jerusalem Bill3 in the Knesset. I tried out several alternate
approaches with the Israelis after first checking with Roy Atherton to
get some assurance that the Egyptians would be agreeable to them.
As you know, the Israelis feel that they have not misbehaved in
any way in connection with the Jerusalem Bill, and are unwilling to
offer any assurances as to what the Government might or might not do
if the Bill were to issue from the committee to which it has been re-
ferred. The most the Government of Israel is willing to say is that it will
not “interfere” with the legislative process of the Knesset in connection
with this Bill. This obviously will not satisfy the Egyptians, as I have
forcefully indicated to the Israelis.
The central fact is that Jerusalem is such a politically sensitive and
explosive issue and, therefore, Begin and his colleagues are unwilling
to say anything about what they might or might not do if a Jerusalem
Bill were to appear on the floor of the Knesset. As you will remember,
all but very few members of the Knesset voted to refer Geula Cohen’s
Jerusalem Bill to committee when it was offered by her.
This morning I thought we had resolved the issue fairly well.4 The
plan was for me to write a letter to General Ali indicating that the Is-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 19, Egypt: 6/80. Secret; Nodis. Copies of the memorandum were sent to Muskie
and Brzezinski. The memorandum was forwarded to Carter under a June 6 covering
memorandum from Brzezinski. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 377.
3 See Document 371.
4 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter held a foreign policy breakfast
meeting from 7:35 a.m. to 9:25 a.m. on June 6, attended by Mondale, Muskie, Brown,
Donovan, Cutler, Jordan, and Brzezinski. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No
memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found. In the published version
