1300  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
but I cannot in all honesty say anything else. David and I both feel very 
much the same on this. I of course base myself primarily on our evident 
inability to hold the line and to obtain public support or support from 
the courts.
In my telegram I also answered your query in regard to the press 
release of May 1, 1952. In this connection we were not at the time pre­
venting travel to Communist China on the grounds of their unjust 
imprisonment of American citizens but on the more general grounds 
of the Korean hostilities which made such travel unthinkable. We, of 
course, had American citizens unjustly imprisoned at the time in other 
Communist countries and while I recall that that was a factor in restrict­
ing Americans traveling to those areas, I do not believe that we have in 
any case other than China made it the sole factor. As a matter of fact 
while the Otis case was a factor in including Czechoslovakia in the ban 
we never entirely prevented all travel to Czechoslovakia, particularly of 
newspaper correspondents, and removed the restriction with regard to 
Czechoslovakia even though we had and still have at least one American 
unjustly in prison there.
I am surprised that you did not get word of my leaving Prague on 
January 8. I sent an OM well before Christmas confirming the plans 
I had mentioned in my previous letter to you. I also sent a telegram 
on the day I left. I fortunately received your letter of January 4 just 
before leaving and sent a reply by open air-­mail from Nuernberg on 
January 8 which you should have received well before your letter of 
January 14. In that I had said that I was agreeable to Dave and Helenka 
going back after the next meeting if it looked as if things were simply 
going to continue to drag along, subject, of course, to obtaining an ade­
quate replacement for Dave. I said that I was delighted at the prospect 
of having Ed Martin and thought that his commuting here would be 
entirely practical.
I do not understand your reference to having sent me material on 
the Nehru conversations as I have received nothing except background 
papers prepared in FE. Perhaps you have sent something to Prague 
which I missed.
I have to close this hurriedly in order to make the pouch.
Regards to all
Sincerely,
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
P.S. [text not declassified]
