486 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement would be dangerous from the point of view of the U.S. Our objective in the Dominican Republic, however, is difficult of attainment because moderate elements who have opposed Trujillo are widely dispersed so that the only active anti-Trujillo groups in the area at the present time are either Communist or Communist-­infiltrated. There are some elements of hope in the professional, business and academic groups. Our actions in the months ahead will be designed to coalesce these groups. Mr. Merchant then read a statement that he characterized as internal policy guidelines: (1) in the event Trujillo survives, maintain present official contacts with the Dominican Republic and expand our contacts with moderate elements in the country prepared to establish a successor government; (2) if an attempt is made to bring a Trujillo clique into power upon the disappearance of Trujillo, recognize that such an arrangement has little chance of achieving political stability; (3) in the event of a seizure of power by moderate Dominican elements, extend prompt recognition and support to the new government; (4) in the event a pro-Castro government succeeds Trujillo, withhold U.S. recognition if any hope exists for a counter-­move against such a government, but if no such hope exists recognize the new government in concert with other Latin American republics. Mr. Rubottom said there had been a surprising coalescence in the Dominican Republic of moderate elements friendly to the U.S. and convinced that a move against Trujillo must be made soon. Trujillo has been trying to consolidate his position and has split with his son, a development which may be the prelude to further repressive moves. Mr. Stans4 asked whether there was not a military assistance program of $1.6 million for the Dominican Republic. Mr. Rubottom said that actually less than $400,000 worth of equipment had been sent under this program. Any new military assistance program would be confined to spare parts. The Vice President5 said that bad as the situation was in the Dominican Republic, he felt the situation in Haiti was even worse. It seemed to him that the situation in Africa was similar to the situation in Haiti. Mr. Dulles said the situation in Africa was worse than in Haiti. The National Security Council: Noted and discussed the subject in the light of an oral presentation by the Department of State.6 4 Maurice H. Stans, Director, Bureau of the Budget. 5 Richard M. Nixon. 6 This paragraph constitutes NSC Action 2178.
