Human Rights standing its relationship to the government) the HRF should be able to speak with a voice independent from, and in some cases more credible than, the U.S. government. —Keep international attention focused on human rights issues. The objective here is to generate and sustain a worldwide constituency for human rights. Activities might include: —Supporting national and international conferences on human rights issues. —Awarding an annual human rights prize, comparable to the Nobel, for outstanding contributions to human rights anywhere in the world. —Serving as a central clearing house for information on human rights and on sources of assistance to victims of human rights violations. —Serving as an “echo-chamber” to amplify the voices of individuals and numerous small groups. —Issuing an annual report on trends and conditions of human rights globally, as well as periodic reports on particularly troubling violators of human rights. 3. Structure of an HRF A good model for the HRF is the Inter-American Foundation, a quasi-governmental organization that receives its money from Congress but has very loose ties with the U.S. government and makes its own policies. The Foundation is directed by a seven member board, appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate. The board includes four members from the private sector and three ex officio representatives of the Executive Branch. This arrangement has assured functional autonomy for the Foundation, while preserving a minimum degree of coordination with the U.S. government foreign policy agencies. Details of the composition of the Board of the HRF can be worked out in consultation with Congress. The important point is that the legislation can be written to reflect whatever degree of linkage is desired between the HRF and the government. 4. Objections to an HRF In his evaluation, the Vice President raises two objections to this proposal.5 First, he is concerned that “such a foundation might do no more than duplicate the work of such organizations as Freedom House and Amnesty International.” After extensive consultations, I am satisfied that no one sees more clearly than do these organizations, their own limitations and the great needs left unfilled. Even if the HRF were to do no more than increase the funds available to NGOs, it would have performed a valuable service. However, as the list of ideas outlined in 5 See Document 97.
