German Democratic Republic 397 about the regulations. A serious, professional correspondent who acts in the spirit of the Final Act to promote understanding, peace and friendship, has received in the past and will receive in the future all necessary support. Dr. Nier said that two questions had been asked that could not be discussed. He had in mind what had been said about Havemann, Heym and education. These were matters fully within the internal competence of the GDR. They involved domestic laws. The GDR did not concede anyone else the right to say anything about them. The GDR was not in agreement with much that happened in other countries. To the extent that those events were based on internal legislation, however, the GDR would not interfere. If someone violates laws in a country, this can not be discussed by other countries. The GDR, for example, was concerned that in some countries children do not enjoy the full right to education, vocational training, and adequate career opportunities. The GDR regretted this deprivation of young people’s rights, but such a matter could not be the subject for government to government relations. The GDR educational system enjoys international esteem. It reflects high standards of academic excellence and is also marked by a spirit of peace, humanism and understanding that flows from the state’s general policy. Ms. Derian said she wished to ask a question of clarification. She believed Dr. Nier might have answered one of her questions obliquely, but she wished to be certain she understood. Was he saying that GDR children are taught to have a high regard for peace and for people of other countries and that reports we have that children are taught an attitude of hostility are incorrect? Dr. Nier said that if anyone alleges that GDR children are taught hatred for children in Western countries, it is a defamation and a slander of the GDR’s policy. The GDR’s basic educational principle is the solidarity of youth everywhere in the world, be it Vietnam, Africa or elsewhere. Such reports, from wherever they come, are, simply put, a slander. He asked to be excused for his frank response. Ms. Derian asked whether the GDR distinguished between what children are taught about other children and what they may be taught in a military context. Dr. Nier responded that there is simply no teaching of hostility. All GDR education is based on love for peace, solidarity, friendship, and understanding among peoples. Of course the GDR also teaches that peace must be defended and secured. If there are classes in this context in which young people are acquainted with national defense, this has nothing to do with reports of the sort Ms. Derian had mentioned. Dr. Nier said he would reiterate again, however, that these were matters of internal competence. Sovereign states should base their relations on matters that pertain to bilateral affairs in accordance with principles contained in documents like the Final Act and the UN
