December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
727
commitment. We are not asking for any infringement of Egyptian
sovereignty.
Minister Modai: The Prime Minister has covered our views. This is
the basic situation.
Secretary Vance: Egypt has made it clear that they will not sell a
fixed amount of oil to anyone. They do not enter into multi-year con-
tracts, only the “evergreen” type. Therefore, there are two elements of
the Israeli proposal which Egypt has refused. I have discussed this be-
fore with you. They won’t change their position. I have argued with
them and they stick to their position. You have posed two conditions
that can’t be met.
President Carter: If there are interruptions, we can guarantee the
supply.
Minister Sharon: On oil, we should be thinking of this in the context
of real peace. It is hard for us to accept that we have to get oil via the
United States. This is not an issue between the United States and Israel.
We are going toward true peace. We don’t accept any restrictions on
selling oil to Israel.
There should be no liaison officers or mission in Gaza. There is a
third point that worries me. We agreed that you should be a full partici-
pant, but I don’t see any situation where you would become a mediator
between the Palestinian Arabs and the Government of Israel. This is
impossible.
You spoke of free passage from al-Arish to Gaza. But this should
be mutual. We are ready when we sign the normalization of relations.
Then we can go freely to Egypt. It should be entirely mutual.
On settlements, you said nothing. But you raised a question that
worries you. There should not be any misunderstanding about the fu-
ture. You should take it for granted that we will settle Jews in Gaza, es-
pecially the southern part. We need a barrier between the 400,000 Pales-
tinians in Gaza and the 40 million Arabs in Egypt. We will not stop our
settlement plans in the Jordan Valley, in the Golan, or in Gaza. But we
will do our best to avoid heavily populated areas. We will only settle in
areas that are crucial for our security.
President Carter: I understand your position and you know ours.
Minister Tamir: We have Annex 3 which could cover oil. There
should be a removal of all of the discriminatory barrier upon comple-
tion of the interim withdrawal. Your proposal is to get Egyptian oil
under the cover of the United States.
President Carter: Egypt will sell oil to Israel on a competitive basis,
or we will guarantee your supply. What Israel is demanding is con-
trary to all international law contracts. You are asking for a special
relationship.
