recognition will have to be considered according to those circumstances. However, under the circumstances now existing and which will exist while we continue to offer a basis for the North China militarists to believe that semiautomatic recognition will be accorded by us to any group occupying Peking by force, nothing more in the way of a conservative or stabilizing force can be expected by us from this Central Administration. From it we will never get again any recognition of our rights, nor will we get any willingness to deal in a spirit of good will with us, or of good faith. It will continue, on the contrary, to be an irresponsible agency, always currying popular favor, as far as it dares, by undermining the rights of foreign nationals and the position of foreign powers. It is as though we had taken to the Central Government as a life raft in the political shipwreck of the Chinese Republic; and that raft, its buoyancy lost now, is no longer keeping us afloat. To keep it afloat we are swimming, but despite this, it must soon drag us down. 6. In the eyes of the country, the Central Administration represents less in status than it has ever before. It formerly commanded throughout the country some slight degree of prestige and respect at least … since it was the only formulation politically of the feeling of cultural and racial unity found among the Chinese people. It has been brought into shame and derision by the events of the last six months, becoming in the hands of the Northern militarists a neglected toy. No serious effort was made for several weeks by Wu Pei-fu and Chang Tso-lin to reconstruct a cabinet after the flight of Tuan. Then for another series of weeks, when at Wu’s instance W. W. Yen consented to act as Premier, Yen was left without the support of a single colleague. The body functioning now was constituted only after a cynical announcement was made by Wu that serious consideration must be given to the matter of a government as the only means for getting from the powers the additional revenues to be made available by the Conference. Even the Cabinet members (which I may say include several of my friends) make little effort to conceal their attitude that it is a farce. Two of them who are
