793.00/73: Telegram [Document 643] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State [Paraphrase] PEKING, July 5, 1925—1 p.m. [Received 2:45 p.m.] 263. 1. Mr. Yoshizawa, the Japanese Minister, called upon me and stated that his Government had instructed him to discuss informally with the British Chargé and myself the question of more complete cooperation between the representatives of Great Britain, Japan, and the United States in order to expedite settlement of the Shanghai affair. He said that his Government thought that it would be of great benefit if the three of us could be the force to lead the Heads of Legation to an early settlement of this matter. Yoshizawa added that he had delayed complying with his instructions so that he could consider his own opinion that from a practical standpoint it might be better to include our French and Italian colleagues in any such cooperation. He said that the French Minister had shown himself always willing to cooperate, that the Italian Minister as senior minister was in a practical sense the leader of the Heads of Legation, and that there had been and continued to be excellent cooperation and understanding between the representatives of France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, and the United States. 2. Yoshizawa had called upon Mr. Palairet, the British Chargé, before calling upon me and had discussed the matter with him. Mr. Palairet had suggested that it might be advisable to include all the Washington Conference powers in any such proposed cooperation as the Japanese Government had suggested. 3. The Japanese Minister asked me to tell him informally what I thought on the subject. I replied that I could only speak for myself since on a matter of this kind I would have to ask my Government for instructions before I could give any answer that he could make to his Government. I added that as the new American Minister was soon to arrive I had some hesitancy even to discuss this matter, implying future action by our Legation. I did, however, informally discuss the subject with Yoshizawa, my special purpose being to sound him out. I told him that from a practical standpoint we believed that the fewer persons who cooperated in a situation the better it was. I said, however, that I fully appreciated Yoshizawa’s idea of the practical utility of having the French and Italian Ministers join in such cooperation as the Japanese Government seemed to contemplate. I expressed the opinion that for the purpose in view the eight Washington
