Afghanistan likely indifferent to its existence and are content to struggle independently. In any case, most tribesmen are discontent with the internal squabbling that depletes so much of the exile leaders’ energies and that reduces their effectiveness as a conduit of external aid. The tribesmen also perceive that the exile parties are playing a minor role in the actual insurgency. As a consequence the tribesmen want a greater role for themselves in Peshawar politics so as to obtain a greater share of the arms they think are coming into the area from the outside and to influence the nature of a successor government. Many of the tribal leaders have said that if the IALA members do not make immediate progress in resolving their differences, they will form an alliance of their own as the principal political focus of resistance against the Communists. Participation of the Peshawar-based leaders in such a tribal council would depend on the number of seats each could win in an election among district representatives picked by the tribesmen. Under such circumstances, Gailani, who has the most religious influence among the tribesmen, would have a good chance of being elected president of any post-Communist government. ([classification marking not declassified]) Some tribesmen support the return of the royal family, regarding it as the last legitimate government of Afghanistan and possibly considering it as having sufficient national stature to rally around in case the Peshawar leaders and the tribesmen fail to develop their own unified opposition to the Communist government. Neither King Zahir Shah nor another important member of the royal family, the King’s cousin and son-in-law Prince Abdul Wali, seem likely to gain enough support to reestablish the monarchy, but they may still figure prominently in any post-Communist government because of the respect they continue to enjoy among some tribesmen in Afghanistan. ([classification marking not declassified]) The return of the monarchy, however, is one of many issues on which the Peshawar leaders differ. The role that Islam will play in a successor government is another key sticking point, with the spectrum of views running from those who favor a Western-style democratic form of government to those who feel that the only constitution their country needs is the Koran. ([classification marking not declassified]) [1 paragraph (7 lines) and classification marking not declassified] [Omitted here is the body of the paper.]
