March–August 1953
497
buying Iranian oil. We might, however, give some slight added tech-
nical and military aid in order to assure the Iranian Government of our
friendly intentions.
Mr. Cutler raised the questions of the repercussions if the Iranian
Government, as it easily could, should determine to slash the price of
Iranian oil. There were plenty of tankers available to carry it, and the ef-
fect would be chaotic on the world price of oil.
Secretary Wilson speculated as to whether Prime Minister Mos-
sadegh had not framed his three questions in anticipation of a negative
response from this Government. The monkey would then be on our
back, and Mossadegh could point to the United States as hostile to Ira-
nian aspirations. Secretary Wilson, however, agreed that there was no
alternative but to say “no” to these questions. If we replied in the af-
firmative we would not only help to destroy what was left of the idea of
sanctity of contracts, but if we entered into an agreement to purchase
oil from Mossadegh we ourselves would quickly be swindled. Secre-
tary Wilson did say, however, that it seemed to him from his knowl-
edge of this problem, that the Iranians felt that in all past negotiations
with the British on oil settlement, the cards had been constantly stacked
against them. Could we not, therefore, as a friendly gesture, offer to
look over these past procedures in order to reassure the Iranian Gov-
ernment that their interests had not really been overlooked or would
not be overlooked in further negotiations?
Secretary Dulles responded by saying that we had already taken
pains to do this. He went on to say that of course if the British were
completely shut out from Iran and from the negotiations, it would not
probably be difficult to get results from Iran, but the United Kingdom
was involved deeply in concern for its own prestige, and this was a
much more difficult thing to deal with than any mere matter of com-
pensation. It seemed to Secretary Dulles that we must somehow try to
become senior partners with the British in this area and work in that
context.
Secretary Wilson expressed agreement, and said that our real ob-
jective was to try to secure a settlement while at the same time saving
British face.
Mr. Cutler asked Secretary Dulles to explain the latest terms which
had been offered to Mossadegh and which he was about to turn down.
Secretary Dulles did so, and explained at some length the Iranian
fear that if they submitted the issue of compensation to arbitration at
The Hague, they would undergo a protracted economic bondage to
Great Britain. But Secretary Dulles was inclined to think that even if the
Mossadegh regime refused to accept the latest proposals, these were
not the last possible terms. We might yet be able to meet this Iranian
dread of indefinite tutelage to the British. In any case, continued the
