Chile  303
which the United States might supply and that the United States might 
also send Naval ships whose generating plants could supply power to 
coastal towns whose plants had had been damaged. The Ambassador 
did not indicate any need for the ships’ power plants, and said that, 
with the availability of the two American field hospitals for the imme-
diate emergency, Chile had no serious shortage of doctors and nurses.
The President said he had been thinking that it might be useful 
for the two Governments to form a group to study the problem of 
Chilean reconstruction. He said that possibly Ambassador Donnelly or 
Dr. Milton Eisenhower might work with two or three Chilean represen-
tatives. The Ambassador did not respond to this suggestion when made, 
but after leaving the White House told an officer of the Department 
he would be very much in favor of implementing the President’s sug-
gestion. He said he would recommend that his Government, after the 
President had returned from his Far Eastern Trip,2 ask the President to 
send a personal representative to Chile to assist in studying the recon-
struction problem.
In response to the President’s question the Ambassador said his 
Government estimated the total reconstruction costs at about $500 mil-
lion, equivalent to more than 50% of the Government’s budget. He said 
that of Chile’s 7.5 million population 2.5 million live in the affiliated 
area. Eighty thousand houses had been badly damaged, and 65,000 
had been completely destroyed and could not be replaced for less than 
$210 million. He said his Government also faced a huge problem in the 
repair of roads, schools, sewage facilities, etc.
The Ambassador pointed out that unfortunately the natural disas-
ter had struck just as the Chilean Government was on the point of suc-
cess in its efforts to stabilize its currency and its cost of living. The rate 
of exchange had held steady for a year and four months and the cost of 
living in the last eight months had risen only 2-1/2% as contrasted with 
33% in the previous year. As a result of the disaster Chile would now 
have to devote to reconstruction the resources it had hoped to devote 
to development. He emphasized his Government was determined to 
achieve reconstruction while maintaining stability.
Voicing his hearty approval of this objective, the President com-
mented that the Chilean Government would have to make a great effort 
and might almost have to regiment all available people and resources. 
He said he thought the influx of too much outside capital into the situ-
ation would seriously threaten to produce inflation, and a great effort 
would obviously be required of the Chilean people. The Ambassador 
2 Reference is to the President’s trip to the Philippines, China, and Korea in June 
1960, for Documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XVIII, Japan; Korea, and 
Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XIX, China.
