Afghanistan 681 in the future will very likely depend upon how “successful” the Soviet leadership views their intervention in Afghanistan to have been. [classification marking and handling restriction not declassified] Stansfield Turner3 Attachment Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency4 Washington, April 10, 1980 [Omitted here is a summary.] SUBJECT The Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan: Aberration or Symptom? The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan has precipitated a sharp debate over its significance. On one side, some offer Afghan-specific explanations to argue that the move is an episodic aberration in an otherwise generally circumspect pattern of Soviet behavior. On the other side of the debate are those who hold that the invasion represents the opening of a new and more aggressive phase in what promises to be an escalating global competition. Proponents of the first view concede that the invasion represents Moscow’s first postwar use of combat forces outside the Soviet Bloc. But they emphasize Afghanistan’s status as a Soviet client and ally and suggest that the invasion was the result of a reluctant decision by Moscow that it could not permit the collapse of a proto-socialist allied regime in a neighboring country which was an incipient bastion of anti-Communist Islamic fundamentalism, if not a potential client of the US or the PRC. Proponents of the second view contend that the invasion is symptomatic of Moscow’s growing willingness to play a worldwide interventionist role and to resort to the direct use of Soviet military force in the pursuit of otherwise unattainable ambitions. As these analysts see it, Moscow is convinced that “the correlation of forces” has shifted to its side, creating a situation in which actions that it would previously have rejected as “adventuristic” can now be confidently undertaken. Some analysts of this persuasion even argue that Moscow’s new found confidence has led it to embark on a calculated plan to fill the unprece- 3 Turner signed “Stan” above his typed signature. 4 Secret.
