Arms Control and Disarmament  1631
to the talks. We cannot achieve this merely by resuming interminable 
wranglings over the veto and the composition of inspection teams. If 
that is what faces our negotiators then I think there will be increasing 
discouragement in our own countries and throughout the world.
What we might do is make clear immediately that these import­
ant differences in approach need not be a bar to putting into effect 
promptly the elements of a control system which are not in dispute—
control posts and agreed aircraft flights, together with the banning of 
the atmospheric tests which these elements can adequately monitor. As 
fast as the political and technical problems of monitoring underground 
and outer space tests are worked out, an initial agreement would, of 
course, be broadened to include these also.
What I propose is the very opposite of an ultimatum. We would 
make clear by our statements and actions that we are prepared and 
determined to continue negotiating a comprehensive test suspension 
agreement. We would simply be offering a way to get started promptly 
in a limited area of agreement, if the Soviets remain adamant on the 
veto. Indeed, between us, I think that advancing such a reasonable alter­
native course of action may be the only effective way to test the real 
Soviet position on the veto.
The Soviets are no doubt considering their own moves. We should 
act when talks resume on April 13, if we are to retain leadership and to 
take action to restore a sense of purpose and hope in the negotiations. Our 
representatives might make carefully prepared statements at the opening 
session in Geneva on April 13, recapitulating the progress and difficulties 
in the negotiations, and pointing out the possibility of action to capitalize 
immediately on the areas of agreement already reached or in prospect.
Simultaneously letters from you and me to Premier Khrushchev, 
perhaps along the lines of the enclosed draft, might be delivered in 
Moscow endorsing the approach. In order that our suggestion might 
not seem to be advanced as a propagandistic gesture, it might be made 
privately and released publicly only after sufficient time for a Soviet 
response—unless, of course, a premature leak forces our hand.
These thoughts are being discussed here with Selwyn and your 
Embassy. Because I believe we have an opportunity to give a new and 
sounder impulse to these negotiations, I wanted to bring them to your 
attention directly and to hear your views.
With warm regard
As ever,
Ike
