634 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX fication would take the form of a federation which would maintain the existing social system in the two parts of the peninsula.4 In Kim Il-song’s opinion the main obstacle is President Park Chung Hee. The North Koreans characterize his regime as Fascist and its policies are clearly pro-Japanese. They would agree to deal with any other president in the south that is agreeable to the US such as Yan Bo-sim (a former President of South Korea, 1960–1962) whom they know to have good relations with the United States. Yan Bo-sim is no communist, and he is presently counselor of the New Democracy Party in the South. Of course, that is only an example, but any personality willing to promote a more democratic regime in the South who would also be agreeable to the US will be acceptable for the North. I present all of this to you in order to give you a picture of how Kim Il-song sees a way to solve the existing problems and open the way to new relations with that part of the world. The President said it is not my responsibility nor that of Kim Ilsong to determine who shall be president of South Korea. That is a decision for the people there, and they have elected President Park in free elections. Will Kim Il-song have a direct meeting with representatives of the US, North Korea, and President Park? President Ceausescu answered that they will not deal with President Park for the reasons mentioned. Regarding the democratic elections in South Korea, I have been told that the other candidates for the presidency were arrested and were not even able to run for office. The North Koreans believe that if the US no longer supports Park, internal forces in South Korea will be able to resolve the problem in a democratic way. Nevertheless, the North Koreans are ready to talk with the US, and they will talk with any democratically chosen leader after Park has been replaced. The President replied that North Korea has historically taken that position. The possibility that President Park might be overthrown or changed is very slight. We do not interfere in South Korea’s domestic affairs and we will not change the government by force or intervention. Unless Kim Il-song is willing to meet with representatives of the current 4 In telegram 163243 to Bucharest, June 27, the Department instructed Aggrey to thank Andrei for the report on Ceausescu’s trip to Asia, and to brief him on the conclusions of Brzezinski’s trip to China. Regarding Korea, the Department suggested that “the Romanians, rather than taking a neutral position, are largely seeking to advance North Korean position. For that reason we see little to be gained from entering into a detailed dialogue with them on the subject.” The telegram instructed Aggrey to tell Andrei that “if the GOR is interested in promoting improved relations between North and South Korea, it may wish to make its views known through direct contacts with the Republic of Korea as it already does with the DPRK.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780266–0541)
