354  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
so was what was delaying talks. Then made detailed statement point­
ing out none of remaining 19 yet released, could not consider this faith­
ful implementation of announcement, PRC failure give benefit agreed 
announcement 10 imprisoned Americans makes it meaningless as far as 
Americans in PRC desiring return are concerned. In view of continued 
delay becoming more concerned over his statement September 23 meet­
ing implying persons in jail not covered by provisions agreed announce­
ment, could not accept any such construction and asked for confirmation 
all American civilians whether or not in jail covered by announcement. 
Could not agree to his implied interpretation our not insisting on definite 
time limit for release constituted agreement to indefinite delay in release. 
Must insist implementation agreed announcement provisions tor expe­
ditious departure all Americans who desire to return including those still 
imprisoned. His continued reference to improved relations as factor in 
release could not but be interpreted as intent disregard explicit terms of 
announcement and “to hold these human beings as hostages for political 
advantage”. My government had promptly implemented announcement 
and had not and would not attach political conditions to carrying it out. 
Chinese have been and still were free to leave. Failure his government 
match our promptness in implementation was what was slowing prog­
ress talks. Referring his previous statements on pressure, did not see why 
it was submission to pressure for PRC “to do what it publicly declared in 
our agreed announcement it was going to do”.
5. He objected all my remarks as falling into item one and again 
raising matters which already discussed and settled. PRC would 
“faithfully carry out agreement but would not allow any distorted 
interpretation” of announcement. Will continue review cases but 
action must be accordance Chinese law, cases will be reviewed “in 
light of the agreement, degree of the offense, conduct and improve­
ment of relations.” There was then much give and take until he clari­
fied and corrected interpretation of previous statement by saying cases 
Americans being reviewed “accordance” agreed announcement and, 
in light of discussion, I interpret as being satisfactory statement that 
all Americans including those in prison included within announce­
ment. I also pressed him hard on other three questions and although 
his answer vague and unsatisfactory with respect to specific assur­
ance each American in prison had been informed of announcement, 
reiterated previous assurances wide publicity included measures to 
assure every American informed. In spite continual pressure he flatly 
refused answer other two questions saying this not the place for dis­
cussion. After long and unsuccessful prodding I expressed hope he 
would assure me UK Charge would promptly be given replies. He 
kept repeating he had nothing more to say.
