Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II opment of a less selective approach by the Commission so that it will focus its attention upon a wider range of serious human rights violations in the world.2 In determining our positions on individual issues our own concepts of basic human rights, as enshrined in our Constitution and developed from the beginnings of our nation, will provide the controlling guidelines. This does not mean, however, that we will seek to achieve uniform acceptance of our own standards. We recognize the virtues of diversity and will actively seek to learn, understand, and to take account of the points of view of other governments represented on the Commission. In particular, this will mean that our concern for the promotion of human rights will include the whole gamut of internationally recognized standards referred to under the headings civil and political and economic, social and cultural. We will acknowledge our acceptance of the proposition that basic civil and political human rights reinforce and promote basic economic rights and needs of peoples, and vice versa. The 35th session will have the usual overly long agenda, of which probably not more than half will receive detailed consideration. Our principal concern at the outset, therefore, will be to assure that those items to which we attach special importance are so placed in the agenda which the Commission adopts that adequate discussion of them will be assured before the close of the Commission session. Since the crucial recommendations on the order of the items are made by the Commission’s Bureau (the Chairman, three Vice Chairmen and Rapporteur), we must conduct early consultations within our own regional group to assure that the regional group representative on the Bureau this year (who will be the Commission Chairman) will act appropriately to assert group interests in the order of the agenda items. Among the matters to be discussed by the Commission the following will be of greatest interest to us and will present opportunities for achieving specific goals: (1) Question of the Program and Methods of Work of the Commission; Alternative Approaches and Ways and Means Within the United Nations System for Improving the Effective Enjoyment of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. Under this item we must assure the adoption of a balanced, constructive plan for the future work program of the Commission as well as for United Nations human rights activities overall. We will seek to advance as far as possible certain of the suggestions made by President Carter in his United Nations address of March 17, 1977, viz., another regular annual session of the Commission on Human 2 The 35th session of the Commission on Human Rights took place in Geneva February 12–March 16.
