568
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
opment of a less selective approach by the Commission so that it will
focus its attention upon a wider range of serious human rights viola-
tions in the world.2
In determining our positions on individual issues our own con-
cepts of basic human rights, as enshrined in our Constitution and de-
veloped from the beginnings of our nation, will provide the controlling
guidelines. This does not mean, however, that we will seek to achieve
uniform acceptance of our own standards. We recognize the virtues of
diversity and will actively seek to learn, understand, and to take ac-
count of the points of view of other governments represented on the
Commission. In particular, this will mean that our concern for the pro-
motion of human rights will include the whole gamut of internationally
recognized standards referred to under the headings civil and political
and economic, social and cultural. We will acknowledge our ac-
ceptance of the proposition that basic civil and political human rights
reinforce and promote basic economic rights and needs of peoples, and
vice versa.
The 35th session will have the usual overly long agenda, of which
probably not more than half will receive detailed consideration. Our
principal concern at the outset, therefore, will be to assure that those
items to which we attach special importance are so placed in the
agenda which the Commission adopts that adequate discussion of
them will be assured before the close of the Commission session. Since
the crucial recommendations on the order of the items are made by the
Commission’s Bureau (the Chairman, three Vice Chairmen and Rap-
porteur), we must conduct early consultations within our own regional
group to assure that the regional group representative on the Bureau
this year (who will be the Commission Chairman) will act appropri-
ately to assert group interests in the order of the agenda items.
Among the matters to be discussed by the Commission the fol-
lowing will be of greatest interest to us and will present opportunities
for achieving specific goals:
(1) Question of the Program and Methods of Work of the Commission;
Alternative Approaches and Ways and Means Within the United Nations
System for Improving the Effective Enjoyment of Human Rights and Funda-
mental Freedoms. Under this item we must assure the adoption of a bal-
anced, constructive plan for the future work program of the Commis-
sion as well as for United Nations human rights activities overall. We
will seek to advance as far as possible certain of the suggestions made
by President Carter in his United Nations address of March 17, 1977,
viz., another regular annual session of the Commission on Human
2 The 35th session of the Commission on Human Rights took place in Geneva Feb-
ruary 12–March 16.
