World Hunger and Food Policy
921
tries, and our partnership efforts with those countries to combat
hunger should expand during your second term.
Public Education—The Commissioners also conclude that a strong
and concerted program to address world hunger requires broadly
based public support in the United States and that a major public edu-
cation effort is needed to gain that support. They recommend, in addi-
tion, that federal laws should be changed in order to permit the use of
federal funds in world hunger-related public education.
We have already taken a number of steps, in association with Anne
Wexler and in coordination with other agencies, to increase our efforts
to educate the public in general, and key private organizations in par-
ticular, of the importance of our economic relations with developing
nations. These steps include establishment of the high level private
sector working group on foreign assistance that you have directed be
formed, an increased emphasis on foreign assistance in public state-
ments by key officials in your Administration, and specific steps to at-
tract the interest of potential new constituencies, such as labor,
business, and the financial community. We hope you will assign the ef-
fort to gain public support a high priority. Your personal leadership
will be essential.
General Analysis—The Commission’s charter was to: define the
causes and scope of the hunger and malnutrition problems domesti-
cally and internationally; evaluate United States programs and policies
affecting domestic hunger and malnutrition; focus public attention on
the problems; recommend actions to reduce hunger and malnutrition;
publicize and assist in implementation of its recommendations.6 The
Commission did not achieve full consensus in its report. Seven Com-
missioners filed additional statements; four of these expressed disap-
pointment with the Commission’s evaluation of existing U.S. policies
and in the progress made by the Report toward a specific plan for a na-
tional food policy.
Our review found the major strength of the report to be the
analysis of the causes of hunger and malnutrition and the focus on the
urgency of addressing the problem. The recent Global 2000 Report7 is-
sued by the Council on Environmental Quality and the Department of
State provides evidence of the urgency of taking action now if we hope
to reduce the prevalence of malnutrition by the year 2000.
The Commission undertook a difficult task. Having concluded
that the elimination of hunger and malnutrition lies in the eradication
of world poverty, the Commission made recommendations across a
6 See Document 251.
7 See Document 343 and footnotes 1 and 2 thereto.
