Covert and Overt Operations 789 crisis, but the reasons for his possibly believing so are unclear. So far there appear to have been very few acceptances to participate in the conference. The Iranians are attempting to persuade some Americans to attend, but realize that there could be difficulties for these individuals in obtaining validation of their passports for travel to Iran. 4. Bangladesh Initiative The BDG at the recent Islamic Conference in Islamabad may have floated the idea of putting together a “contact group” of a few Islamic countries which would go to Tehran to try to be helpful in resolving the US-Iranian crisis. We do not know at this point whether they had any positive responses from other Islamic governments, but are checking on it with our people in Dacca. 5. UN Initiative The Syrian advisor to President Assad, Adib Daoudi, arrived today in Tehran. His trip is at Waldheim’s request for the purpose of exploring possibilities for the UN Commission to resume its mandate. Waldheim has said that he will ask Daoudi to meet with religious leaders such as Beheshti, as well as with government officials. Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh has publicly disassociated Daoudi’s visit from the hostage issue. This stance probably reflects Ghotbzadeh’s doubts as to whether it will be possible to use Daoudi’s visit to contribute to a solution. Points to be Made —I would like to reconfirm our understanding that the Daoudi visit is truly exploratory, and that there can be no question of release of the commission report except in an agreed framework for release of the hostages. —We hope you will keep in closest touch with us, especially as regards the outcome of the Daoudi visit. —Assistant Secretary Saunders has been in Europe this past week consulting with our major Allies on ways in which their Ambassadors in Tehran can be helpful. —Saunders has also had long talks with the Swiss government, which represents our interests in Iran. The Swiss have agreed to play an active role and will attempt to be of assistance in connection with various initiatives that are underway. —Saunders has discussed with European social democratic leaders their plans for visiting Iran. Hopefully such a visit can also have a positive impact on the hostage question. —Archbishop Capucci is in Tehran at his own initiative attempting to explore the possibilities for Islamic countries playing a helpful role in building a consensus for the release of the hostages.
