North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 877 Three broad options for the levels of US concessional assistance to be achieved by 1982 are discussed below, two of them involving a real increase in aid.23 The mix of programs mentioned under each of these illustrative options is only one of a number that might be appropriate at each funding level.24 Your selection among these options will provide guidance for internal executive branch planning, but not for submission of future aid projections to the Congress at this stage. 1. Continue Present Aid Levels in Real Terms. Total FY 1982 concessional assistance (including SSA) would rise in current dollars to about $7.5 billion.25 In constant dollars it would remain the same as in FY 1978, i.e., about $6 billion. Unless there were a marked shift from bilateral to multilateral aid, this would require us to refuse the increase in the size of the soft-loan windows of the multilateral banks that their presidents are likely to propose. If SSA were held constant in nominal terms, however, this option would permit a modest increase in US bilateral concessional development assistance. Aid levels would decline as a proportion of GNP. Other donor countries’ aid performance would be adversely affected. Developing countries’ growth rates would thus be as heavily dependent as in the past on their internal economic policies and on trends in the world economy. Relatively rapid growth would probably continue in the middle-income countries of East Asia and Latin America; there would be little or no per capita income growth in many poor countries of South Asia and Africa. US aid performance would be criticized and would have an adverse impact on US relations with developing countries. This option would be viewed by many as a violation of our Summit and CIEC pledges by you and Secretary Vance to increase aid. 2. Moderate Increase in Assistance. Under this option, FY 1982 concessional development assistance (including SSA), in FY 1982 dollars, would be over $10 billion.26 In constant 1977 dollars, it would range around $8 billion, or an increase of about one-third over FY 1978 levels. This could mean: 23 The Brookings study concludes that substantial changes in past AID management practices and personnel procedures would be needed if these increased funds were to be effectively spent. Governor Gilligan indicates that he has already begun making these improvements. The Brookings study suggests that changes in legislation and in Congressional requirements regarding aid presentation and implementation would also be needed. These issues will be treated in our later paper on organizational issues. [Footnote in the original.] 24 The illustrative figures shown under each option do not include the over $800 million by which we will soon be in arrears in meeting our past commitments to the softand hard-loan windows of international financial institutions. We will have to seek additional funds from the Congress to cover these overdue payments. [Footnote in the original.] 25 Carter underlined these phrases in this sentence: “FY 1982” and “$7.5 billion.” 26 Carter underlined these phrases in this sentence: “FY 1982” and “$10 billion.”
