6
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
6. Final point Saud had to make regarding the Camp David
meeting was that he hoped what emerges therefrom will include the
Palestinians and the principle of self-determination for the Palestinians.
He stressed that this would be very important on gaining support in
the Arab world. I said I could understand this concern but cautioned
that what we want is a workable set of principles not a ringing declara-
tion that will not advance the cause of peace in practical ways. On the
Palestinian question, we believed the Aswan formulation5 was a prac-
tical one.
7. We then turned to discussion of Lebanon. I stressed our concern
over the situation there and told Saud of the time and effort you had
put in on the Lebanese problem during your trip. Saud said he had read
our press briefing6 on Lebanon and considered it very good. He re-
counted the talks Fahd and he had had recently in Damascus, saying
that the Syrians are very suspicious of the U.S. Syrians misunderstood
the U.S. effort to call a security council meeting on Lebanon, saw the
hand of Israel—and therefore the U.S.—behind the agressiveness of the
Christian militias, and were suspicious of the contacts of the American
Ambassador in Beirut with the Christian leaders. I said none of this is
true. As regards the last point, I explained that Ambassador Parker’s
contacts were undertaken on instructions from Washington and in the
cause of restraining the Christian extremists and strengthening Presi-
dent Sarkis. Saud said he and Fahd had told the Syrians that their sus-
picions of the U.S. are unfounded. Saud said he considered most im-
portant thing U.S. could do now would be to give as much attention as
possible to its contacts with the Syrians. I told Saud we had been and
still were active in Damascus, and especially in Israel, in seeking to
keep the lid on in Lebanon.
5 In his remarks to the press after meeting with Sadat in Aswan on January 3, Carter
said: “We believe that there are certain principles, fundamentally, which must be ob-
served before a just and a comprehensive peace can be achieved. First, true peace must be
based on normal relations among the parties to the peace. Peace means more than just an
end to belligerency. Second, there must be withdrawal by Israel from territories occupied
in 1967 and agreement on secure and recognized borders for all parties in the context of
normal and peaceful relations in accordance with United Nations Resolutions 242 and
338. And third, there must be a resolution of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects. The
problem must recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and enable the
Palestinians to participate in the determination of their own future.” (Public Papers:
Carter, 1978, Book I, pp. 19–20) For documentation on Carter’s meetings with Sadat at
Aswan, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–
August 1978, Documents 185–186.
6 For a summary of the August 8 Department of State press briefing on the situation
in Lebanon see telegram 200652 to Alexandria, August 9. (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D780325–0103)
