684
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
FY 81 $100 million; FY 81 $50 million. We would seek a one-time FY 79
appropriation for the entire funding of the three-year airbase construc-
tion program. (S)
Option 2. Increase the present $1.8 billion annual aid program by
$500 million, to $2.3 billion, and indicate a willingness to continue at
this level over the four years FY 79–82, so as to cover about $2 billion of
the $3 billion special Israeli request. Under this option, outlays would
rise by about $250 million in FY 79 and annually thereafter. We would
request a supplemental appropriation of $500 million in FY 79 and
amendment of your FY 80 foreign assistance budget request in the
same amount, largely or wholly in the FMS account. (S)
Recommendation: We recommend Option 1 with standard FMS
credit terms, because it:
—costs less and is hence more consistent with your overall fiscal
policy (we are already getting complaints about rumored FY 79 supple-
mentals from the Hill);
—minimizes the risk of locking us into a permanent higher level of
aid (current aid levels already exceed Israel’s requirements);
—makes any aid over the cost of relocating the airfields dependent
on actual Israeli expenditures and on clear evidence that additional
economic aid is required;
—insulates the foreign assistance budget for other countries from
offsetting Congressional cuts better than Option 2 because it is confined
to the costs of a single event—airbase relocation—and because it does
not involve annual aid requests for four years. (S)
In declining order of acceptability, we suggest two fall-backs:
a. Option 1 with the usual half-grant terms of FMS to Israel;
b. Option 2, with a hardening of the terms of at least the incre-
mental aid to those of standard FMS credits. (S)
II. Egypt’s request for military aid.
You have a current proposal from Secretary Brown for military
assistance to Egypt, involving annual arms sales of $500 million, with
$200 million of this being on FMS credit terms. We have no basis for
comment on these figures. We do suggest that you limit the time period
of the commitment, so as to preserve latitude for tactical use of aid com-
mitments as the peace process evolves and Middle East security re-
quirements change. We would prefer two to three years, and would
recommend not going beyond three years, at a maximum. (S)
III. Economic aid to Egypt and to regional development.
Sadat has frequently and publicly discussed a massive “Carter
Plan” for Egypt and possibly other Middle Eastern countries; he may
ask you to adopt this foundling. State and AID agree that a significant
