1956  903
of Conversation that Menon’s approach carries more of the flavor of his 
own ideas than that of a message from Peiping. I would certainly agree 
that we should not at this time give any consideration to assenting to 
his suggestion. In fact, it seems to me that in some ways the meeting 
with someone designated as the President’s personal and special envoy 
carries with it from our standpoint even greater disadvantages than a 
meeting of the Foreign Ministers. It is also quite obvious that it would 
tend to give the impression, which Peiping would probaly be quick to 
exploit, that there is a divergence of view between the President and the 
Department with respect to the Chinese Communists.
I am enclosing a separate letter on more general subjects.
Sincerely yours,
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
567.	 Letter 28 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 28
Geneva, April 8, 1956
Dear Walter:
I was remiss in not letting you know that I had left Geneva and 
returned to Prague last week, my plans for a trip to Paris Easter having 
fallen through [text not declassified].
[text not declassified]
I was very disappointed to hear about Holdridge and today sent a 
telegram which summarizes my views. Obviously the man in Stanley’s 
job is fully occupied only on meeting days and I am concerned that 
something can be worked out that will usefully occupy the person in 
that job the rest of the time. As I said in my telegram, I still think that 
Stanley’s assignment to Geneva for consular training is a logical and 
efficient answer from every point of view. The pace of the meetings 
is of course not my choice and obviously my staff here is not heavily 
pressed. However, when I need people, I need them and it seems to me 
the issues are important enough to meet my very modest requirements. 
Dave has assisted Stanley in keeping notes and they provide a very 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Confidential; 
Official–­Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
