4. I would have preferred to have strengthened statement by definitely stating in so many words that the powers concerned would take up with a formally established Chinese Government the subject of treaty revision at the earliest moment practicable, thus turning this phase against those who now using it to our disadvantage. Statement as adopted this morning’s meeting by implication puts us on record as desirous to this effect. 5. Both British Minister and myself fearful that further strengthening our proposed statement might prevent French and Italian Governments from associating themselves therewith, the chances being that these two Governments would even oppose statement as now drafted. 6. Japanese Minister stated he had reason to believe Feng and Sun Yat-sen contemplate another coup in the very near future. Impossible to know Feng’s attitude as Tuan may be simply playing him off against foreigners demanding immediate treaty revision or cancellation. It would be difficult for us to issue proposed statement which Sun could then make to appear as result of his threats.

7. For above reasons I most earnestly recommend that if Department approves proposed statement I be instructed to this end at very earliest possible moment. 8. I venture to add that I consider the making of a statement similar to that proposed of so great importance at this time that I would favor its being made to present Chinese Government even if only by Great Britain and the United States; with Japan, the Netherlands and Belgium if possible. If necessary, however, I believe Japanese Government would be willing to join in such a statement even if all powers concerned would [not?] agree thereto. Possibly more danger of playing into Japanese hands by proposed statement is less than that of ill-advised agitation for treaty revision in my opinion. Of the two it goes without saying I greatly prefer to assist the Japanese. I would much appreciate simultaneous instructions on this point should the Department approve proposed statement in principle. British Minister of same opinion and is requesting similar instructions.
