Afghanistan Turner: Actually I like the terms of the last finding which meant getting the Saudis out in front. Vance: They will still be in on it as you described the present proposal. We will take note of what you say. You are going to have to have the Attorney General here to sign off on the recommendation for a finding. Brzezinski: Let us do that at the SCC tomorrow morning. Turner: We would have to give training on the RPG–7 anti-tank weapon. The way we would do it would be to train Pakistanis who then in turn could train Afghans. We also could provide SA7 antiaircraft missiles but these are not used in Afghanistan and we are trying to restrict ourselves to equipment that the rebels could have taken from the Afghan Army. We have also set aside [amount not declassified] for communications equipment. Newsom: Is there any sign of greater cohesion among the guerrilla forces? Turner: No. Christopher: Where would you provide the equipment? Turner: Inside Pakistan. That would keep us out of it. Newsom: Would this program give us more leverage in dealing with these amorphous rebel groups? Carlucci: That depends on what your goal is. These weapons won’t enable them to take over the country; they will just be making life more difficult for the Soviets. Turner: One more thing: We can work this first delivery into the money available under the November finding. We have [amount not declassified] remaining. Over the next six or eight months, however, we are going to need $10 million. We can’t go back to Congress and ask for more money until we get a significant Saudi contribution. Brzezinski: But won’t this smoke the Saudis out? Carlucci: This, plus our Iran program, will clearly exhaust [less than 1 line not declassified]. We will have to ask for a larger [less than 1 line not declassified] and that will mean a debate in Congress. Vice President: Are we doing enough on broadcasting? Brzezinski: A recent SCC meeting mandated several steps. OMB is causing trouble however and I hope that you could weigh in with them. I will send a report over to you. Vice President: Yes, send some information to me. Turner: Shouldn’t we lift the anti-Soviet propaganda prohibition that was laid on us at a recent meeting by Lloyd Cutler?11 11 No record of this meeting was found.
