708 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII last containing an unexpected invitation to visit Moscow this summer. By means of private channels, which the Soviets have long believed useful in communicating with the Chancellery, Soviet representatives have indicated Moscow’s “interest” in the European Community’s neutralization proposal for Afghanistan, and have also conveyed the message to a Chancellery official that West Germany’s expected refusal to impose economic sanctions on the USSR was much more important to the Soviet leadership than Bonn’s likely decision to boycott the summer Olympics. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) Although private Soviet overtures to the West Germans and other West Europeans lack specific substance, it is evident that Soviet tactics are based on the assumption that US-West European differences are significant and create openings for the Soviets to exacerbate them. The Soviets may believe that the worst of the European reaction to the Afghanistan intervention has passed or that more serious moves—such as specific economic sanctions—can be attenuated by skillful diplomacy. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) In either case, the Soviets have opted for a combination of harsh public rhetoric with private hints of a more conciliatory Soviet stance on arms control issues in particular should the West Europeans temper their support for US “hard line” policies toward Moscow. Thus far, however, the Soviets have demonstrated little willingness to make tangible concessions to West European concerns. Nevertheless, West European reservations with respect to US actions in Iran, the implementation of NATO’s decision on theater nuclear force modernization, and diplomatic maneuvering leading up to the November 1980 CSCE Review Conference.4 All are perceived by Moscow as opportunities to affect adversely US-West European ties. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified.]) [Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.] 4 Documentation on the November 1980 CSCE Review Conference is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
