548 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 1. Secret Nodis Cherokee entire text. 2. I had two meetings with the Prime Minister today, the first with his small negotiating group, and the second with about one half of the Cabinet present. Dayan and Weizman were present on both occasions. We will be meeting privately tomorrow morning before another large meeting.2 I may also pay a farewell call on the Prime Minister later in the day before heading back to Cairo to report to Sadat that evening. 3. At this point the results at this end are about what we might have expected. The Israelis reacted negatively and argumentatively to most of the elements of the package that we brought from Cairo.3 To what extent this is an initial reaction that may to some extent soften over time is difficult to judge at this point. Toward the end of our second meeting there seemed to be one or two glimmers, particularly from Dayan, to suggest that the Israelis may become somewhat more flexible when they have had a chance to think about the proposition. 4. I started out by stressing the strategic objectives we shared in shoring up the forces of stability and moderation in the region, and said an Egypt-Israel peace would be an important component of this. I followed by outlining the degree to which the Egyptians had made concessions from their previous positions, and then explained the rationale for each document which had been developed. 5. They were most disappointed, as we might have expected, about the proposal to link the exchange of resident ambassadors to the inauguration of the self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza. Dayan at one point said that he would rather go back to the wording of the Camp David Accords for Annex III without any mention of ambassadors than to accept the concept that an element of this treaty is conditional on steps in the West Bank/Gaza. Begin argued strenuously that such a proposition was totally outside of, and contrary to, the Camp David Framework. They tried to depict Sadat’s withdrawal of his offer to exchange ambassadors one month after completion of withdrawal to the interim line as a violation of faith, and I had repeatedly to remind them that Sadat had originally offered this in return for subphasing, and when the Israelis withdrew that, Sadat, felt free to withdraw his offer as well. I pointed out that Sadat was making only one aspect of normalization of relations out of many contingent upon West Bank/ Gaza developments, but Begin insisted that to establish conditionality on one point would set a precedent for the other aspects of normalization as well. 2 See Document 158. 3 See footnote 4, Document 156.
