1412 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 4. Are we willing to accept an international inspection system in the U.S.? Are there constitutional questions? 5. Is it our conviction that a sound and adequate inspection system would be of advantage to the U.S. by bringing about a massive pene­ tration of the iron curtain and subsequent benefit in intelligence and exchange of information? 6. What should be U.S. policy with respect to the international means required for monitoring a nuclear test cessation agreement, including organization and personnel? 7. Should the U.S. “seek to prevent the development by additional nations of national nuclear weapons capabilities” by means of a nuclear test suspension agreement? 8. Should the U.S. agree to abide by a test ban prior to the installa­ tion and operation of an adequate detection system? 9. Should our policy anticipate Soviet acceptance of the inspection concepts agreed at Geneva and seek to make it difficult for the Sovi­ ets either to resume nuclear weapons testing or to derive world-­wide acclaim for unilaterally practicing a test ban? 10. Is it a national U.S. policy objective to seek now to diminish world-­wide fears about the hazards of radioactive fallout and to take action which will reassure those who hold these fears? Attachment Paper Prepared in the Office of Science and Technology PRINCIPAL ARGUMENTS FOR A TEST CESSATION 1. Military Security of the USA: Relative Position vs. the USSR Test cessation now or in the near future would be to the military advantage of the U.S. At the conclusion of the Hardtack tests, the U.S. will possess a tested series of nuclear warhead prototypes covering a very wide range of application, and probably with superior perfor­ mance in all categories compared to the USSR. While it is evident that continued U.S. tests would increase U.S. nuclear weapons strength in an absolute sense, further tests will not increase our relative strength, and may even decrease it in the light of rapid Russian advances and the increasing maturity of nuclear weapons technology on both sides. [text not declassified] According to intelligence estimates, USSR does not have a warhead in this weight class and is, therefore, restricted to very much larger ICBM’s and may encounter difficulties developing a submarine-­launched IRBM.
