Comprehensive Test Ban
395
on-sites is likely to accomplish about all that any on-site inspection pro-
vision is capable of. In fact, no on-site inspections, mandatory or other-
wise, will accomplish a whole lot if there is not cooperation of the host
government. For example, in remote mountainous terrains of the Soviet
Union, it is hard to imagine how any foreign team could operate effec-
tively over a large area and for a sustained period if the Soviets were
bent on throwing up harrassing obstacles.
Moreover, we are really not likely to ever request an on-site inspec-
tion, “mandatory” or voluntary, just for a fishing expedition—the risk
of coming up with an embarrassing absence of evidence would be too
great—but only when we are confident there has been a violation and
that we could find the evidence if we arrived at precisely the right
place. But, if such a situation were to occur, the Soviets would not be
likely to let us get there, whatever the wording of the treaty. So, in the
end, the right to ask for an inspection would mainly be useful as a fur-
ther inhibition against violations because it would strengthen our hand
in demonstrating—by their refusal to permit an inspection—that the
Soviets had something to hide. (This, of course, is very different from
consulting with the Soviets through private diplomatic channels to try
to resolve an ambiguous situation.)
Entry Into Force
The present Soviet position is that the treaty would come into force
only when all nuclear powers have ratified. The Soviets suggest, how-
ever, that there might be a US–UK–USSR moratorium for 18–24 months
once the negotiations have been completed—with the freedom to re-
sume testing thereafter if all nuclear powers have not accepted the
treaty. A high-level presentation would stress to the Soviets that their
position would inevitably boomerang. The Chinese (and the French)
would reject such crude pressure. There would, therefore, only be a
brief and temporary halt in our own testing; and there would be no op-
portunity for important non-nuclear-weapon states to accept formal
treaty constraints.
We can present our alternative as one which meets the objectives
we both share. If the treaty entered into force for a specified period,
parties could decide at the end of that period whether it was necessary
for them to withdraw. (Although we are prepared to agree to a period
as short as about three years, it would be advantageous at this stage to
speak in terms of roughly five years.)11 After the treaty was in force,
and with the accession of a number of other states, there would almost
certainly be increasing though subtle pressure, over time, on France
11 Brown wrote a check mark to the right of the sentence in parentheses.
