Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX for the technology they need and for a number of years (five or six) were sending a considerable number of Romanians to the U.S. and other Western nations for education and training. This has now tapered off, though there is a steady flow of Romanians who go to U.S. and elsewhere on short visits in a number of technological rather than scientific areas. In short, the Romanians no longer rely on the Soviets for training or technology and in some areas are their peers. B. New Technology There is no P&T area (except military weaponry) where the Romanians have not protected themselves from Soviet leverage by developing ties with other non-CEMA countries. In nuclear area, Romanians have opted for Canadian type reactor (CANDU) which uses natural uranium for fuel. Romania does have some uranium. Deal with Canadians provides for fuel and heavy water. Thus, Romanians have effectively insulated and isolated themselves from USSR and other CEMA nations which are building the Soviet light water reactor. This is not to say that Romanians do not benefit from their S&T agreement with Soviets, only that it is not critical enough for the latter to use as an effective lever. 5. Military A. On the extreme end of the spectrum, the Soviet Union has the military capability to intervene in Romania, depose Ceausescu, and install a regime subservient to Soviet interests. However, we consider such a course of action as highly unlikely except under the gravest of circumstances. Ceausescu has shown himself to be a master of judging limits of Soviet tolerance and not exceeding them, and we have no reason to expect that in the future he will either so grossly violate these limits or so lose control of internal events as to trigger a Soviet military takeover. Further, for years Romanians have diligently been seeking to up the CTT to Soviets of any blatant misbehavior toward Romania— hyperactivity in UN and other international fora, courtship of Third World, close and increasing ties with the West, excellent relations with all shades of Communist and other “progressive” forces, doctrine of a people’s war against “any” foreign aggressor. How much of this is bluff is impossible to gauge, and how effective all of this would be in deterring Soviets in a real crunch is open to question. Nevertheless, Romanian message is quite clear—there would be no free ride for Red (or any other) Army into Bucharest, and costs of such action in terms of wider interest would outweigh any limited benefits attained thereby. B. In a Yugoslav-Bulgarian agitation or Yugoslav invasion scenario, Soviet units could move rapidly via the Odessa-Varna ferry route. However, first commitments would probably be airborne and air transportable units which can move on short order to any point in Balkans. Important point in this scenario is that while Soviets have more open capability to avoid transitting Romania, they probably would not. If
