Arms Control and Disarmament 1649 These are some of the problems in which the technical inputs are especially strong. Many other problems have stronger military and political emphasis, although still involving technical considerations. For instance, the choice of geographic zones for “trial” inspection schemes involves not only the political, and strategic considerations, but also those of ever changing military technology and of technical aspects of inspection. The USSR delegates in Geneva emphasized their unalterable opposition to even the discussion of any schemes involving monitoring alone, without arms limitation measures. It would appear desirable to determine whether, from the point of view of the USSR, with its emphasis on military secrecy, the inspection schemes alone are indeed as disadvantageous as their delegates implied. If that is the case, it needs to be determined whether it is to our political advantage to propose nonetheless such schemes in conferences or to abandon them. In the latter case the technical work indicated in the preceding may take a somewhat different slant. The discussion of the last few pages, we hope, justifies our con­ viction that the study of the whole area must be done by a staff that represents not only the military but also the technical and political com­ petence. We hope also that this discussion gave some indication of the variety and complexity of the problems involved. It is our belief that the complexity is so great that to rely on ad hoc study groups prepar­ ing each particular conference is to our national disadvantage. What is needed, we believe, is a sustained effort on a significant level, in order to have available the required information and technology when a suit­ able opportunity for an agreement is in prospect and also to have on hand a competent staff trained in the problems involved, so as to have the best possible on-­the-­spot advice when conferences do take place. This certainly would be needed in the eventuality that the USSR seri­ ously enters the discussions of some agreements and comes forth with proposals of its own. It is not the purpose of the present memo to present a detailed organizational plan for a continuing study of the problems outlined above. However, certain features of a desirable organization can now be indicated. We deem it desirable to have this organization set up on a non-­departmental basis. The organization itself might consist of a full time director with a modest administrative and technical staff and a board of consultants, whose advice would be seriously weighed in planning activities and whose opinion would add weight to the conclu­ sions reached. It goes without saying that a budget must be provided, to support activities outside of the director’s office, as well as this office itself. These activities, which are the essence of the concept being pro­ posed, fall into three categories:
