North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 841 do not agree. A UN oversight9 role is inevitable, either as a result of the 32nd UNGA or of the restructuring of the UN. An overview mechanism could be prejudicial to US interests if we do not take an active role in moving the General Assembly away from negotiations on specific issues and timetables, and toward general considerations of North/ South problems. Moreover, the President reviewed this issue in connection with the Latin American bilaterals and expressed a preference for: a) steering UN General Assembly North/South discussions toward broad issues; b) the avoidance of negotiations within the General Assembly, c) negotiations on specific issues in functional bodies. I therefore recommend that Option 1, favoring an overview mechanism be approved. AGENDA ITEM 4 Acceptance of greater participation of LDCs in the international system will flow from PRC agreement on the basic policy framework. I recommend that you approve the PRM 8 working group’s recommendations that the USG make a major effort to enlarge the group of countries which manages the international system.10 AGENDA ITEM 5 The basic human needs section of PRM 8–III is far superior to what is now found in the drafts of the Development Coordination Committee or the Brookings Report.11 No final decisions need be taken on the issues presented at this time. In the preliminary discussions on basic human needs, I recommend (1) that you explore the possibility of approving the working group’s recommendation that its basic human needs approach12 be endorsed; (2) that you express a preference for bilateral programs that are flexible enough to be directed toward13 middle income countries, as appropriate; (3) that you express a cautious approach to the conditionality which will be required of developing countries (on US leverage and conditionality the PRM 8–III, the DCC and the Brookings study are quite divergent); (4) that you express support for the working group’s recommendations that the US support the basic human needs policies of international development lending institutions; and (5) that you endorse the working group’s cautious approach to expanding the basic human needs concept to other areas. 9 Brzezinski underlined the words “A UN oversight.” 10 Brzezinski highlighted the last sentence of this paragraph and underlined the words “group of countries which manages the international.” 11 See Document 277 and footnote 2 thereto. 12 Brzezinski underlined the words “basic human” and “approach.” 13 Brzezinski underlined the word “toward” and wrote “who” in the margin adjacent to this sentence.
