North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
841
do not agree. A UN oversight9 role is inevitable, either as a result of the
32nd UNGA or of the restructuring of the UN. An overview mecha-
nism could be prejudicial to US interests if we do not take an active role
in moving the General Assembly away from negotiations on specific
issues and timetables, and toward general considerations of North/
South problems. Moreover, the President reviewed this issue in con-
nection with the Latin American bilaterals and expressed a preference
for: a) steering UN General Assembly North/South discussions toward
broad issues; b) the avoidance of negotiations within the General As-
sembly, c) negotiations on specific issues in functional bodies. I there-
fore recommend that Option 1, favoring an overview mechanism be
approved.
AGENDA ITEM 4
Acceptance of greater participation of LDCs in the international
system will flow from PRC agreement on the basic policy framework. I
recommend that you approve the PRM 8 working group’s recommen-
dations that the USG make a major effort to enlarge the group of coun-
tries which manages the international system.10
AGENDA ITEM 5
The basic human needs section of PRM 8–III is far superior to what
is now found in the drafts of the Development Coordination Com-
mittee or the Brookings Report.11 No final decisions need be taken on
the issues presented at this time. In the preliminary discussions on
basic human needs, I recommend (1) that you explore the possibility of
approving the working group’s recommendation that its basic human
needs approach12 be endorsed; (2) that you express a preference for bi-
lateral programs that are flexible enough to be directed toward13
middle income countries, as appropriate; (3) that you express a cau-
tious approach to the conditionality which will be required of devel-
oping countries (on US leverage and conditionality the PRM 8–III, the
DCC and the Brookings study are quite divergent); (4) that you express
support for the working group’s recommendations that the US support
the basic human needs policies of international development lending
institutions; and (5) that you endorse the working group’s cautious ap-
proach to expanding the basic human needs concept to other areas.
9 Brzezinski underlined the words “A UN oversight.”
10 Brzezinski highlighted the last sentence of this paragraph and underlined the
words “group of countries which manages the international.”
11 See Document 277 and footnote 2 thereto.
12 Brzezinski underlined the words “basic human” and “approach.”
13 Brzezinski underlined the word “toward” and wrote “who” in the margin adja-
cent to this sentence.
