German Democratic Republic of relations. He said the US appreciates the GDR’s positive approach to this problem and stated that the US would continue to study the problem and would “go back to the drawing board.” He added that with good will and determination it should be possible to resolve the nationality question, preferably without referring to it at all in any exchange of letters. 17. The Ambassador stated that the claims issues are important to us and their solution would contribute to bilateral relations. The US had positively assessed the March meeting of experts, the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission is working within a short time frame and negotiations should start in 1980. Ambassador said that he would convey the offer of a meeting to hold talks to authorities in Washington but, as an informal comment, expressed the hope that these talks could be held earlier. The Ambassador agreed that bilateral cultural relations had broadened and deepened, and he expressed appreciation for the fact that the Jubilee Singers would be able to perform in May next year. He expressed the hope that the photographic exhibit, “Reflections, USA” could be held in the Berlin TV Tower as well. 18. Nier said that he wanted to make a comment in the support of frankness that had so far prevailed. He stated that one must not give an opportunity to the mass media to poison the “constructive atmosphere” which had prevailed during the talks. This would not serve either detente or the solution of problems. Nier noted that there had been some speculation in the mass media and that the GDR had had experience with abuse of this nature. He stated that he had no objection to informing the media of the fact that the US and the GDR had discussed matters of mutual interest. Ms. Derian stated that if she is obliged to make any statement to the press at all, it is to the effect that she had had frank discussions on matters of mutual interest. Ms. Derian stated that as we prepare for the Madrid Conference, we must talk and that such discussions can ease tensions. Nier replied that the GDR was prepared to contribute to the preparations and hopes to find useful ways to develop cooperation among nations. He noted that he had just returned from Madrid and the Spanish Government had already started its preparations for the conference. In conclusion, Deputy Foreign Minister Nier expressed the hope that Assist Sec Derian could come back to Berlin when the weather was better. 19. Cable has been cleared in draft by Ms. Derian. Bolen
