384
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
the United States, a country which would stand idly by, thus permit-
ting the continuance of the British blockade, while Iranian nationals
were starving.
8. His only comment on the reported infiltration of Tudeh ele-
ments in the Party and Government was that the greater danger of the
moment was the retention of British elements in positions of power.
9. When questioned concerning the need to alleviate the desperate
conditions of the workers, Dr. Bagai stated that the present labor law
does not have adequate provisions for enforcement. He ascribed this to
the machinations of the AIOC influence with the government just after
the Second World War (when the labor law was passed). He stated that
the proof of his allegations were in the documents captured by the
Workers’ Party from the AIOC information office. Dr. Bagai stated that
it should be a primary responsibility of the deputies of the Parliament
to pass a new, and enforceable, labor law. He personally believes that
the only hope for effective enforcement is in the control by the gov-
ernment not only of labor wages but also of factory production and
distribution.
In short, Bagai has an exaggerated idea of the strength of his own
Party, of the readiness of Maleki’s branch to fade quietly away. He is
unwilling to recognize that the Tudeh Party has become a more impor-
tant political agency than his by far. He has no plan for financing the
Government deficit, no plan to reduce the concentration of dependent
National Iranian Oil Company workers, nor for feeding or housing the
unemployed, no plans to meet the economic crisis which winter is cer-
tain to bring.
He is waiting for the American election in the hope that the Repub-
licans will be elected, that their election will mean the solution either of
the oil question, or that it will generate an American urge to underwrite
whatever budget deficits might exist.
For the Ambassador:
Roy M. Melbourne
First Secretary of Embassy
