3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
811
ically that the fact was that in Vienna he had expressed a generally ob-
jective assessment of the existing equality between the sides; i.e., the
Soviet Union and the United States, while in Washington he took the
position of striving for a military advantage for NATO and first and
foremost for the United States. Gromyko would now cite a third fact;
the Secretary had mentioned SALT II and while he, Gromyko, had in-
tended to speak on this subject separately, he would present the third
fact here. This fact was that the U.S. had undermined the Treaty. The
U.S. Administration seemed to have been selling it, but it could be said
that in fact it had buried the Treaty. This, too, happened before the
events in Afghanistan. The U.S. Government invented a certain situa-
tion in Cuba, and this had made it very clear for the Soviet authorities
that something was brewing in Washington. The Soviets understood
then that the Cuban situation had been invented artificially for a spe-
cific purpose. It became clear that SALT II was being pigeon-holed for a
long period of time and that the Senate had decided at an early stage to
remove SALT II from its agenda. Leaving aside the fact that the U.S.
had taken a very frivolous attitude toward an agreement that had been
carefully arrived at as a result of lengthy negotiations, and had been
signed by the two heads of state, the practical result of withdrawing
SALT II from the ratification process had struck a severe blow at the re-
lations between our two countries and had gone a long way to under-
mine the Soviet Union’s confidence and trust in the U.S. Administra-
tion, its words, and its agreements and understandings with the Soviet
Union. Indeed, the U.S. Administration was acting quite frivolously—
achieving understandings today and rejecting them tomorrow. Gro-
myko said that the Secretary might reply that in the U.S. the President,
the Secretary of State, many officials and other people, among them the
Secretary’s predecessor as well, had made speeches in favor of SALT II.
It is true that some statements to that effect had been made, but they
were of the kind that undermined rather than supported the substance
of the Treaty.
These three facts were irrefutable; they could not be denied by
anyone. All three taken together and, indeed, each one of them sepa-
rately, constituted a well-rounded system designed for striking a se-
vere blow at Soviet-American relations. Considering the role that the
U.S. and the Soviet Union played in world affairs, such a severe blow
could not but have a negative effect upon the international situation as
a whole. This had already produced a strong effect: many people today
are worried about their tomorrow. The Soviet leadership had the im-
pression that there were some people in Washington who had com-
pletely lost their self-control, particularly in these days, when weapons
of terrible destructiveness were in the hands of both sides. This was an
entirely different situation from anything twenty, thirty, or forty years
ago. The Soviet leadership asks itself how responsible statesmen could
