Colombia 317 stability, that we have shown our willingness to be of assistance by the Eximbank loan granted last year, and that we hope to continue to be helpful within the limits of available resources. 2. Economic Development Loans. The Colombians have indicated, without being specific, that they plan to seek loans for economic development projects. The Eximbank may wish to consider their applications if their stabilization program shows further progress, but we cannot speak for the Bank. The IBRD has its own policies. The DLF might be interested in applications that meet its criteria, but funds for this purpose are limited. 3. Coffee Prices and Quotas. 85% of Colombia’s foreign exchange is derived from sales of coffee abroad. Coffee prices have been falling, and every cent that coffee drops on the New York Market means a loss to Colombia of $8 million in foreign exchange. The Colombians may urge us to assist them in stabilizing coffee prices and imposing coffee quotas. We are now studying various possibilities of cooperating on the coffee problem, but these have not yet been cleared through the Government, and until such time as we have reached full agreement, no hopes should be aroused in the Colombians. 4. Swedish-Built Destroyers. The Colombians will have two modern destroyers ready for delivery from Sweden about May 1, on which they still owe $7 million. The Foreign Minister has suggested that we provide the Colombian Navy with these vessels under the MAAG agreement by taking over the payments due. There is no way that we can do this. We hope the ship loan bill recently introduced in Congress will enable us to transfer two destroyers to Colombia, which would give them some flexibility in deciding what to do with the Swedish-­built ones. 5. Religious problem. The Protestant problem has two important phases: (a) The closed churches and schools, both inside and outside of Mission Territory, have not been reopened, with four or five exceptions. About 100 churches and chapels inside Mission Territory and 40 churches and chapels outside Mission Territory remain closed. About 200 Protestant schools are still closed. Our Ambassador has taken up this question with the Foreign Minister on several occasions, urging that a formula be found to permit the churches and schools to be reopened, but the Foreign Minister says that the clergy and masses are opposed to any such action and it is very difficult for the Government to intervene for this reason. The Ambassador has warned him that if nothing is done the success of his mission in the United States may be endangered. (b) Violence. Sporadic cases of violence against U.S. Protestant missionaries still occur from time to time. Recently the residence of a U.S. missionary in Supfa, Caldas, was dynamited following attacks upon her from the pulpit by the local priest. Our Embassy brought this case to the attention of the Foreign Minister, expressing some surprise that no action was taken against the priest for this. The Government rarely
