Chapter 5, May–June 1990 667 that you would grandfather an existing conventional ALCM that we’ve called Tacit Rainbow which has a range over 600 kilometers, then I can tell you that we will agree to the range threshold of 600 kilometers for ALCMs. Let me say, as you might well suppose, this has not been an easy thing for me to get. I told the President that you had said that range was the key and that everything depended upon. I also told him of the conversation that we had with Akhromeyev in Moscow when he referred to the understanding that he had worked out with Nitze about this, and I also mentioned what he said about the difficulty of transforming your air defenses. In light of all that, I’ve now been authorized to say that we will go to 600 if you will accept this package and take care of Tacit Rainbow. But I have got to tell you that I don’t have a happy military. Shevardnadze: On the question of numerical limits for heavy bombers, there’s no changing of your position? Baker: Yes, that’s right. And also on this issue of the tactical aircraft carrying conventional ALCMs. We’re not willing to accept that. But the rest of the elements that were mentioned by Karpov were included in that package. Now for SLCMs. Here is our proposal in the form of a draft declaration. Most of what it has is what we agreed to in Moscow. When we left Moscow we were left with two issues—­ one was range and the other was the issue of whether the declaration would be covering nuclear or conventional. You then came back after Moscow in Washington and made your proposal. This package that I’m presenting to you in the form of a declaration is designed to cut through the differences that we have. This declaration touches only on nuclear SLCMs. The declaration covers SLCMs over 300 kilometers in range. You wanted 600, we preferred no range thresholds. We’re moving to 600 on ALCMs, your number. Now, this declaration is merely a declaration and isn’t going to impose a restriction on your SLCMs of over 300 kilometers. Our preference would be to include all nuclear. We’re going to include those with a range of over 300. On verification, there is no language which is something that we agreed would be the case in Moscow. But we do pick up on your idea of referring to future possible cooperative measures. We’re also saying here the sides will exchange information on which kinds of ship and submarines would be capable of deploying or carrying SLCMs, and we also agree there would be no MIRVed SLCMs. Most importantly, we’ve tried once again to respond to your concerns, because we’re now coming in with a common limit on nuclear SLCMs that will not be exceeded for the duration of the treaty. Shevardnadze: That’s very important.
