United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  129
Sr. Bueso presented a memorandum2 on how the U.S. could help 
in the integration of Central American economies by the establishment 
of a Central American development bank. Such a bank could finance 
roads of common importance, the linking up of electric power net-
works, industrial loans of a regional character, and loans to enterprises 
requiring help because of readjustments of tariffs. It would be a mixed 
bank of government and private capital, reinforced by external loans. 
Each Central American country would put in $2 million; there would 
be a total of $2 million private capital. They request a ratio of 3 to 1 of 
external resources to Central American resources. There would be an 
open door for Costa Rica and Panamá, but since this is an integration 
movement these two republics would have to be members in the trade 
area, as well as in the bank.
Mr. Dillon said that we are warm supporters of Central American 
economic integration and recognize the need for a bank. The U.S. 
believes that once it has started the situation will rapidly improve. 
Heretofore, we have had no very definite project for such a bank, but 
at the time of the Bank/Fund meeting in Washington at the end of 
September3 we would be ready to work out a draft charter. The Inter-
American Bank might serve as a supervisory trustee for U.S. funds. 
Certainly it would be a good thing to work closely with that Bank.
Mr. Dillon observed that President Herrera said he was very much 
interested in this bank and would like to give technical help.
Mr. Dillon said that we can’t tell how much the U.S. is ready to do 
until we sit down and discuss it. The figure of $80 million mentioned 
in a table at the end of the memorandum is much more than we had 
hereto discussed. The important thing, however, is to get started. As in 
the case of DLF experience, we found that some national development 
banks require successive loans after the initial loan. He also said that 
where major projects are concerned the parties might consider assis-
tance from organizations other that the proposed bank.
Mr. Mann suggested that, in order to save time, it would be best for 
the U.S. to do its preparatory work with someone (perhaps Mr. Rochac) 
between now and the end of the Bank/Fund meeting and we could all 
meet thereafter, say September 25. Sr. Mohr said that it is true that the 
important thing is to get started, but in order to have the psychological 
impact that the Central American common market is here to stay the new 
2 Not found in Department of State files.
3 Reference is to the annual joint meetings of the Boards of Governors of the IMF, 
IBRD, and IFC, held in Washington, September 26–30, 1960. For text of a message from 
President Eisenhower to the representatives at the meetings, and statements by Secretary 
of the Treasury Anderson, Under Secretary of State Dillon, and Assistant Secretary of 
the Treasury Upton concerning the problems of a developing world economy, see 
Department of State Bulletin, October 17, pp. 607–617.
