1104  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
I asked whether attrition had yet had much effect on the public pay-
roll. He said it had not, although the prohibition on all new hiring was 
being strictly enforced, and that the rate of reduction was only about 5 
percent per year. Retirement benefits for anyone who had worked for 
the Government for seven years were so great as to make firing unprof-
itable but he was contemplating a considerable number of firings of per-
sons employed less than seven years. He was also continuing his hunt 
for Communists, had unearthed a considerable number particularly in 
the Bureau of Internal Revenue, and would get rid of them regardless of 
length of service.
He was delighted with the unfreezing of the submarine sinking 
fund,2 which would help materially in meeting his still difficult prob-
lem of meeting current expenses. After January 1 IPC would resume its 
current tax payments and the Southern Peru Copper Corporation begin 
its export payments. The new tax bonds would be floated beginning 
in late January and he thought would bring in some $500 million. This 
would be necessary not for the budget but to meet expenses during the 
lean first five months of the year.
The inflow of dollars was continuing, although the Central Bank had 
recently sold half a million. I told him we continued to spare Malcolm 
Bryan’s3 worry that holding too rigid a rate would cause difficulty later 
and he reiterated his intention shortly to let the sol rise gradually to 27.50.
I asked whether he did not believe the improvement in the sit-
uation warranted a moderate increase in credit. He thought that a 
reduction of perhaps 5 percent in reserve requirements and equivalent 
rediscounting might shortly be warranted.
I hoped that as soon as the budget was passed he would find time 
for other matters, reminding him of our haunting preoccupation with 
the prospect of social revolution unless steps were taken reasonably 
quickly to bring about a rising standard of living for the lowest classes. 
He replied that a balanced budget was the fundamental requisite and 
that thereafter prosperity would follow naturally. I agreed but held that 
prosperity for the wealthy and the business community would not be 
enough unless unprecedented steps were taken to enable the Indians 
and Cholos to participate in it to some degree.
2 In a memorandum of December 10 to Assistant Secretary Rubottom, Deputy 
Assistant Secretary Coerr recommended approval of a Peruvian request of November 
24 that the Export-Import Bank authorize Peru to send soles set aside for payment of a 
Peruvian submarine loan. Rubottom noted his approval on condition that the money went 
to the Ministry of Finance and not the Ministry of the Navy. (723.5–MSP/12–1059) In tele-
gram 449 to Lima, December 23, the Department of State informed the U.S. Embassy that 
the Export-Import Bank delivered to Ambassador Berckemeyer on that day a letter dated 
December 22, which upon the Ambassador’s endorsement authorized the requested expen-
diture, provided that it was not for military purposes and that Peru continued to make 
quarterly deposits of soles in a special account with the Banco de Fomento Agropecuario as 
provided by the amended submarine loan agreement. (103.XMB/1–2359)
3 Malcom H. Bryan, Special Adviser to the Government of Peru, Central Bank of Peru.
