1979 555 As a third issue, Dr. Brzezinski proposed discussion of economic targeting, and in particular, whether we should continue to have as an objective the prolongation of Soviet recovery, or should instead target the Soviet economy in terms of war sustaining industry and the broad urban industrial base upon which Soviet post-­war power would depend. (TS) Secretary Brown noted that this may not be an important issue because whichever policy we choose for economic targeting will probably lead to pretty much the same targets. (S) Dr. Brzezinski then asked how we should deal with the issue of hard-­target kill—­specifically the ability to destroy Soviet silos, sheltered leadership and targets of this type. (TS) Secretary Brown noted that this is primarily an acquisition issue. (U) Mr. Aaron responded by saying that it is important to discuss it, nonetheless, because many people think of targeting in terms of this issue. (C) Secretary Brown noted that a major reason to want hard-­target kill capabilities is to eliminate Soviet capabilities to reload and reuse their missile silos. (S) Dr. Brzezinski then stated that the fourth issue would be a discussion of the need for prompt hard-­target kill capability. (S) Secretary Vance then suggested that the SCC discuss how our targeting policy impacts on European interests. (S) Dr. Brzezinski argued that this issue should be taken up later. (U) General Jones said that some new SAOs are being constructed for targeting conventional forces in Eastern Europe, and that these targeting plans might be well received by our NATO Allies. (TS) Mr. Aaron said this is probably not true of all of our European Allies and the issue of whether, when and how to discuss these new SAOs with our Allies should be thought through carefully. (TS) Dr. Brzezinski then suggested that the fifth and sixth issues for discussion should be the launch-­under-­attack question, and the impact of our targeting plans upon our Allies. (TS) Mr. Aaron suggested that after the issues Dr. Brzezinski had suggested had been dealt with, the SCC should discuss our declaratory and acquisition policies. (S) Dr. Brzezinski then suggested Harold Brown should be prepared to open the discussion in the next meeting on the first two or three issues, and that background papers drawing on the study should be prepared on all the issues. (U)
