1979  555
As a third issue, Dr. Brzezinski proposed discussion of economic 
targeting, and in particular, whether we should continue to have as an 
objective the prolongation of Soviet recovery, or should instead tar-
get the Soviet economy in terms of war sustaining industry and the 
broad urban industrial base upon which Soviet post-­war power would 
depend. (TS)
Secretary Brown noted that this may not be an important issue 
because whichever policy we choose for economic targeting will prob-
ably lead to pretty much the same targets. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski then asked how we should deal with the issue of 
hard-­target kill—­specifically the ability to destroy Soviet silos, shel-
tered leadership and targets of this type. (TS)
Secretary Brown noted that this is primarily an acquisition issue. (U)
Mr. Aaron responded by saying that it is important to discuss it, 
nonetheless, because many people think of targeting in terms of this 
issue. (C)
Secretary Brown noted that a major reason to want hard-­target kill 
capabilities is to eliminate Soviet capabilities to reload and reuse their 
missile silos. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski then stated that the fourth issue would be a discus-
sion of the need for prompt hard-­target kill capability. (S)
Secretary Vance then suggested that the SCC discuss how our tar-
geting policy impacts on European interests. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski argued that this issue should be taken up later. (U)
General Jones said that some new SAOs are being constructed for 
targeting conventional forces in Eastern Europe, and that these target-
ing plans might be well received by our NATO Allies. (TS)
Mr. Aaron said this is probably not true of all of our European 
Allies and the issue of whether, when and how to discuss these new 
SAOs with our Allies should be thought through carefully. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski then suggested that the fifth and sixth issues for dis-
cussion should be the launch-­under-­attack question, and the impact of 
our targeting plans upon our Allies. (TS)
Mr. Aaron suggested that after the issues Dr. Brzezinski had sug-
gested had been dealt with, the SCC should discuss our declaratory 
and acquisition policies. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski then suggested Harold Brown should be prepared to 
open the discussion in the next meeting on the first two or three issues, 
and that background papers drawing on the study should be prepared 
on all the issues. (U)
