LII Summaries of Compilations Bolivia U.S. Relations With Bolivia Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. The central theme that runs through the story of United States relations with Bolivia during the last 3 years of the Eisenhower administration is the effort made by U.S. officials to encourage the reform of the ailing Bolivian economy while not, at the same time, contributing to the collapse of the Bolivian Government. Except for Haiti, Bolivia was the poorest country in Latin America. The Bolivian economy was inefficient, underdeveloped, imbalanced, and plagued by the vagaries of the international metals market. The Bolivian Government was hampered in its efforts to deal with these problems by its commitments to the workers who had supported and sustained the government since it came to power in 1952. Bolivia was heavily dependent on financial support from the United States to meet a succession of economic crises, but the Bolivian Government had to avoid the stigma of appearing to fall back into the embrace of “Yankee imperialism.” Under the circumstances, the objectives which the United States hoped to achieve in its relations with Bolivia were easier to define than to achieve. A policy paper drafted in the Department of State on November 3, 1958, stipulated that the United States was prepared to support any government in Bolivia which was free from Communist influence, and which had the ability and disposition to carry out an effective stabilization program. Conditions in Bolivia were so difficult, however, that the paper defined the primary objective of U.S. policy as “the maintenance of relative political stability in order to forestall a serious politico-­social upheaval.” (BL–15) The Natural Resources Issue Vice President Nixon visited Bolivia in May 1958 and President Hernán Siles Zuazo took advantage of the opportunity to point up the problems afflicting the Bolivian economy, particularly in light of reduced exports of and prices for tin. He asked for Nixon’s support for additional loans from the Development Loan Fund. Nixon promised to support such loan applications, but he stressed the importance of continuing Bolivian efforts to establish an effective financial stabilization program. He also indicated that prospects for Congressional support for financial aid for Bolivia would be enhanced if Bolivia would complete the compensation of U.S. shareholders of the mines which had been nationalized in Bolivia in 1952. (BL–5)
