conditions may improve. In many ways this course would be worse than calling off plebiscite at once, as it would amount to official notice that strong presumption for that cause existed in minds of the Commissioners and as result entire plebiscitary process would henceforth be virtually condemned in advance to failure. Precise problem presented is to find way to carry on until time arrives for determining finally question whether fair plebiscite can in fact be held. As Department intimated in its telegram February 27, 5 p.m., Commission can not safely make this decision until registration stage has been entered and perhaps concluded. Any other course appears, in Department’s view, bound to impose upon Plebiscitary Commission and Arbitrator responsibility far greater than they ought to take, as well as to diminish chances of placing blame where it belongs. Department is strongly of opinion that Peruvian resolution for indefinite postponement should not, at this juncture, be considered and if pressed to a vote it should be rejected on ground that issue is prematurely raised. On record as it stands, this question of existence of conditions or of a so-called plebiscitary atmosphere favorable to fair vote is one which has been before the Commission for months and various attempts have been made to force hand of Commission in regard to it. Department does not see how the record justifies decision practically calling off plebiscite today any more than it did two months ago. Department does not think it wise to engage in written communications with Peruvian Commissioner, as you suggest. Department thinks that it is highly advisable, however, for you to have informal conversations with both Freyre and the Chilean member of the Commission for purpose of making clear to them that your mind is open on possibility of abandoning plebiscite or of postponing it indefinitely; that you will consider that question later, if necessary; and that if pending resolution comes to vote you will either vote against it or will vote for its postponement, placing your reason for such action upon the record. This action on your part, in Department’s view, makes it very difficult for Peru to carry out her threat of withdrawal. Doubtless you have already observed that Freyre’s resolution is drawn so as to leave Peru in position to contend that she has reserved her right to a
