United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 41 Mr. Marshall M. Smith Mr. Clarence I. Blau Governor Wm. McC. Martin, Jr., Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System Governor M. S. Szymczak Mr. J. Herbert Furth Mr. Samuel C. Waugh, Export-Import Bank Mr. R. H. Rowntree Mr. Dempster McIntosh, Development Loan Fund Mr. Robert M. Cabot Mr. Walter Schaefer, International Cooperation Administration Mr. Hale T. Shenefield Mr. Charles Warden Mr. Thomas P. Doughty Mr. Frank A. Southard, Jr., International Monetary Fund Mr. John S. Hooker, International Bank Mr. Max Myers, Department of Agriculture, Visitor Mr. William F. Doering, Department of Agriculture, Visitor Mrs. Katherine Wiley, Department of Agriculture, Visitor Mr. Larry F. Thomasson, Department of Agriculture, Visitor Mr. Bartlett Harvey, Bureau of the Budget, Visitor Mr. Hal B. Lary, Council of Economic Advisers, Visitor Mr. George H. Willis, Secretary Mr. C. L. Callander, Assistant Secretary Mr. Victor A. Mack, NAC Secretariat 1. Inter-American Development Banking Institution The Council considered the paper submitted by the Staff Committee on policy issues involved in the Inter-American Development Banking Institution (NAC Document No. 2431). The Secretary of the Council reviewed the Staff Committee discussion, pointing out that the basic assumption of the Working Group was that the institution would be a conservative financial institution which would revolve its funds through a banking operation. If this broad principle were altered to emphasize the possibility of soft loans, the paper would have to be modified. The Staff Committee had discussed the question of currency of repayment and agreed this matter required further Council consideration. Another important issue was whether the authorized capital should be $600 million as outlined in the paper, or $1 billion as suggested by the State Department in the Staff discussion. The Secretary noted that these questions also involved the question of U.S. voting power in the institution. The Chairman asked for the views of the Department of State. Mr. Dillon recalled the political motivation of United States support
