104  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
transferred to it by the U.S. Government. They also foresaw that this 
program would require the administrative cooperation of agencies 
located in Latin America such as ICA, and the existent national orga-
nizations charged with economic planning in the different countries.
Mr. Rubottom asked Sr. Herrera if the new lending agency intended 
to develop a special relation to one or two countries (he cited Honduras 
as an example) with the intention of turning them into “show-­cases.” 
The Bank President replied that he was in favor of this approach, and 
in that regard had in mind Paraguay and Bolivia. He added that the 
IDB should not be concerned with the political side of the Paraguayan 
problem, and that $10 million in Paraguay, because of its purely agri-
cultural structure, could do wonders. Mr. Dillon agreed, commenting 
that the new institution could ignore political factors whereas the U.S. 
Government has no similar freedom of action.
Bolivia, said Sr. Herrera, should also receive special attention 
aimed at diversifying its economy.
Mr. Mann discussed the subject of the pressures being put upon the 
U.S. Government to finance budget and balance-­of-­payments deficits. 
He was of the opinion that any funds transferred to the IDB should be 
used wisely and that any local government costs financed by the Bank 
should result in an easing of deficits in other areas. In line with Assistant 
Secretary Mann’s misgivings on U.S. financing of budget deficits, the 
Under Secretary said that the Bank should require recipient countries 
to make the proper commitments to it so that any assistance given them 
will not encourage continued budget and balance-of-­payments deficits.
ETA–42.	
Editorial Note
The notes of the Secretary’s staff meeting, held on July 28, 1960, 
at 9:15 a.m., concerning the subject of economic assistance to Latin 
America, read as follows:
“2. Mr. Dillon thought his meeting with the Latin American 
Ambassadors yesterday on OECD developments had been useful. 
Some of their fears that the OECD would prejudice Latin American 
interests seem to have been allayed. There was more interest in the 
new program proposed by the President, and it was obvious that the 
Ambassadors wanted a figure rather than generalities. Mr. Dillon added 
that the new Latin American program had pretty well taken shape in 
the Department and now would be discussed with Milton Eisenhower 
and the interested agencies before being taken up with the President
