1260
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
and the few remaining West Bank mayors, including Freij, are consid-
ering similar action. The quality of life has plummeted in the territo-
ries and many, including Sam Lewis, expect a cycle of violence and re-
pression which could turn the clock back ten years. This ultimately
could lead to repugnance in Israel and even greater pressure for new
elections.
Begin is no closer to solving his ministerial problem. He and
Sharon engaged in a vitriolic exchange at Sunday’s5 Cabinet meeting
which will make it all but impossible for Sharon to support Shamir’s
appointment as Defense Minister and equally impossible for Begin to
withdraw it. If Sharon votes against the government he is required by
Knesset procedures to resign and Begin is apparently backgrounding
the press that this would be no great loss. Sharon’s defection would not
bring down the government but would make Begin’s majority and sur-
vivability very tenuous.
Begin, in an almost irrational Knesset speech,6 compared the
German government to the Nazis and the French to the Vichy. He reit-
erated Israeli policy on Jerusalem and used the line that the gov-
ernment does not intend to “intervene” in the Knesset handling of the
Cohen Bill.7 While the intent may have been to be helpful, the message
was couched in a way which will be interpreted by the Egyptians and
other Arabs as anything but helpful.
Burg talked to Sam and said he was anxious to come to Wash-
ington to see you and is ready to travel on 36-hour notice. Burg once
again tried out Begin’s formula of the Government not “intervening” in
the matter of the Cohen Bill but asked Sam for any other suggestions.
Burg would like to get a formula worked out before coming to Wash-
ington. Sam is skeptical that any formula Begin could agree to would
satisfy the Egyptians and suggests we not spend much political capital
in pursuing this track. He also points out that the government is begin-
ning to press its own version of a basic law on Jerusalem which could
come out of committee or at least be considered in committee in a
matter of weeks or no more than months. Thus, even if we get a reas-
surance on the Cohen Bill we must be careful not to mislead the Egyp-
tians and set the stage for a future walk-out which causes even more
damage. Sam suggested getting Burg and Ali together (Ali is currently
indisposed due to a recurrence of his rheumatic arthritis), back-to-back
Burg and Ali visits or a shuttle by you in the area. However, Sam is
5 June 1.
6 Excerpts of Begin’s June 2 address to the Knesset are in Israel’s Foreign Policy, His-
torical Documents, vol. 6: 1979–1980, Document 97.
7 See Document 371.
