304 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV and fluctuated more than that for any other service. By the end of the 10-­year period, spending for this service was only slightly higher than in 1967. Examination of defense spending for intercontinental and regional forces indicates that: • Spending for intercontinental attack forces subject to SALT II limitation constituted a little over 10 percent of total defense spending and grew at a slower pace than the total. • Spending for Ground Forces and Frontal Aviation in the NATO Guidelines Area constituted less than 10 percent of total defense spending but grew at about twice the rate of the total. • Spending for Soviet forces along the Sino-Soviet border constituted a little over 10 percent of total defense spending and grew at more than twice the rate of the total. Prospects. Soviet economic growth has been slowing in the 1960s and the 1970s, and we forecast a further slowdown in the 1980s. Nonetheless, all of the evidence available to us on Soviet defense programs under way and planned suggests that the long-­term upward trend in allocation of resources to defense is likely to continue into the 1980s. There is no indication that economic problems are causing major changes in defense policy. The atmosphere in Moscow with regard to the economy, however, is one of concern, and the Soviet leaders could be contemplating modest alterations in military force goals. But even if such alterations were undertaken, the rate of growth of defense spending over the next five years or so probably would slow only marginally. • For the next two or three years, Soviet defense spending will continue to grow. Because some current ICBM, ballistic missile submarine, and fighter aircraft programs are nearing completion, the annual rates of growth in that period probably will be slightly lower than the long-­run average. • During the early 1980s we expect the Soviets to begin testing and deploying a number of the new weapon systems under development. This probably will cause the annual rates of growth in defense spending to increase to a pace more in keeping with the long-­term growth trend of 4 to 5 percent a year. • Conclusion of a SALT II agreement along the lines currently being discussed would not, in itself, slow the growth of Soviet defense spending significantly. [Omitted here are the preface, the body of the assessment, and an appendix.]
