National Security Policy 609 of “communes” must be a development ideologically embarrassing to the Soviets, since it implies that the Chinese are advancing toward Communism more rapidly than the Soviets themselves. There may also be Soviet concern over a Chinese tendency toward “adventurism” in pushing for Communist advances, and over the role to be played by Communist China in those areas of the Far East where it has independ­ ent interests. Thus far these matters do not seem to have occasioned serious difficulty, although even if they had every effort would cer­ tainly be made to conceal the fact. Peiping has been in the forefront in proclaiming Soviet leadership of the Bloc, the USSR has acknowledged Communist China’s high place in Bloc councils and its ability to make independent contributions to Marxism-Leninism, and to date Sino-­ Soviet interests in the Far East apparently have not clashed. 213. Problems associated with Sino-Soviet economic and military relations could also lead to friction. However, Soviet aid programs have apparently gone forward on the planned scale, and there is no evidence that the Chinese have sought more aid than they are getting; Peiping’s desire for more assistance probably has been counterbalanced by its wish to limit the degree of its economic dependence. The question of nuclear weapons may be a delicate one; the Chinese have presum­ ably sought them from the USSR, or will do so. The USSR is proba­ bly reluctant to supply them because of unfavorable repercussions on the Soviet disarmament position, the attendant loss of Soviet leverage over Communist China, and the potential military risks involved. We believe that nuclear weapons have not been given to China, but that the Soviets may make them available in the future under some form of Soviet control. 214. In sum, we believe that Communist China will attain over the next several years an increasing influence on general Bloc policy and Communist ideology. The Soviet leaders themselves are almost certainly aware of this likelihood and probably view it with concern. Moscow will wish to retain its pre-­eminent position in the Bloc and, to the extent that it fears the eventual emergence of an actual rival, will attempt cautiously to minimize Peiping’s influence within the Bloc. On the other hand, Peiping’s growing stature strengthens the Bloc both internally and externally and in this respect is welcome in Moscow. Moreover, both partners recognize the importance of solidarity to over-­ all Communist objectives and realize that mutual adjustments are inev­ itable consequences of the alliance. VI. TRENDS IN SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY Introduction—The Current Conduct of Soviet Policy 216. Soviet foreign policy, over the more than five years since Stalin’s death and increasingly since the consolidation of Khrushchev’s
