792
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
We have carefully considered the implications of your announce-
ment of the withdrawal of some Soviet military units from Afghanistan.
Your letter indicates that there has been a reduction of the overall
number of Soviet troops in Afghanistan, although neither your public
announcement nor our own analysis indicate that this is necessarily
the case. We will carefully watch for evidence of such a reduction.
As the Venice Summit communiqué makes clear, the U.S. and the
other Summit participants would regard such withdrawals as a useful
contribution to the solution of the Afghan crisis if they are permanent
and continue until there is a complete withdrawal of the Soviet troops.3
We would welcome as a significant step an indication of your intention
to undertake a process leading to complete withdrawal and a political
settlement.
We recognize that the Soviet Union has legitimate interest in the
security of its borders and in friendly relations with Afghanistan. In
our view, an independent and non-aligned Afghan Government pre-
pared to maintain friendly relations with all its neighbors would be
consistent with Soviet interests. Such a government would have to be
acceptable to the Afghan people, for otherwise there can be no restora-
tion of peace and tranquility in Afghanistan. Any legitimate concern
you may have regarding outside interference in Afghanistan could be
met by mutual and reciprocal guarantees of non-intervention and non-
interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan by all concerned
parties.
Begin brackets. We have taken note of the Soviet position on a
political settlement as set forth in your letter. In our view, that formula-
tion leaves a number of important questions unanswered. For example,
it offers no indication of what the Soviet Union would regard as satisfac-
tory assurances of nonintervention, and it does not indicate whether
and when all Soviet forces would withdraw if such assurances were
provided. In addition, it does not address the problem created by the
resistance of the Afghan people to the policies of the present regime.
End brackets.4
I would like to reiterate our strong interest in an improvement in
U.S.-Soviet relations based on reciprocity and mutual restraint. The
key to an improvement in this relationship remains a political solution
to the Afghan crisis which I believe can be achieved with the complete
withdrawal of Soviet troops, pursuant to appropriate transitional
arrangements. If you are prepared to discuss such a solution seriously,
3 See footnote 2, Document 281.
4 This paragraph was not included in the final text.
