Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 391 58. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, November 21, 1989, 1207Z 10407. Subject: START: Approaching the End of Round XII 1. Secret—Entire Text. 2. The atmosphere continues to be good here but it seems clear results will fall short of what both sides had hoped for this round. This is mainly due to unanticipated problems in implementing the new unit of account, slowness in getting anticipated new instructions from Washington and lack of new ideas from either side on the remaining major issues. At least, peace and friendship were much in evidence at a Soviet reception November 16 to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the beginning of SALT I in Helsinki. Simplification of the Treaty 3. The need for simplification of the treaty—­a theme I have been pushing for some time—­is beginning to be more widely recognized here. The sides have reorganized and simplified the MOU and mobiles paper and made other minor fixes. The ACDA lawyers are looking at how we might rationalize the hodge-­podge of terminology that has grown up and turn that into a coherent and internally consistent set of properly defined terms. Informally, the Soviets are pointing to the constraints on non-­deployed missiles, provisions on case/cass and missile elimination procedures as areas where major simplifications should be made. 4. Everyone would readily agree with the general proposition that the Treaty is far too complex and needs an overhaul. The problems start when one looks at specifics—­one person’s simplification will kill another person’s sacred cow. It may be that this is primarily a delegation responsibility. However, some direction from capitals along these lines might be helpful. For example, both sides could formally instruct the delegations to search for ways to simplify the Treaty. More specifically, State could help by focusing interagency attention on NDMS, case/cass and terminology as priority issues for between-­the-­rounds closure. The point to stress is that this should be done now, while we still have time to do it right, and not in the rush of the endgame. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D891014–0040. Secret; Immediate.
