Dominican Republic  513
further said that when General Clark had asked him when he would 
retire he had not answered, but that he did not expect to retire before 
the year 2000.
2. We could assure him that contingency military planning with the 
Pentagon was well advanced and that, in fact, the U.S. was prepared to move 
when and if the President decided.
3. We felt that it was now necessary to develop a concrete solution on the 
assumption that we would not have the cooperation of the Generalissimo. I said 
that we were working on this within the government, and—­since I did not in 
any way indicate he would be consulted—­he should have got the inference that 
there was no role for him at this time.
After brief reflection, General Clark said that his preliminary comments 
were as follows:
1. He still strongly believed that the Generalissimo would leave the 
Dominican Republic if inducements were held out to him to do so. He felt that 
in the approach which he had made he had been so restricted by the Department 
that he could not offer the Generalissimo inducements—such as U.S. cooper-
ation in settling him elsewhere and in having him appear before the OAS—
which would make it attractive for the Generalissimo to leave. He thought 
that the possibility of the Generalissimo’s leaving voluntarily should 
not be ruled out until we had made concrete and official offers to him.
2. He felt that contingency planning was not sufficient; the U.S. must 
have an active plan to remove Trujillo from the scene if the situation were 
not to drift to our disadvantage.
3. He felt that, after working with us, he had presented a plan which the 
President had approved in the presence of the Secretary, we owed it to the Pres-
ident not to leave the matter dangling and to put before him a detailed plan in 
writing. He (General Clark) would do his best to go along with such a plan 
but would dissent from it if he felt that he had to do so. He clearly indicated 
that he expected at some later stage to get together with the President and the 
Secretary to approve a final plan for the Dominican Republic.
I had only a short time to reply to these comments, but did say that 
I was sure everyone was concerned with moving ahead and that the 
President was being kept informed.
As the General was boarding the plane, he said that we should both 
reflect further on these matters and that I should call him when he returned to 
Washington next week.
COMMENT:
I did not feel it my place to tell the General that he would be excluded 
from further phases of planning with respect to the Dominican Republic. It 
was clear, however, that he expected to continue to play a role in this matter, 
that he believed the President had approved his plan, and that—­if it is not 
intended that he should continue to play his role—­he will have to be told so at 
a high level.
