3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1980 883 302. Summary Memorandum of Conversation1 New York, September 25, 1980, 10 a.m.–1:20 p.m. PARTICIPANTS United States USSR Secretary Muskie Minister Gromyko Marshall Shulman Special Adviser G.M. Kornienko First Deputy to the Secretary Minister of Foreign Affairs Reg Bartholomew Director, A.N. Dobrynin Ambassador to Political-Military Affairs the U.S. Robert L. Barry, Deputy Assistant V. Isakov Deputy Director, Secretary, European Affairs USA Division Dmitri Zarechniak, Interpreter V. Sukhodrev, Interpreter Secretary Muskie opened the conversation by pointing out the importance he attached to face-to-face meetings as an effective way of moving toward accommodation. The President had called him this morning and asked to have his best wishes passed on to Brezhnev and Gromyko. The Secretary said that he and Gromyko had listened to one another’s speeches and thus their discussion had already begun. There were many differences but both sides also sought positive results. He wanted to begin the discussion where possibilities for accommodation were greatest. Iraq-Iran Pointing out that we wanted to avoid new areas of misunderstandings Secretary Muskie said we were deeply concerned about the unfortunate outbreak of hostilities between Iraq and Iran.2 This conflict was taking place in an already unstable part of the world and could endanger our hostages as well as Western oil supplies. Our aim is to end hostilities immediately and we are pursuing this goal through the UN and other international efforts. We favor a meeting of the UN Security Council and a cease-fire resolution as a means of obtaining an immediate end to hostilities. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 58, Chron: 9/21–30/80. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Barry. The meeting took place at the Soviet Mission to the United Nations. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote, “Predictable propaganda. J.” 2 In September 1980, clashes took place along the common Iran and Iraq border, concentrated most heavily along the Shatt al-Arab waterway. Territorial possessions along the border were contested by Iraq, who had repealed just a few days prior the 1975 treaty which mutually agreed on a common Iran–Iraq border in the Shatt al-Arab waterway. (John Kifner, “Iraq Asserts it Sank 8 Iranian Gunboats, Shot Down Fighter,” The New York Times, September 22, 1980, p. A1)
