825.00/284: Telegram
[Document 301]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, September 10, 1924—7 p.m.
[Received September 11—9:20 a.m.]
56. Tonight Alessandri and family depart for Buenos Aires with Europe as
their ultimate destination. I shall accompany them to Mendoza, returning
Friday evening. I am taking this course at the request of the family and with
the full permission of the Government. On two occasions Alessandri
tendered his resignation but each time it was rejected by Congress. The
latter, however, under the Constitution has granted him a leave of 6 months.
He stated to me that he intends again to resign when he crosses the frontier,
inasmuch as he believes it to be inconsistent with his self-respect and
dignity to remain in office when he is not permitted by the military junta to
perform the duties of his office. In a sense his resignation is absolutely
voluntary although his departure from Chile is a result of his knowledge
that if he did not depart he would be forced to by the junta. The junta wants
him to accept the leave granted and not resign. In keeping with the
Constitution General Altamirano as Minister of the Interior assumed full
power as Acting President. The Cabinet offered to send in their resignations
but the members have all been retained. No other faction or party claims to
be the Government. Thousands of people throughout Chile undoubtedly do
not approve of what has happened. However, I have learned of no protests,
especially by organized factions. Everything has been done according to
constitutional forms. The exertion of pressure has been by intimation rather
than by direct threats. No act of violence has yet occurred, but if
compliance had not been given force would undoubtedly have been used.
The nation as a whole seems inclined to accept the present Government at
least until a new Constitution is adopted or until new elections bring about a
change. The legality of the Government is not challenged by the press.
Under the existing situation I believe that the new Cabinet must be
