National Security Policy 1111 employed on key fixed logistical installations, such as Ascom City and Pusan, would seriously affect the US and Allied capability for sustained combat in Korea. Contrariwise, the communist forces are relatively primitive in nature and their supply requirements are substantially less.” On page 122 and 131, it is concluded that under conditions of a continuing two-­way nuclear exchange there would result either a mil­ itary stalemate or an unpredictable expansion of the conflict. Query as to the significance of this conclusion for any judgment as to the present adequacy of our limited war forces? I got the impression from listening to the discussion on Tuesday morning that your people continue to assume that there would be US monopoly use of nuclear weapons in limited operations. Is this a wrong impression? In addition to the proposition “we can’t win unless we use nuclear force”, I would like to hear more discussion of the question, “Can we win if both sides use nuclear force as our intelligence estimates suggest would occur?” SNIE 100–7–58 of July 22, 1958, entitled “Sino-­Soviet and Free World Reactions to US Use of Nuclear Weapons in Limited Wars in the Far East” concluded, in part, that “We believe that if the US used nuclear weapons in meeting Bloc local aggression in the Far East, there would be a grave risk that the Communists would retaliate in kind. . . . If, in the case of Communist aggression against South Korea . . . the US nuclear response were lim­ ited to Korea . . . the Communists would probably respond in kind in the same area.” An informal check indicates that our intelligence people believe this SNIE is still valid. I think it would be most helpful if some time in the future the NSC’s attention could be sharply focused on the effect of limited enemy nuclear attacks on our forces. I am inclined to think that if this is ever done it will lead to a change in our policies and financial allocations to limited war forces. Perhaps a Net Evaluation Committee study of an attack on the Off Shore islands, assuming both sides use nuclear weapons, would be desirable as a next step in exploring the question of whether it is to US advantage to use nuclear weapons in attempting to win a limited war. I would appreciate your reaction to this last suggestion. Sincerely, Gerard C. Smith
