United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 121 Latin American governments and nations make reasonable efforts to help themselves in attacking these problems, and (d) the United States stands ready to lend a hand in cooperation with individual national efforts. We believe that the approach taken by the Committee of 21 in its work over the past two years has not been fruitful and does not promise real accomplishment for the future. The United States will seek, at Bogotá, to achieve restoration to the regular organs of the OAS of the responsibilities which the Committee has been undertaking, with a view to making greater use of the IAECOSOC for the consideration of economic problems, for the conduct of necessary economic studies, and for appropriate recommendations for solutions. At the same time we will seek acceptance of the approach embodied in President Eisenhower’s program. The U.S. delegation will press for: (a) the establishment of what may be called the Inter-American Fund (or Program) for Social Development, (b) use of the Inter-American Development Bank as the primary mechanism for administration of the fund, (c) acceptance of the principle of self-­help, and (d) a strengthened IAECOSOC for Colombo-­type discussions on social and economic problems. The action by the meeting will probably take the form of an agreement accepting the above points or whatever part of them may prove acceptable. The text of a draft of such an agreement was given Latin American representatives by Mr. Dillon on September 26, und the text has also been forwarded to each U.S. diplomatic mission in Latin America.19 III—SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS (None) IV—PUBLIC POSITION Excerpts from the August 23, 1960 testimony before the House Foreign Relations Committee by Under Secretary of State Douglas Dillon (enclosed) may be used us our public position.20 EXCERPTS FROM STATEMENT BY UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE DOUGLAS DILLON BEFORE HOUSE FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE—AUGUST 23, 1960 19 Under Secretary of State Dillon handed the draft text of the “Agreement for the Establishment of an Inter-American Program for Social Development” to Latin American representatives in Washington on August 26, 1960. Documentation concerning the formulation and presentation of this document is in file 371.04. 20 Under Secretary of State Dillon testified before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on August 23, 1960, in support of President Eisenhower’s request that the Congress authorize the appropriation of $600 million for the establishment of a new social program in Latin America.
