140 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII would be forward-leaning in its consideration of proposals for dealing with this problem. (S) Afghanistan/Pakistan: The Vice President then departed and the meeting then turned to a detailed discussion of the problem of providing encouragement or aid for insurgency in Afghanistan. It was agreed that this could be done realistically only through and/or with the assistance of the Pakistanis and in the framework of other recent highlevel policy decisions on Pakistan. After review of CIA’s proposals it was decided that CIA would have early exploratory talks with Pakistani intelligence officials about • radio broadcasts to Afghanistan • financial assistance for selected insurgent groups • an effort to assess the insurgent movement from the viewpoint of providing training and material assistance. It was agreed that a Presidential Finding will be required to cover such activity and, unless there is a negative response from the Pakistanis, such a Finding will be forwarded to the President and CIA will be authorized to proceed with the task of working out operations in these fields in cooperation with the Pakistanis.2 If the Pakistani response to CIA’s exploratory talks is negative, the SCC will reconvene and review the issues anew. (TS) [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.] Near-Verbatim record of SCC of April 6, 1979 VP: It seems to me that this Afghanistan issue provides a good opportunity for us here. We have the Russians deeply involved in the internal affairs of another country and they are obviously trying to mask it with counterattacks to put us on the defensive. They are supporting a highly unpopular government in Afghanistan; secondly, they are fighting the world of Islam. It is embarrassing to them. It would be nice for us to be seen on the other side. I have been encouraging us to make that point wherever we can. The State Department had made a good statement on it. Senator Pell did a statement on it. We have talked with Zablocki and others and they will be making statements. I think we ought to keep the heat on this. The Russians are jumpy as hell about this. I gather when we say we are not involved that that is accurate. Are the Egyptians and the Pakistanis involved? FC: We have no evidence that they are; but they cannot control the border. 2 An unknown hand underlined “unless there is a negative response,” and placed a question mark in the left margin next to the sentence.
