698
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
your generosity. I just hope that God will help in your mission. You can
count on us as peace loving friends in happiness and in sorrow.
President Carter: I hopefully pray that in spite of difficulties that I’ll
never disappoint you. You are the most admired person in my country.
That is a justified feeling. The situation in the Middle East has greatly
changed since I first met you. We have just a few more hours together.
When I get to Israel on Sunday,4 I’ll start the substantive talks. I’ll try to
conclude the talks as quickly as possible. It shouldn’t take long. The dif-
ferences that remain are relatively minor compared to the past. Begin
and Dayan have behaved well in the last few days. They have not made
any claims of victory, they have been cautious, and there is an attitude
of hope. Even in New York,5 Begin struck a very moderate tone. This is
possibly a good omen. I know that Begin is strong, courageous, and
honest. He has made difficult sacrifices in Israel. He has gone further in
his actions than his predecessors. He has suffered at home. He can get
his own party to support him. I’ve tried to understand Israel politics.
The Israeli people are as anxious for peace as those in Egypt. This may
also be true in Syria. The leaders are not in step with the people there. I
hopefully expect that after a few months of difficulty, the attitudes of
the people in Jordan and Syria will change their leaders’ attitudes.
We’ll do all that we can to prevent punitive actions against Egypt. We
will use our maximum influence with Jordan and Saudi Arabia to get
them to accept the accomplished fact. I’ll let them sound off for a while,
but I intend to quietly lean on them. Then I will do all that I can to bring
it to an end. I’d like to leave the Middle East with the peace treaty. If I
go back, it will be hard to reopen the negotiations.
President Sadat: Right.
President Carter: On the prospect of the SALT talks, I need to meet
and to prepare for those. My hope is that if the Israelis provide me with
a good surprise, we can conclude and sign the whole thing early next
week. If so, I would like to leave with good feelings between Egypt and
Israel. There should not be a grudging acceptance. There will be
problems in the future and they can be worked out with cooperation.
Israel can exaggerate little difficulties. Within the limits of expectation,
we are trying to put a good spirit into the whole process. A negative re-
action in the Arab world will be minimized if they see that there is not a
grudging acceptance. If they see things hanging by a thread, then Hus-
sein may try to stir up the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza. No
4 March 11.
5 Following his meetings with Carter in Washington, Begin visited New York
March 6–7, where he gave a series of speeches to Jewish-American groups. (Edward
Walsh, “Begin Urges U.S. Jews to Back New Peace Plan,” The Washington Post, March 7,
1979, p. A17; Edward Walsh, “Begin Says Treaty Now Up to Carter, Sadat,” The Wash-
ington Post, March 8, 1979, p. A26)
