Arms Control and Disarmament 1337 military technical grounds. The Atomic Energy Commission and the Department of Defense, however, believe that tests should continue. The United Kingdom not only wishes to complete its planned tests this year, but also does not feel able to give up further testing unless the results of United States weapons tests can be made available to the United Kingdom through amendment of the Atomic Energy Act. Par­ adoxically, Prime Minister MacMillan says agreement on nuclear test suspension is the only foreseeable result of a summit meeting. 2. Nuclear Cut-­Off—A suggestion by Admiral Strauss has been given some consideration. This calls for shutting down fissionable material plants in order to ease the inspection problem and require cannibalisation of weapon stockpiles to meet peacetime requirements. However, this was strongly resisted by the United Kingdom which depends on its fissionable material plants for its nuclear electric-power program. Accordingly, no major change in this area is being considered. 3. Surprise Attack Zones—We have already decided to separate out the Arctic Zone of inspection against surprise attack. There is a difference of opinion, between General Norstad on the one hand and Chancellor Adenauer and the Defense Department on the other hand, regarding the desirability of accepting European zones of inspection independent of a zone involving North America, and also regarding the possibility of a small European inspection zone covering only Ger­ many, Poland and Czechoslovakia. 4. Outer Space—The idea that outer space might be used only for peaceful purposes has been viewed hopefully as a possible major United States initiative. Careful studies by Mr. Killian, however, have raised danger signals. The Soviet Union appears to be significantly ahead of us in ballistic missiles development. If we ceased testing bal­ listic missiles in the near future, the Soviet Union might have an opera­ tional ballistic missile capability, while we would not. As for a broader control of missiles, the inspection requirements for elimination of mis­ siles production and stocks appear to exceed by far any inspection sys­ tem hitherto contemplated. Accordingly, it appears that this proposal should not be pushed and that the most that can be looked for is some cooperation in peaceful exploration of outer space. 5. Armed Forces and Armaments—Some adjustment in our position on this matter will probably be worked out, but the Secretary did not feel that this was an area where we could look for significant or major steps. The Secretary continued that the inter-­agency working group would report shortly. When decisions had been taken, consultations with our allies would then get underway. He suggested that Admiral Strauss, Mr. Quarles and Mr. Killian expand on the views which he had summarized.
