1956 769 settle this question by means peaceful negotiations. This demonstrates peaceful intention of Chinese regarding settlement international disputes. 41. Wang said second point he wanted make was that we should not attempt confuse international dispute with internal matter. This question has always remained before us. 42. Wang said I had asked whether or not China would only use peaceful means in settlement Taiwan problem. It seemed him this ques­ tion went beyond terms of reference present talks. It entirely matter for Chinese people themselves as to by what means they would accom­ plish liberation Taiwan. This matter in which US has no right interfere. They would oppose any attempt interfere this matter. Same is true in other respect: that is, China has no right interfere in internal matter of disputes between political parties in US. They had made clear in pre­ vious meetings this point of view: that such matters, which essentially internal matters of China, beyond scope these talks. 43. Wang said what we should discuss in these talks is question of grave tension created Taiwan area as result US occupation Chinese area of Taiwan, and we should attempt find solution to this situation. 44. Wang said thirdly he wanted deal with question of relationship between issuance announcement and substance of our disputes. They had always proposed that these two questions should be separated in their order of solution, and this is given expression in draft put forward by their side. It is a practical way—to try to solve disputes between our two countries step by step. 45. Wang said that was why they did not in their draft announce­ ment raise any prerequisites or raise any matter which US could not find acceptable. Whereas in US proposal, US has attempted confuse these two steps and raise self-­defense clause, which tantamount to pre­ requisite. That is where obstacle in way progress our talks lies. 46. Wang said therefore problem confronting two of us seemed to him very clear. It quite clear also why we not reached agreement issu­ ance announcement up to present moment. Present fact is that we have not reached agreement on a proposed announcement. This not what their side desired. Question of what would follow issuance announce­ ment was not one I had asked—what would happen if declaration were violated—but the problem was rather that both sides would attempt find ways and means for realization of provisions which stated in declaration. 47. I said I was sorry we just did not seem able arrive at meeting of minds on this. We seemed be arguing somewhat at cross purposes here. I been trying very hard keep simply to substance of our draft announce­ ment. Whereas he said he agreed with my view that we had to keep our separate steps apart from each other, yet he continually attempting
