986
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
2. I agree with Dick that the two key LDC issues for the Summit are
MTN and aid.
a. On MTN I concur with Dick’s recommendation that the Summit
should direct the US, EC, Japanese, and Canadian negotiators to bring
the developing countries into the negotiations.
b. On aid, I also agree with what Dick says about Summit pledges
to provide more resources for IDA and other multilateral institutions.
3. We have late information about four likely North-South issues
that other heads of government may raise at the Summit:
a. Trudeau may want to strengthen that section in the draft Declara-
tion which calls for more aid to help LDCs increase energy production,
and requests the World Bank to examine how this can be done most ef-
fectively. This is one of the more promising Summit initiatives, and we
should support Trudeau.
b. Callaghan may announce forgiveness of some past LDC debts to
the UK. It is not clear whether this would represent an increase in aid to
LDCs; it might be offset by reductions in new aid. This idea came up at
the Summit Preparatory Group; the British wanted all countries to join
a multilateral statement to this effect, but others did not agree. If Calla-
ghan announces this British decision and say that legislation now be-
fore the Congress would permit the US also to ease the terms of some
past LDC debts. I attach a briefing memo on this point at Tab B.2
c. Fukuda will announce a doubling of Japanese aid from 1977 to
1980, with the comparison being made in dollars. This is a disap-
pointing outcome to the argument between the Finance Ministry and
the Foreign Ministry, which favored a doubling from 1978 to 1981 in
terms of yen. The Foreign Ministry position would have meant $4 bil-
lion in aid in 1981; the Japanese decision means $2.8 billion in 1980 (or
about $3 billion in 1981). Bob McNamara urges you to press Fukuda at
Bonn to change his position. I agree. Aid proponents in Japan, we are
told, believe that external pressure on Fukuda might cause him to alter
his view. This could mean $1 billion more per year for LDCs.
d. Giscard may raise his idea of an African fund. If so, you might
say that the US agrees fully with the need for more effective coordina-
tion among aid donors and between donors and recipients in Africa.
We cannot, however, support certain aspects of the French proposal as
it now stands: We cannot commit ourselves to multi-year financing or a
high US share of financing; nor can we commit ourselves to participa-
tion in every project donors desire. But we have no objection to men-
tioning aid for Africa in the Summit Declaration, and will continue dis-
2 Tab B, attached but not printed, is a July 10 paper prepared in EB/IFD/OMA enti-
tled “Retroactive Terms Adjustment.”
