910 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX factors such as emigre activity and national separatism may foster some uncertainty and instability in the post-Tito period. While the Yugoslavs will want our support, they will not welcome a US or allied over-reaction. This would have the effect of undermining Yugoslav confidence in their own ability to cope with the post-Tito period and could provide the Soviets with pretexts to react in unhelpful ways. They will even suspect that our expressions of concern are designed to destabilize the country, perhaps to get the Communist Party out of power. They will be particularly watchful about our will to control any Yugoslav emigre activities in the West. Therefore, a primary goal of US policy will be to ensure a calm US and allied response, reflecting confidence in Yugoslavia’s stability and political maturity. U.S. Commitments, Plans, Studies, and Decisions 1. Neither we nor any other NATO members have made any direct commitments to provide either men or material to Yugoslavia in the event of a crisis or threats from the Soviets. We have expressed “support” for Yugoslav independence and territorial integrity during Tito’s 1978 visit to the U.S. Initially U.S. support would come in the form of close political and economic ties and stepping up our modest military supply relationship if the Yugoslavs want this. As the situation develops, we will want to consult closely with our allies bilaterally, through the Quadripartite mechanism, and possibly in NATO. However, we should bear in mind Yugoslav sensitivities about NATO discussions focused on them, which they see as stimulating compensatory Warsaw Pact pressures. We should not undertake detailed contingency planning in NATO, but confine ourselves to general and confidential exchanges. 2. The Department has prepared and updated during the past ten years a USG Contingency Study for Yugoslavia, which addresses scenarios for internal disintegration and Soviet/WP threats and/or invasion. This study is a useful reference but not a policymakers tool. EUR has formed an interagency group to review these plans, bring them fully up-to-date, and prepare necessary decision documents. Under the aegis of this group, PM is preparing a more detailed analysis of military options for the U.S. and NATO which will be ready by January 25. 3. DOD is working on contingency plans to meet a situation in which the Yugoslavs might ask us to provide increased military supplies, logistical support. These plans will be ready shortly. (In a crisis, the Yugoslavs can muster three million men in the field and another three million auxiliaries.) They are less likely to look to the U.S. or the NATO allies for a direct commitment of military forces, than for the type of assistance mentioned above.
