290
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
grounds. If we cannot do that much, clearly we cannot sustain a charge
of a substantive violation in the Security Council or elsewhere. (C)
134.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
Washington, July 18, 1980, 2021Z
189291. Geneva for Ambassador Flowerree. Subject: Soviet Re-
sponse to U.S. De´marche on Sverdlovsk Incident.
1. S—Entire text.
2. Summary: Soviet Charge´ Vasev came in with a reply to Ambas-
sador Earle’s de´marche of July 11,2 to Dobrynin requesting consulta-
tions under the BW Convention on the reported incidence of anthrax at
Sverdlovsk. Vasev said he had been instructed to confirm that the So-
viet side considered the allegations completely unfounded, that there
had been no violation of the BW Convention and that there was conse-
quently no basis for consultation. Ambassador Earle regretted that the
Soviet reply had not addressed the factual information we had con-
veyed and cautioned that, since the problem would not go away, we
would have to continue pursuing the matter by other means which
would probably include the participation of other parties. End
summary.
3. Saying that he was speaking on instructions, Vasev delivered the
following “oral reply” on July 17:
“In view of repeated requests of the American side the Embassy
has been instructed to confirm once again that the Soviet side considers
as completely unfounded allegations which try to establish some sort
of connection between an outbreak of anthrax in the region of Sverd-
lovsk in April 1979 and the compliance by the Soviet Union with the
Convention Prohibiting Bacteriological Weapons.
“The Soviet Union, as one of the initiators of and participants in
the Convention, has always attached the utmost importance to the un-
deviating fulfillment of all its provisions which represent a major meas-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 83, USSR: 7/11–31/80. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Sent for information to the Mis-
sion in Geneva, USNATO, London, Bonn, Paris, and the White House. Printed from a
copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 See Document 131
