1112
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Conclusion
About a year into the administration, David Aaron mused that
“North-South policy was an idea whose time had not yet come.” If he
was wrong, it was only in the confidence that its time in the United
States would come. To be sure, we will have to adjust to international re-
ality in one form or another—but it is far from certain that this will be
the result of conscious policy choices, as opposed to having the situa-
tion forced on us (the process that OPEC has begun).
There is a good case to be made for the proposition that the Amer-
ican people, because of historical and geographic peculiarities, will
never come to the conclusion that a positive North-South policy, in-
cluding some short-term sacrifices, makes sense to them. Personally, I
do not despair of building that realization, but for the next several years
at least—and probably most especially during the Reagan presi-
dency—there will be no effective moves in that direction. We will not
be able to make the key politico-economic linkage required for such a
strategy. Since these years are likely to be a time of very tight resources,
that may not make much difference.
These years can be used for educational purposes within the
American public—a task that the government should do but probably
won’t. The burden will fall on private organizations as it has in the past.
One can only hope that they will be more successful than they have
been in the past.
In policy terms, there is not much left beyond handling
North-South issues on a case-by-case basis. This is of course how the
Carter Administration—and Kissinger before then—handled them.
What may be lacking, however, is an overall concept relating these in-
dividual cases. Again, neither Carter nor Kissinger was able to con-
struct a compelling single concept; yet there were some useful ideas for
the operators to keep in mind. An early task of the Reagan administra-
tion should be to enunciate some of its own ideas as a means of mini-
mizing the likely chaos.
At a minimum, we should ensure that we do not slip backwards
during this difficult time. Thus policy planning for North-South affairs
over the next several years should probably concentrate on developing
good defensive strategies, in contrast to the more hopeful but often ir-
relevant constructs of the early Carter years. Since the operators
(Treasury, State/EB) have taken a defensive posture all along, this
should be a welcome change to them. The key, however, will be sup-
plying the overall rationale which the operators have lacked and will
probably continue to lack.
