January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1187
Minister Kubersky said that because of practical problems of daily
life, water and other services must be supplied. When the military gov-
ernment is withdrawn, the civilian administration would continue to
operate until there is agreement. When there is agreement, there will be
a transfer. Would there be a vacuum? A veto on political problems is
bad enough; but where it applies to the supply of services, the veto can
cause paralysis.
Ambassador Linowitz said that, first, residual categories are not here
(in the paper) and were not intended to be here. What the Continuing
Committee would do is deal with issues not resolved before the overall
agreement is finished. It would not deal with residual powers. Second,
with regard to economic cooperation and similar issues, there would be
three steps: try to get full agreement; if not, agree on principles and
work in as much detail as possible; and if we can’t gain even principles,
then use the Continuing Committee. Third, Camp David says that the
military government and the civilian administration go out at the same
time. Israel’s proposal is not in Camp David, and there could be a
problem with Egypt.
Minister Burg said that if we cannot get to our target—but try to do
so—then the Continuing Committee would become an incentive not to
solve problems.
Ambassador Linowitz said that it would help to introduce this para-
graph to indicate a joint commitment—to the heads of agreement, to
May 26, and to accelerate the talks to get as much as possible.
Prime Minister Begin asked if he could have the floor.
The President said: “you have it.”
Prime Minister Begin said that he has read the paper two or three
times, and understands it. Therefore he will make some remarks, and
think aloud. They will need to take the paper home to study it for to-
morrow. In the meantime: first, today and tomorrow we need to agree
on certain principles submitted by Israel this morning. He would like to
know if they are agreed, to be suggested to Egypt for its consideration.
He proposes that we not just agree on just this (U.S. paper), and leave
out the most basic problems—such as the question of the Administra-
tive Council and the Self-Governing Authority. If we can agree that
the Self-Governing Authority is an administrative council, then we
can come to the Continuing Committee. We should not just announce
the Continuing Committee and accelerated negotiations: that will not
suffice.
The President agreed that there should not be just this (i.e. the Con-
tinuing Committee).
Prime Minister Begin said that we need agreement on a set of points.
The President agreed.
