160 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 of prolonged litigation, with more and more states focusing not only on the hostage issue but increasingly on Iran’s alleged grievances. If, in the end, we do get our hostages back through accommodation, we still run the risk of jeopardizing our electoral chances if the public perceives us as having been intimidated in some fashion. From every public contact I have had, I sense a strong desire for U.S. honor to be reasserted and for American power to be demonstrated. Moreover, the Moslem world, and especially those Moslem states most dependent on us, will become increasingly convinced that the United States can be coerced. This will make our friends more insecure and our enemies more assertive, and thus it will also jeopardize goal #3 (a respectable relationship with the Arab world). A punitive post-release strike, in my judgment, will not correct the above deficiency. It will be seen by much of the world as a petulant and perhaps even cowardly act, and it would almost certainly precipitate an explosion in the rest of the Moslem world. (In this connection, it is useful to remember that Shi’as number 55% of the population of Iraq, 51% of Jordan, 55% of Bahrain, 51% of Oman, 25% of Turkey, and about 18% of Pakistan.) The only acceptable outcome of the peaceful route would be some formula along the lines that we discussed at Camp David:3 release of our people concurrently with a UN discussion of Iran’s other grievances, perhaps also accompanied by the Shah’s voluntary departure. We could follow that by severance of all diplomatic and economic relations with Iran. We could then also quietly pursue objective #2 (getting rid of Khomeini), though he would be fortified in the meantime by what in Tehran will appear to have been a successful humiliation of the U.S. All in all, this particular outcome—if accomplished without humiliating conditions—still remains the least risky and the best possible one, all things considered. The Risky Alternative The other alternative is to increase pressure on Iran and on the international community, once we have had recourse to all the peaceful options. The best means to do so would be to blockade Iranian ports while announcing: 1. They will stay closed until our people have been released; 2. That massive and instant retaliation will follow any harm to any one of the hostages. The above will involve a high-risk strategy. It could result in the forfeiture of the lives of the hostages. Nonetheless, such an action 3 See Document 51.
