Human Rights
589
previous administration. Most important, perhaps, we have stuck with
the policy. The President continues to support it strongly (more so than
many of his would-be advisers) and the administration in general has
not gotten too “bored” with the issue.
Clearly, not all is roses. There are quixotic aspects to the policy and
quixotic people associated with it. There has been some misdirection of
our efforts. And, of course, there are many areas that we simply cannot
affect.
Sometimes the quixotic elements are positive. Our single-minded
voting against loans to HR violators in the IFIs has no impact on the
loans since they are approved anyway. It is important, however, that
we portray a picture of consistency as part of our overall campaign.
You are going to have to risk looking quixotic yourself, if you are
going to do this job adequately. The human rights portfolio is an adver-
sarial one. Your geographic colleagues will often have good political
reasons not to push human rights too hard. Don’t let them get away
with it. Sometimes you will have to take fairly extreme positions just to
force a reasonable compromise. Your function (and this is true of
non-proliferation as well) is to keep your teeth firmly dug into others’
heels. Otherwise you will be disregarded—even by people who are at
least as warm-hearted as you, but who are faced with a different set of
issues. And not all of them are quite that warm-hearted. There are
plenty of people in State—and not only there—who consider human
rights a misguided effort and play along with it only to the minimum
extent necessary to humor a President who “doesn’t understand” the
realities of international politics. Kissinger lives.
A major problem at the beginning of the administration was the in-
ability of some to understand that there are different categories of
human rights; that there are differences among torture, lack of free
press, and inadequate access to pure water. Fairly early on, we were
able to get the theoretical distinction accepted, and not too long there-
after, even Patt Derian was brought around to the belief that some vio-
lations had priority over others. It is an issue that needs to be watched
constantly, however, for there are still many who simply aggregate all
human rights listed in the UN declaration.
An unfortunate example (albeit one that the Administration is not
responsible for) is our concentration on Jewish emigration from the So-
viet Union. There are many worse things that happen to people in the
Soviet Union than (a) being Jews and (b) having to stay there. Many
much worse things happen to people outside the Soviet Union. Obvi-
ously Jewish emigration is a legitimate human rights issue. It should
not, however, enjoy the priority that it gets.
An example of ineffectiveness is not hard to find. We are unable to
do anything about Equatorial Guinea and never did much about Pol
