196 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement the increasing technical competence of the USSR, and the means Russia now has to damage the United States. The fact that, despite our great defensive efforts, the USSR can now inflict severe damage on continental United States, apparently has shaken the confidence of some of our allies that the United States will in fact make a nuclear retaliatory attack on the USSR unless the imme­ diate security of the United States is jeopardized. They may believe that the fear in the United States of the threat that we have not yet learned to live with stoically will immobilize our will—­and our power—­at the crucial showdown. They really question our national will to act as we say we intend to. Others among our allies question our judgment on placing sole reliance on massive nuclear retaliation to defeat aggression, of launch­ ing headlong into a general nuclear war in retaliation of what they may consider a “small aggression.” Especially is this questioned when they visualize that the nation aggressed against is not a near neighbor, nor is its opinion necessarily asked before action is taken. These people are reported not to want to associate themselves in alliances which may become involved in a general nuclear war, automatically initiated to defend some other nation—­and a war to which they cannot contribute, will have little voice in the control thereof, and, in their view, provide only their country as a battleground to be devastated. Probable Future Situations The USSR, as she develops an ICBM and a submarine missile capa­ bility, also may come to believe that the United States will not actually launch retaliatory strikes unless United States security is directly jeop­ ardized. If she comes to believe this, the USSR can be expected to con­ tinuously expose the United States to the threat of severe destruction so as to keep the United States so pre-­occupied with preparing for general nuclear war that we will not take appropriate action in time to stop the gradual expansion of communist domination of other countries by other means. She can also be expected to be very careful not to provide sufficient provocation to the United States to launch our nuclear retal­ iatory forces. Also, Russia may be expected to continue to exploit U.S. general war posture in perpetrating fear among our allies that through nervous anxiety the U.S. might itself set off the nuclear war either (1) as an inap­ propriate response to little probes or (2) by accident. The communists, by intrigue, subversion, political warfare, and propaganda, will do their best to intensify any lack of confidence of our allies, not only in our ability and willingness to conduct general war in the protection of our allies, but also in our willingness and skill to prevent nations from coming under communist domination by less dramatic action.
