Human Rights 169 nomic development. The kinds of initiatives which we have said we contemplate include, but will not necessarily be limited to: (a) Cooperative programs with leading international or regional institutions, such as the International Commission of Jurists and the Inter-American Human Rights Commission, which are specialized in dealing with serious human rights violations; (b) Programs designed to help the urban poor and rural poor to have effective access to the rights and protections which are provided for them under law and under development programs—including arrangements for local advocacy and for nonformal education aimed at providing the poor majority with knowledge of their rights and of governmental processes which affect them; and (c) Sponsorship of studies and conferences regarding human rights problems and their relationship to development. The emphasis is to be on the various categories of human rights recognized in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as they relate to each other. Each A.I.D. regional bureau has proposed to follow a strategy to fit the particular circumstances and needs of the countries it is concerned with. LA has stressed legal aid and “public interest” law. NE emphasizes the need for a better understanding of local social, cultural, and political conditions. ASIA stresses the work of voluntary groups, such as the Asia Foundation. AFR intends to encourage studies and conferences, with emphasis on African participation, which focus on problems related to the development in multi-ethnic societies, the human rights aspects of local and traditional values, and the human rights consequences of economic and political change. In actions taken to date: —A.I.D. sponsored a one-day meeting at Johns Hopkins University of scholars, foundation officials, human rights activists, and officers from the Executive and Legislative Branch on the relationship between economic and the other categories of rights. The deliberations are summarized in the April issue of War on Hunger.3 A.I.D. also funded a conference sponsored by the State University of New York at Albany and the Irish Institute for Public Administration on the roles which legislative bodies play with respect to the various categories of human rights. A report on that meeting is available.4 —A.I.D. is sponsoring a program of studies by scholars in various countries on non-totalitarian approaches toward economic growth with equity. We are contributing to a program of research on local political leadership and development programs and progress. Antedating 3 Reference is to a monthly periodical produced by the Press and Publications Division, Office of Public Affairs, Agency for International Development (AID/OPA/PP). 4 Not further identified.
