472  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
DR–5.	
Memorandum of a Conversation between the Secretary of 
State and the Dominican Foreign Minister (Herrera)1
Washington, November 7, 1958.
SUBJECT
Termination of Military Agreements with the Dominican Republic2
PARTICIPANTS
The Secretary
Mr. Rubottom – Assistant Secretary, ARA
Mr. Little – Deputy Director, CMA
Dominican Foreign Minister Porfirio Herrera Báez
Dominican Ambassador Manuel A. de Moya
Foreign Minister Herrera Báez opened the conversation by stat-
ing that his Government has traditionally followed a policy of close 
and friendly cooperation with the United States and that it wished to 
continue these policies in the future. He continued by saying that his 
present visit to the United States and the purpose of his call on the 
Secretary related to the military agreements between our two coun-
tries. His Government had decided, he stated, that it wished to ter-
minate the Military Assistance Agreement of 1953 and the Naval 
Mission Agreement of 1956, since his Government believed that the 
purposes of those two agreements had been achieved. He said that his 
Government hoped that it would be possible for our two governments 
to agree mutually that these agreements be terminated in lieu of a uni-
lateral denunciation by the Dominican Republic, reiterating that his 
Government did not wish, by its position on these agreements, to indi-
cate any change in its traditional policies toward the United States to 
which he had referred. The Minister then handed the Secretary a mem-
orandum embodying this request, which is attached3 Mr. Rubottom 
asked the Minister how the desire of the Dominican Government to 
terminate the two agreements related to the agreement for the Missile 
Tracking Station. The Minister replied that neither that agreement nor 
the one covering the Loran station would be affected by this proposal. 
Later in the conversation the Minister said that, if his Government in 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 739.5-MSP/11–758. Confidential. 
Drafted by Edward S. Little on November 7.
2 In a memorandum dated November 6, 1958, Assistant Secretary Rubottom 
informed the Secretary of several subjects which Foreign Minister Herrera might want to 
discuss, including U.S. military assistance programs, an expression of U.S. appreciation 
for Dominican friendship and cooperation, and the Dominican desire for greater access 
to U.S. markets. Rubottom also recommended positions for the Secretary to take on these 
issues. (611.39/11–658)
3 Not declassified.
