1957 1447 list as having escaped a man such as Capt. Harry Moreland who, as I pointed out in our 64th meeting last January, had both legs amputated. I find it incredible that your side would be able to say that it had no data concerning a man such as Capt. Joseph S. Long, Jr. of the United States Air Force, who, a broadcast from your side in April 1952 said, was alive and a prisoner. “However, when such facts were pointed out at the 79th Military Armistice Commission meeting last month, representatives of your side resorted to entirely irrelevant polemics rather than making any seri­ ous effort honestly to discuss the problem or to furnish the requested information which they have recognized is their obligation under the Korean Armistice Agreement. “Mr. Ambassador, my purpose in again raising the question with you here this morning is not to make accusations or to engage in polem­ ics, but rather to seek the cooperation of you and your authorities in liquidating this problem.” 11. Wang replied. With regard to the question of missing personnel in the Korean War that I had again brought up this morning, he had made their attitude very clear in previous meetings. He did not consider this subject within the terms of reference of our talks. He therefore did not feel it was necessary to give a reply to me this morning. 12. I replied whether he considered it within the terms of reference or not, it is a practical matter at issue between us. It is not a problem that can be solved by sweeping it under the rug or doing nothing about it. 13. Wang said he had nothing more. 14. We agreed that our next meeting would be held on December 12. U. Alexis Johnson American Ambassador 841. Letter 61 from Johnson to Clough1 Letter No. 61 Geneva, November 14, 1957 Dear Ralph: As you have seen Wang was today very mild and obviously just marking time. There was no slightest mention of New Delhi or anything 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. Sent via air pouch. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
