Chapter 7, January–May 1991  1031
I believe there is an element of tactics and bluff at work here (finish-
ing in July would not pose any problem), but we should by no means 
ignore these warnings completely. The strongest and most detailed 
explanation of all this can be found in my April 24 conversation with 
Roslyakov (Geneva 4958).2 The U.S. del’s scenario for quite some time 
has been that, if we are not in endgame by mid-July, we would break 
until after Labor day and then try for success in the fall. Of course, this 
has not been discussed with the Soviets.
Launcher Type Rule
6. You have our RFG on this. The Soviets have accepted the U.S. 
position almost completely and we should not back away from it now. 
I admit that our RFG just before the break went a bit too far in ques-
tioning that position, but it would never have been drafted if we had 
thought the Soviets would buy our position completely. The JCS angst 
over possible challenges to the multiple capabilities of existing U.S. 
silos should be laid to rest by the agreed statement in which the Soviets 
agree not to do this.
Suspect-Site Inspections
7. Things seem to be evolving rapidly in the SSI area, and any com-
ments I make could be made OBE quickly. In any case, a reasonable 
solution seems to be taking shape. Mandatory SSI would be absorbed 
into data update inspections, for which the quota will be 15 per year. 
The list of facilities to be included is far from settled, but it looks as 
though we can get the four Soviet ballistic missile facilities we asked 
for, but at the price of four U.S. ballistic missile facilities, for which we 
just today (May 6) received coordinates.
8. Right-­of-­refusal SSI would be handled by strengthening the JCIC 
protocol to make clear that the commission must convene within a speci-
fied period to deal with an extraordinary situation such as this, and mak-
ing clear that OSI can be an outcome of the commission’s deliberations.
9. This solution would cause SSI as a separate category of inspec-
tions to disappear from the treaty. I doubt that this would bother any-
one in Peoria, especially since right-­of-­refusal SSI is more likely to be 
the subject of ridicule than of praise. More importantly, we would also 
not actually be giving up anything of substance in the U.S. position. 
Nevertheless, because SSI was endorsed by two U.S. presidents and 
one Soviet president, you may wish to consider the matter further.
10. On another OSI issue, the Soviets have agreed to accept hard 
covers for inspections of SLBM RVs.
2 In telegram 4958 from NST Geneva, April 30, the Delegation to the Nuclear and 
Talks transmitted the memorandum of conversation for Ifft’s April 24 meeting with 
Roslyakov. (Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D910415–0056)
