474 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Commission subject the hostages to interrogation in connection with its inquiry during any of its meetings with them. III. Work of the Commission 1. The Commission would not leave New York for Tehran until the U.S. announcement above has been made. It would aim to begin work in Tehran early next week. 2. The Commission would hold its meetings in private and will receive evidence and documents to be submitted to it by Iranian authorities. 3. The Commission would visit the Embassy as soon as possible to meet with the hostages. 4. As soon as the Commission has concluded its work and drafted its report, it: (a) would tell the Revolutionary Council that the credibility of its report would be seriously limited unless the hostages are released immediately or at least moved from the compound to a hospital; (b) would inform the Revolutionary Council that it is ready to return to New York to submit its report to the Secretary-General. IV. Final Stages: 1. Transfer of the hostages to the protection of the Government of Iran either in a hospital or in the Embassy compound after the “students” have left the premises. (Day number 1.) 2. Return of the Commission to New York. (Day 1 plus 1) 3. Submission to the Secretary-General of the Commission’s report which will contain findings and recommendations. Publication of the report as a UN document. The report would express inter alia the following principle as a recommendation to all governments: —Governments should respect and facilitate within the framework of their internal laws the right of Iran: (a) to file suits against the Shah, his family or associates on the basis of the grave presumption of any serious crimes set forth in the report; (b) to file suits to recover assets which in the report are presumed to have been illegally taken from Iran by the Shah, his family or associates. (Day 1 plus 2) 4. Release of the hostages and their departure from Iran. (Day 1 plus 3). 5. One hour after their departure, the SYG will release statements by President Bani-Sadr and President Carter both previously agreed by Iran and the U.S. and, before the Commission left Iran, deposited privately with the SYG. (a) The Iranian statement will admit the moral wrong of holding hostages, express regret, promise to respect international law and affirm a desire to establish normal relations based on mutual respect, equality and international law.
