Afghanistan 735 alternative to Zia would pursue policies any more successful or favorable to our interests than his government at this time. But I believe, and USG policy papers state, that we have important interests here, in promoting regional stability, avoiding conflict, countering Soviet expansionism, and not least in seeing that the USG is perceived as actually carrying out its professed policies. I therefore hope that we can examine anew the possibilities for economic assistance to Pakistan, and come to some better decisions before the aid consortium meeting June 12. 8. I would give top priority to debt rescheduling, which all the other members of the consortium are ready to do, and where we are the only hold-out. Given our very real budget constraints, congressional attitudes, and Treasury and OMB policies, only a directive from the President has any chance of changing the present USG hard-line stance. 9. I have been told that there is no possibility of finding funds, and authorizations, for economic assistance to Pakistan in the upcoming FY 81 budget. I hope that this can be tested out again, to see whether priorities can be rearranged. 10. P.L.–480 sales of agricultural commodities are being projected at low, or very indefinite levels. These should be examined, and raised substantially. 11. A substantial grant of funds for relief of nearly a million Afghan refugees would be useful and logical, and would help to avoid a totally negative USG stance at the consortium meeting. Substantively, too, our interests will be served by helping the Paks avoid the disruptive and destabilizing effects of this large number of Afghans in its border provinces. 12. The FY 82 budget request, now being constructed in Washington, should be carefully considered, to see that economic assistance to Pakistan is adequate to match our policies, particularly in aid inputs, in [garble] and in P.L.–480. 13. None of these suggestions will be new to Washington policymakers, and none of them will be easy. You will hear strong and cogent reasons why they are impossible or at best difficult. Still, I hope that you will use your influence to see that our important policy goals are not made unattainable by essentially procedural difficulties, real though they are, within our own government. Hummel
