EXCELLENCY: The “Comité de Contrôle des Etats garants pour la reconstruction
de l’Autriche” (Committee of Control of the Guarantor States for the
Reconstruction of Austria) have at the request of the Austrian Government
consented in their meeting held in London on October 12th, 1927, to the
conclusion on the part of the Austrian Republic of an investments loan to
yield an amount of 725 million Schillings.
This decision was based on a statement of the Austrian Government on
Austrian revenue and expenditure during the years 1923–1927; on the sums
required for capital expenditure (investments) from 1928 to 1932; and on
the actual state and the use made of the Austrian Government Guaranteed
Loan 1923–1943. I have the honour to annex to these presents three copies
of the said statement for information.
The following points of the contents of the statement seem to me to require
special mentioning:
The current administration of Austrian Federal Finance resulted in a deficit
only in the first year of reconstruction, i. e. in 1923, while in the subsequent
years fairly considerable surpluses were obtained. Therefore, the total
deficit shown in the years from 1924 onwards, represents such part of
capital expenditure only as was not covered by ordinary revenue, and,
consequently, had to be defrayed out of the yield of loans. Thus Austria
succeeded, thanks to the magnanimous support it received from all the
nations participating in the work of its reconstruction, to save its finances
from utter ruin and to establish the permanent equilibrium of the budget.
Moreover, a large portion of the purely productive capital expenditures was
covered by current revenue, so that the proceeds of the reconstruction loan
set apart for such capital expenditure, will be sufficient up to the first
months of 1928. Now, as is also shown by the enclosed statement on the use
of the said loan, the sums disposable under this heading are almost
exhausted. Only a sum of approximately 26 million Schillings is left for
capital expenditure in 1928. The great works of reconstruction Austria
undertook with the help of funds drawn from the reconstruction loan, in the
first place the installation of electric traction on the Federal Railways, and
the laying of long distance telephone cables, both of them works of highest
importance to making Austria’s balance of payments active, must be
