Chapter 4, February–April 1990 441 threshold. At present our position is that any ALCM with a range over 1500 km is assumed to be nuclear; the Soviet position is 600 km. The President: Why? Scowcroft: The Soviets want to force us to come in close with our bombers and not have a large number of stand-­off weapons. They also want to increase the number of weapons that count. We want to preserve our flexibility and exclude conventionally armed ALCMs such as “Tacit Rainbow” which has a range of about 800 km. We have agreed to come down to 1000 km, and the remaining dispute is whether we can go down to 800 km. The President: If we don’t have any missiles in that range, why should this be a deal breaker? Secretary Cheney: We would be giving up capability. If we go to 600 km they have a large number of missiles under that range. Scowcroft: If distinguishability and range limits work its a little bit like belt and suspenders. We can differentiate except on existing missiles. Tacit Rainbow is an existing missile. General Powell: This preserves future options for us. We want as much range as possible. We can’t say that it’s a deal breaker but we’d like to get as close as possible. If everything else is solved, we’re just asking that Jim come back so I can go into the tank, get the agreement of the Chiefs, and get back to him in Moscow. The President: Does the movement of Soviet forces out of Europe affect this? Does this have an impact on the range? Powell: If so, we might not make the investment. But also we may want a longer reach. They want our number down to capture possible technological breakthroughs. The President: Where are these launched from? Powell: From ships and airplanes. Cheney: We also want to capture the short range cruise missiles on the Backfire bomber. They’re also a threat. Secretary Baker: We’ve made good progress. This range issue is the only one disagreed among us. There is really very little difference in our positions. The thousand kilometer range was out there two years ago. Powell: It was never tabled. Scowcroft: We never negotiated on a thousand. Baker: You want me to resolve the ALCMs. I want to show up and demonstrate flexibility in each of the three areas—­counting rules, distinguishability and range. I have flexibility in distinguishability and counting rules and we can protect the Tacit Rainbow through distinguishability and let the range go to 900 km. Then we can say to the
