March 1952–February 1953
265
nomic problems resulting from the oil issue. In view of the interde-
pendence of the oil problem and the financial situation their attitude is
no more consistent than Mossadeq’s. It is, nevertheless, good politics
and an indication that the political developments of the past year have
not been lost on them. Their attitude toward the oil controversy is,
however, more realistic and prospects for an oil solution would im-
prove if they returned to power. They have at no time lost their control-
ling position in the Senate and Majlis and have the numerical strength
not only to block legislation desired by the National Front but also to
overthrow the government when they consider such action to be
desirable.
10. The foregoing analysis of the National Front movement sug-
gests the following conclusions concerning Iran’s future:
a. There is little prospect of major changes in Iran’s social and po-
litical structure until the urban middle class and the political parties
which represent it develop clearly defined social, political, and eco-
nomic aims.
b. These groups are unlikely to develop such aims so long as their
political energies are concentrated almost exclusively on anti-foreign
policies.
c. In view of Iran’s dependence on foreign trade and foreign assist-
ance, these groups will be afforded continuing opportunities to express
their anti-foreign feelings and are unlikely, therefore, to shift their in-
terest to internal affairs. Moreover, so long as their preoccupation with
foreign influence and their aimlessness with respect to internal affairs
persist, Tudeh influence is unlikely to increase significantly.
d. Translated into political activity, this suggests a continuing un-
easy equilibrium between extreme nationalist elements, advocating the
complete elimination of foreign influence, and the traditional ruling
class, which attempts to reconcile Iran’s nationalist aims with the need
to maintain some degree of economic and political stability.
e. This continuing state of equilibrium will prevent economic “col-
lapse” and political disintegration. It will also, however, seriously in-
hibit, if not completely block, social and economic improvements and
will perpetuate Iran’s isolated position in the cold war.
f. The only developments, short of war, that are likely to alter this
situation are:
1. the establishment of an authoritarian regime, which now ap-
pears unlikely; and
2. a great increase in the strength, education, and political sophisti-
cation of the urban middle class, which will probably not occur for
many years.
John H. Leavitt
