Arms Control and Disarmament  1465
political or military factors. However, he said, we have an able delega­
tion and while he would be surprised if the talks ever got beyond Sec­
tions I and II, the fact remains that the Soviets have proposed the talks 
and a mutual interest does exist in reducing the dangers of surprise 
attack. If we refuse to consider the problem of nuclear weapons, both 
sides will be faced with it, and if we restrict the delegation in a way 
that will hamper their exploration of Soviet thinking, we will restrict 
the potential value of the Conference and will also place ourselves in a 
disadvantageous propaganda position.
Mr. Foster noted that there was a possibility of fruitful exploratory 
discussion on methods that might reduce the likelihood of accidental war.
Mr. Quarles said the propaganda victory we had gained at the 
Geneva technical talks on nuclear testing resulted from our standing 
firm against Soviet efforts to make the Conference political in nature.
Dr. Killian expressed the view that the delegation should be allowed 
maneuverability in the talks, and Mr. Foster said it must at least have 
the opportunity during the preparatory work to look at the question of 
the effects upon the surprise attack problem of limitations and of vari­
ables in armaments.
Mr. Quarles said the delegation could study the question of the 
effects of limitations in their preparatory work, but that discussion of 
limitations in Geneva should not be undertaken without reference back 
to Washington. Mr. Quarles then proposed that Section II be changed in 
a manner that would limit discussion to technical problems that would 
have a range of variables to be concerned about. He said he would not 
object to the terms of reference paper stating that if the delegation felt 
that it had to discuss limitations, it should request instructions from the 
Committee of Three.
There was then some discussion to the effect that perhaps there 
was a meeting of minds on the issue of what should be discussed. It 
was agreed that the Department of State would redraft Section III, with 
appropriate changes in other parts of the terms of reference paper, in an 
effort to reflect the apparent agreement. The Committee of Three would 
then review the redraft.
Nuclear Test Suspension Negotiations
The meeting next considered questions relating to the nuclear test 
suspension negotiations scheduled to begin on October 31 in Geneva. 
The Third Report of the Working Group on Disarmament Policy 
(TAB A) served as a basis for the discussion.
Mr. Gray inquired whether there was yet a statement of the U.S. 
objective in the forthcoming negotiations; was it, for example, to elim­
inate tests, was it to get off the propaganda hook or was it to eliminate 
fallout as a potential health hazard.
