Chapter 2, January–June 1989  107
bombers. But the more fundamental issue is whether a START treaty 
is in our interest even though not all of its provisions are fully verifi-
able. “Perfect” verification is an unachievable ideal. Our standard of 
“effective” verification should balance the risks of undetected Soviet 
cheating with the costs and constraints on the U.S. of more intrusive 
Soviet verification rights.
We need to face the verification issue now, and not wait until the 
ratification debate is approaching. We need a thorough review of our 
verification policy, including a military risk analysis in areas where our 
verification capability is not high. The objective of such a review would 
be to ensure that we are making the right tradeoffs between verification 
and our own deterrence requirements.
(4) SLCMS. The Soviets have told us repeatedly that there will be 
no START treaty without limits on SLCMs. Despite much work we 
have been unable to identify SLCM limits that are both verifiable and 
acceptable. There is no consensus on whether such limits can be identi-
fied, but this issue is not ripe for resolution in START.
(5) Defense & Space Talks. There is general agreement that we need 
to be able to develop SDI within the ABM Treaty limits in order to deter-
mine its feasibility, and establish the right to deploy strategic defenses 
in the future. In the end, there may be a need to make tradeoffs between 
our START objectives and how we proceed with SDI, but we are not at 
that point in the negotiations yet.
There is a consensus on the value of retaining the ABM Treaty for 
now in order to constrain possible Soviet ABM deployments, and of 
seeking a cooperative transition to a world with strategic defenses. 
In devising our negotiating position, we also need to ensure that the 
Soviets do not become free of ABM treaty limits before the U.S. is able 
to deploy defenses.
III. PARTICIPANTS
List at Tab C.3
IV. PRESS PLAN
None
V. SEQUENCE
The agenda for the meeting is at Tab B.4
Prepared by:
Richard Davis
3 Not attached.
4 Attached but not printed is the agenda.
