Afghanistan 637 237. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State1 Moscow, March 18, 1980, 1526Z 4364. Subject: (U) Another Look at Soviet Motives and Objectives in Afghanistan. Ref: 79 Moscow 28134.2 1. (S—Entire text) 2. Summary. The Soviet argument that their move into Afghanistan was necessitated by outside interference which threatened Soviet security through the replacement of a friendly regime with a hostile bridgehead on the Soviet Union’s southern border does not stand close scrutiny. Nonetheless, the Soviets were genuinely concerned that internal instability in a bordering country, with a Marxist government, if allowed to continue, would damage Soviet interests and prestige. They undoubtedly suspected that the U.S. and China would eventually be tempted to exploit a sustained anti-Soviet insurgency, that Amin’s excesses were damaging the prospects for stabilizing the Marxist regime’s control of the country, and that Amin’s justifiable distrust of Soviet intentions toward him would tempt him to consider a sharp turn away from dependence on Soviet support with a consequent loss of Soviet prestige. They also recognized both the ideological difficulty of explaining the overthrow of a Marxist regime by an Islamic fundamentalist movement and the effect of such an event on Eastern Europe, the Third World and the Muslim population of Soviet Central Asia. We have yet to see any hard evidence that the Soviet thrust into Afghanistan was part of a larger design aimed at the Persian Gulf, warm water ports on the Indian Ocean or the encirclement of China through Pakistan; but Soviet decision-makers were undoubtedly aware of the opportunities that a stable Communist Afghanistan, subservient to the Soviet Union, would create for future Soviet exploitation of targets of opportunity in Southwest Asia and the Persian Gulf area. 3. The Soviet minimal objective was therefore to secure a stable pro-Soviet Afghan state. Soviet forces were intended to secure the major population centers and transportation routes in Afghanistan, 1 Source: Library of Congress, Donated Material of Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, 1977–1981, Box 82, Afghanistan Neutralization. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Sent for information to Warsaw, Amman, Baghdad, Beijing, Beirut, Belgrade, Berlin, Bonn, Bucharest, Cairo, Damascus, Geneva, Islamabad, Jidda, Kabul, Leningrad, London, Vienna, New Delhi, Paris, Prague, Rome, Sofia, Tel Aviv, Tokyo, and USNATO. Printed from a copy received in the Joint Chiefs of Staff Message Center, which included additional handling instructions: “Military addressees handle as Specat Exclusive for Service Chiefs.” 2 See Document 123.
