Negotiating Channels
443
to Ghotbzadeh and Bani-Sadr and they are trusted by the Iranians.
Although we cannot be entirely sure they are trustworthy, they have
already provided evidence that Ghotbzadeh is willing to deal with
them. They are workmanlike, and one of them from a human rights
background seems to have a genuine personal interest in a solution
and in the long-term success of Iran’s Revolution.
—The PLO. There are two lines: (1) through Arafat and (2) through
a senior official close to the PLO representative in Tehran who has
offered mediation. The PLO has excellent access to Khomeini, but they
are hesitant to commit themselves until the conditions for settlement
are almost perfect. They are now talking of February 15. They are also
very self-interested and slow in communicating results of discussions.
We do not know the extent of their influence with key Revolutionary
Council members.
—Richard Cottam, Professor at Pittsburgh, is excellent in learning
Ghotbzadeh’s views and in communicating ideas from us. But commu-
nications via telephone and Ghotbzadeh’s “code” are not efficient for
active negotiations.
—Waldheim is not entirely trusted by the Iranians. He will inevitably
play a role in implementing and possibly in working out the final
details of a settlement because there seems to be a growing consensus
that the commission of inquiry will be appointed by the Secretary
General.
—Mohammed Heykal, renowned Egyptian journalist who is writing
a book on Khomeini, is in London awaiting word from Hosain Kho-
meini (grandson) on a date to come to Tehran. He has received one
message from Khomeini inviting him to come as soon as Khomeini
leaves the hospital.
—Sadiq al Mahdi is a religious leader and the former Sudanese
Prime Minister who visited Iran in the late fall and is ready to go back
when told by the Iranians that the time is ripe.
—Mansour Farhang, Iranian Ambassador at the UN, is apparently
trusted by Ghotbzadeh but said to have better ties with the chief presi-
dential candidates. He is not above putting his own interpretation into
the negotiations.
—Delegation from the Islamic Conference. We hope they will act to
persuade the Iranians but we cannot expect them to negotiate on
our behalf.
—Swiss Ambassador Lang has been excellent at communicating with
the Iranians in a timely fashion, but using him as a negotiating channel
might jeopardize his usefulness in humanitarian support.
