Non-Proliferation
795
Preliminary options:
1. A call by the U.S. or jointly by the Suppliers Group, for a three-year
moratorium on sensitive transfers while we search for other ways to meet
legitimate nuclear energy fuel cycle needs. The term “sensitive
transfers” refers to enrichment facilities, reprocessing facilities, and
highly enriched, weapons grade uranium (HEU).
2. Further investigate the possibility of a few multinational fuel cycle
centers which would provide regional enrichment and reprocessing capacity.
This option would only be attractive if a study reveals that there exist
suitable sites for such an operation, and that multilateral management
and control arrangements could be worked out that would guarantee
adequate safeguarding.
3. Fuel assurances provided either unilaterally or, much more attrac-
tively, multilaterally. In either case, this policy would demand that we
expand current U.S. enrichment capacity so that we can guarantee the
supply of low-enriched fuel. Longer term possibilities might include
some form of international “bank” managed by the IAEA which would
ensure non-discriminatory access by all nations to an international pool
of SWU’s (the measure of enrichment capacity).
4. As an alternative to reprocessing, the creation of a multinational spent
fuel-plutonium storage regime. Under such a policy, reprocessing would
be either ruled out or indefinitely deferred in favor of a “once through”
fuel cycle in which used fuel rods are not reprocessed but rather stored
for an indefinite period of time.
5. Renegotiation of existing agreements for cooperation. Under this
policy, the United States would attempt to renegotiate its existing
agreements for cooperation to include stricter safeguard criteria. One
possibility would require recipient nations to agree to full scope safe-
guards under which all of their nuclear facilities—regardless of where
they came from—would be subject to IAEA safeguards. Not only are
there severe legal barriers to renegotiating existing agreements, but this
effort would meet very stiff political resistance from key nations such
as Yugoslavia, Israel, and many others. Canada is encountering serious
difficulties in its effort along these lines (PDB, February 17).
6. A legislative or regulatory finding that reprocessing plants are inher-
ently unsafeguardable (there are several such Bills on the Hill). This would
mean that in exporting nuclear fuel the U.S. would have to require that
it not be reprocessed, or be returned to a nuclear weapons state for re-
processing. This would raise immediate problems with the Japanese
(among others) who have a reprocessing plant in the final testing stages
and need our permission to begin reprocessing U.S.-supplied fuel.
7. Expansion of U.S. cooperation in developing non-nuclear energy re-
sources. The United States’ abundant (relatively speaking) domestic
