58  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
Enclosure
Johnson Remarks2
Geneva, August 4, 1955
“I then referred to Wang’s second and third proposals and handed 
him list of 76 Chinese students. I told him his reference to ‘exit per­
mit’ in connection with 76 students was inaccurate since no exit permit 
required of aliens desiring depart United States. Any alien, including 
any Chinese national, did not need to apply for permission to leave 
country but simply made travel arrangements and departed. That is 
why United States Government had to issue restraining orders in cases 
those few aliens whose departure we desired prevent. Such orders 
issued against certain Chinese students in past. On April 8 our ­Consul 
General informed Chinese representative that 76 students formerly 
prevented from departing United States free to leave. These students 
all notified that orders preventing their departure rescinded. They 
not issued exit permits because there is no such permit. Vast majority 
Chinese students never subjected to preventive departure orders and 
always free to depart whenever wished. The few preventive depar­
ture orders previously issued all rescinded. I then repeated that, as I 
informed him last meeting, United States Government not now pre­
venting departure any Chinese wishing return to mainland China.
I said, on other hand, no general deadline imposed for departure 
Chinese from United States. I did not know where Wang obtained 
information that Chinese students must depart by September 6 or 
apply for permanent residence but said I was satisfied this informa­
tion inaccurate. I explained many Chinese who came to United States 
as students have completed studies and no longer students. Thus 
they no longer entitled student visas and in accordance with stand­
ard procedures applied all aliens such persons informed by Immi­
gration their visas no longer valid, and they should arrange depart 
United States by certain date. However each case handled individu­
ally and each individual permitted give reasons why departure date 
should be postponed. Many postponements granted for one or more 
months or indefinitely at request of individual. Postponements have 
been and will be granted in order avoid hardships or for other good 
cause. I also pointed out that even though alien had applied for or 
been granted status of permanent resident he still free leave country 
at any time, and I concluded reiterating no exit permit required.”
2 Confidential.
