Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II State Department work—and yet it cuts across areas of responsibility which other government departments (e.g., Treasury or Agriculture) have thought of as their own. Consequently, important decisions are taken in committee sessions from which, sometimes, no one emerges entirely happy. Our case-by-case approach—the absence of clear guidelines that certain human rights violations will always receive certain treatment, much less a “hit list” of the most offending countries— further complicates the process. For all the problems involved and the resentment of those who feel that their good advice went unheeded, we still think this is the best way to do the human rights business. The issues do go beyond the purview of any one bureau or department. It is a perhaps extreme example of the fact that key foreign policy issues these days are not bilateral or even regional, but functional. But some degree of bureaucratic resentment probably is inevitable. VI. How Do We Stand With Congress? Reasonably well at present, but we face potentially serious (and conflicting) pressures. Those Congressmen most interested in human rights like what we say, but remain skeptical of our actions. Our role in legislation has so far been largely reactive, and is seen by many as damage-limiting. It is generally believed, for instance, that we would not be applying human rights criteria to economic assistance if Congress had not ordered us to do so. Our record on military assistance to human rights offenders is especially criticized. Congressional unhappiness with perceived softness in our application of the policy, combined with the desire of many Congressmen to seem tough (especially on South Korea), could produce new proposals not only to shorten our leash in the IFIs, but also for restrictive legislation governing our participation in UN organizations or the IMF. Moves already are afloat to inject human rights concerns into appropriations for the Witteveen Facility.24 (Such efforts would of course be supported by those who don’t like the UN or IFIs for other reasons.) The major coalition of human rights groups intends to focus on security assistance to violators. Congressional unhappiness with our performance could even impede the arms transfers we want to make to South Korea in compensation for troop withdrawals. Pressure from human rights activists on the Hill is a familiar problem. We may have a new and growing one with Congressmen who fear that our human rights advocacy will interfere with other 24 Named after IMF Managing Director H. Johannes Witteveen, the Facility constituted a special fund designed to provide economic assistance to oil-importing nations.
