March 27–December 31, 1979 1053 general and eliptical way that the point will be lost on Begin, or that Begin’s response will be at such a level of generality that it will have no practical relevance for the specific nuts and bolts issues the autonomy negotiators are grappling with. This is a real risk, since Sadat has taken little interest that we are aware of in the specific issues under discussion in the autonomy talks and probably does not have a very precise picture of the specifics. 7. Despite the impatience of Sadat’s advisors, his tactic of not pressing Begin has probably been the right one up to now. If Sadat decides to let another summit go by without bringing any of the issues to a head, there is nothing we can do about it. But given the problems it will create for our own position in the area if the autonomy talks continue to be perceived as getting nowhere, it seems to me that at a minimum we need to take the initiative to compare notes on strategy with Sadat and plant a few ideas with him. I believe there is a way to do this without the risk of seeming to get out in front of Sadat or of being seen to press him to move faster than he desires. I have in mind the following two-part approach: —First, I believe it would be desirable for the President to send letters to both Begin and Sadat which should be similar if not identical in content.6 In such letters, the President could note Ambassador Linowitz’s impressions from his recent visit to the area that all concerned feel the time has come to step up the pace of the negotiations. The President could say that he agrees this is desirable and note that if Begin and Sadat come to this conclusion in their meeting, the U.S. stands prepared to make its contribution to early progress in the negotiations. —Second, I could be equipped with points to make orally to Sadat when delivering the President’s letter. This oral presentation could note that after both the Alexandria summit (Alexandria 0611)7 and the Haifa summit (Cairo 18416)8 Sadat had asked that President Carter be informed that the time was coming when he would ask us “to resume” our full partner role, that this third summit (then foreseen for October) 6 On the recommendation of Linowitz, Carter approved messages to Begin and Sadat praising the “dedication” each expressed for “achieving success” in the autonomy negotiations and impressing upon them the “critical” importance of the period ahead. In approving the draft messages, however, Carter noted on the undated action memorandum from Brzezinski, “It’s just baloney, but if it’s what Sol wants, OK. J.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 19, Egypt: 12/79–1/80) The message to Begin was conveyed in telegram 4052 to Tel Aviv, January 6. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Trips/Visits File, Box 116, 1/7/80 Aswan Summit: 12/79–1/80) The message to Sadat was conveyed in telegram 4053 to Cairo, January 6. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870047–1032) 7 See footnote 3, Document 272. 8 See Document 290.
