3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1977 221 59. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State1 Moscow, November 9, 1977, 1603Z 16276. For the Secretary from Ambassador. Subject: Message to Brezhnev. Ref: State 264784.2 1. With one hour’s advance notice I was received by Brezhnev in his Kremlin office at 1230 on November 9 for a 65-minute conversation. Also present were Brezhnev’s aide A.M. Aleksandrov and his interpreter Sukhadrev. (It is noteworthy that no representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs attended.) I was accompanied by my political counselor. 2. After the usual opening courtesies I presented Brezhnev with the text of President Carter’s letter (reftel). Brezhnev informed me that he was already familiar with the contents since Secy Vance had given the text to Dobrynin. This enabled him to make some preliminary considerations which he would ask me to transmit to President Carter. —First he wished to express his gratitude for the President’s congratulatory message on the sixtieth anniversary of the Soviet state and for the best wishes which the President had expressed both in his official message and in this letter —He would of course carefully consider the contents of the President’s letter and will soon give an official reply. 3. Reading from a typed statement of 7–8 pages Brezhnev said he noted with satisfaction that one of President Carter’s main goals was for greater cooperation. “We welcome this positive shift in Soviet-US relations during the recent period.” He also took satisfaction from the fact that agreement on a series of mutually acceptable principled understandings was found in the recent meetings which Gromyko had with the U.S. side in Washington and New York.3 As for the Soviet Union, its line vis-a-vis the U.S. remains consistent and unchanging: “We want these relations to be good, more friendly and hallmarked by the spirit of cooperation” regarding bilateral questions and important international problems. This Brezhnev had restated in his (November 2) speech marking the sixtieth anniversary celebration.4 The Soviets are ready to maintain and improve relations so as to meet the aspirations of 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840076–0378. Secret; Cherokee; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Sent by the Department of State to the White House. 2 See Document 58. 3 See Documents 50 and 51. 4 See footnote 2, Document 58.
