North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
867
1979 request. If you wish a meeting with the PRC principals before de-
ciding, please let us know.
A later memorandum will come to you by November 30 about or-
ganizational issues.
This memorandum was prepared by Guy Erb of the NSC staff and
me. It is based on the Development Coordination Committee and
Brookings studies of foreign aid, and on PRC discussion of these
studies. It has been coordinated with other agencies. The preferences of
these agencies among the indicated strategies and options are stated in
the memo.
My own views are not recorded in the memorandum. I favor
Strategy #1, focusing concessional development aid on helping poor
people in poor countries, while using Supporting Security Assistance
and such non-concessional aid as World Bank loans to help middle-
income countries; and I favor the moderate funding option, a one-third
overall increase in concessional assistance by FY 1982. I would make
implementation of whatever decision you reach about aid funding con-
ditional on your being satisfied that needed improvements in aid effec-
tiveness have been achieved. This is at least as important as funding
levels.2
If you are pressed for time, it is not necessary to read the tabs. You
may, however, want to look at Cy’s memo at Tab F, commenting on the
future of US foreign assistance.
Attachment
Memorandum for President Carter3
Washington, November 9, 1977
CONCESSIONAL ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE OPTIONS
This memorandum is to secure your guidance on US concessional
economic assistance strategy and longer-term (FY 1982) funding goals.
2 In a November 11 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski indicated his support for
“State and AID in their preference for strategy number 2. It combines the morally desir-
able objective of focusing on the poor people with the needed political flexibility. Strategy
number 3 is too vague, while strategy number 1 does not give us the occasionally needed
flexibility for political purposes or, indeed, for the morally good objective of stimulating
some concern within middle-income nations for their own poor people.” Carter initialed
Brzezinski’s memorandum, a stamped notation at the top of which reads: “The President
has seen.” (Ibid.)
3 Confidential.
