Afghanistan
101
second terrorist was taken from the hotel either unconscious or dead.
The third terrorist was on a stretcher very bloody and apparently dead.
37. Police officers then came out of the room with the Ambassador’s
sports coat and tie. Flatin asked for possession. The nearest police
official was prepared to permit this but the tall Soviet police advisor
came up and convinced him to rescind his permission, explaining
the items were necessary for police examination. (The Ambassador’s
possessions were later returned to the Embassy.)
38. Events back at the Interior Ministry: At about 1255, Mr. Taylor
phoned the Embassy to report that the Afghan police were obviously
on the verge of some overt action. Mr. Taylor talked to Mr. Turco who
said that whatever the DRA was planning had just happened. At that
point, while Mr. Taylor was on the phone with Mr. Turco a Russian
civilian emerged from Taroon’s office and left the waiting room. This
man had not entered through the waiting room while Taylor was there
so he must have been with Taroon during the entire period Taylor was
at the Ministry. About three minutes later, another official entered the
waiting room and said to the secretary that he had heard shooting and
the secretary informed all of the police stations to search their areas
for the source of the shooting.
39. At about 1305 hours Taroon and his bodyguard came out of
the commandant’s office and Taroon said that it was all over “and that
the Ambassador was injured and in the hospital.” Taroon quickly left
the room and went down to the main exit of the building. Mr. Taylor
rushed after him down the step and asked for five seconds of his
time to explain what Mr. Taylor thought of Taroon’s behavior and his
handling of the whole affair. Taroon replied he was “too busy” and
didn’t have time to talk with Mr. Taylor.
40. Taroon with his machine gun drove off in his Mercedes. It
was obvious that Taroon refused to have any American representative
aware of what the Afghan police were preparing to do. He also deliber-
ately disregarded the American position for delay which was repeat-
edly made known to him a number of times, and disregarded his
telephone promise to the DCM not to take action without consulting
us, and that after the incident he did not want to hear any questions
or statements from the American representative. It was equally clear
that a civilian Soviet advisor was intimately involved with the Afghan
police preparations in Taroon’s office.
41. Back at the hotel, Flatin subsequently discussed the incident
with the police plainclothesman in charge of the operation, and asked
why the action had been launched so precipitously. The police official
said he was under higher orders and claimed that the Afghan police
did not start the shooting. He explained that the terrorists had told the
police that the ultimatum time had elapsed and that they did not want
