ChapterВ 3, June 1989вҖ“January 1990вҖғ 407
The President: How do you like my ship? The press was yelling at 
me on the Belknap that everything was cut short. I told them that we 
worked at lunch too. (U)
Chairman Gorbachev: Overall it was five hours. We know better. 
If you donвҖҷt mindвҖ”Вӯbecause of this we could have a press conference 
together. (U)
The President: We have arranged to do something together and then 
a press conference. (U)
Chairman Gorbachev: Have you announced that? Because I think 
our press conference will have to be here on the Gorkii. I thought it 
would be better to do it here. (U)
The President: If we do that the press will think IвҖҷm dodging their 
questions. They will say I donвҖҷt want to answer their questions. (U)
Chairman Gorbachev: O.K. We will come out togetherвҖ”Вӯnot for a 
press conferenceвҖ”Вӯanswer a few questions. Then I will just have a press 
meeting not a press conference. (U)
The President: Fine. IвҖҷll have a final answer for you after the meet-
ing. (U)
Chairman Gorbachev: Mr. President, yesterday I responded to your 
proposals. Maybe you want to listen to our suggestions. I will take into 
account what you said. This is an informal meetingвҖ”Вӯthe firstвҖ”Вӯbetween 
the two of us. I want to say to you and the United States that the Soviet 
Union will under no circumstances START a warвҖ”Вӯthat is very import-
ant. The Soviet Union is ready no longer to regard the United States as 
an adversary and is ready to state that our relationship is cooperative. 
That is the first point. (S)
Second, we favor joint efforts for verifiable limits on nuclear weap-
ons. We are interested in continuing arms control but need to go beyond 
the arms race and renounce the creation of new weapons. Our military 
people are already cooperating. I want to thank you for giving General 
Yazov a chance to familiarize himself with U.S. armed forces.2 (S)
Third, we have a defensive military doctrine. We have given expla-
nations to the United States of what is meant by it. I want to note that 
the structure of our armed forces is changingвҖ”Вӯassuming a defensive 
2 Reference is to YazovвҖҷs trip to the United States, October 1вҖ“7. In telegram 28180 
from Moscow, October 10, the Embassy transmitted a report of JoyceвҖҷs meeting with 
Yazov upon his arrival in Moscow on October 7: вҖңYazov praised arrangements for the 
visit unstintingly. He seemed exhilarated by the trip. In a five-Вӯminute monologue hardly 
punctuated by pauses to take a breath, he repeatedly praised the openness his U.S. hosts 
had shown in his visits to military sites. He noted that at San Diego and at Luke AFB he 
had seen things that SecDef Cheney had said many Americans would not see. Soviet 
pilots had been allowed to sit in advanced U.S. aircraft other members of the delega-
tion had seen missile sites. вҖҳWe could not feel that anything had been hidden from us.вҖҷвҖқ 
(Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, D890874вҖ“0499)
