Human Rights
479
crop yields of poor farmers by providing irrigation? Will an animal
health loan improve nutritional standards in a country, or only help
prosperous beef exporters? Will a road building loan do more to help
farmers get their crops to market, or the military to tighten its control
over the population? Will a loan to an intermediate lending institution
ultimately reach small businessmen, or the already prosperous? Such
questions as these, applied on a case-by-case basis, are more important
in our decisions than rigid guidelines.
—Any apparent inconsistency between our attitude toward IFI
loans, and toward bilateral aid programs, stems from our ability to de-
sign the latter to ensure they meet the basic human needs criteria. We
must react to IFI loans, on the other hand, as they are presented to us.
—Our support of loans which directly benefit the needy, even in
human rights problem countries, is reflected in our record in the IFIs.
We have, for instance, opposed loans to Paraguay for highway devel-
opment in the IDB and IBRD, but supported loans to it for agricultural
education (IDB) and rural water supply (World Bank). Similarly, we
have opposed IFI loans to the Philippines which would not serve basic
human needs (ADB loans for hydropower development and to the
Philippine Development Bank, and a World Bank loan to the Philippine
Investment Services Organization) but supported those which met the
needy criteria (a World Bank loan for tree farming, and IBRD loans for
educational radio, irrigation, and to the Philippine Development Cor-
poration). We opposed an IDB loan to Uruguay for coastal roads, but
will support one on May 30 for vocational training. We are supporting
a World Bank vocational training loan to El Salvador, but will oppose a
World Bank telecommunications loan and an IDB loan for cattle devel-
opment, if they come to a vote absent human rights improvements.
—On rare occasions we have opposed IFI loans which met the
needy criteria, to express extreme concern about a human rights situa-
tion. But we have never done so when bilateral programs remained un-
changed. We abstained on an AfDf education loan to the Central Af-
rican Empire, but are making no new bilateral AID agreements with it
either. We voted against an IDB rural public health loan to Chile, but it
has been eliminated from bilateral programming. We abstained on an
AfDf loan to Guinea for hemp production, but also reduced its pro-
posed PL 480 allocation. We abstained on IDA loans to Ethiopia for irri-
gation and rural roads, but during the same period have signed no new
bilateral AID agreements there. We voted against an IDA agricultural
loan to the Peoples’ Democratic Republic of Yemen, but have no bilat-
eral relations with it. (We also were uncertain that any assistance, how-
ever described, actually would reach needy people in Ethiopia or the
PDRY.)
