444 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Carter: Coming together is a great help. I shook hands with Helmut Schmidt on Friday5 and the stock market went up 15 points. We should understand the importance of individual commitments. We have tried to carry out our Downing Street commitments. US growth was 5.7% last year, but will drop some this year. We have also made a great deal of progress in reducing unemployment. Energy imports are up only 1% in 1977. During the first five months of this year, oil imports are down by about 1 million barrels a day. I have introduced a five-part program on energy. Three are in little dispute. A conference committee has agreed on the fourth part, on natural gas. A few oil pricing elements are also agreed. As far as oil is concerned, the sum total of these agreed efforts will reduce oil consumption by 2.3 million barrels per day by 1985. I will attempt to raise the price of US oil to world market prices by 1980. I will check back home on these things so I am not doing what is politically unfeasible. With respect to the budget, our 1978 deficit will be in the 50 billions. This coming year it will be in the 40’s and the next in the 30’s of billions. This represents a small part of the GNP. We are also limiting government spending. We know our balance of trade is important to all of you. We are able to buy your goods better than you are to buy ours. Exchange rate changes should deal with some of these problems. Also, the dollar is down; while we regret this, it should help to correct the imbalance. This meeting can provide a tone of general progress and specific commitments. We will do our share. Schmidt: I believe Summits have been constructive on the whole. I know more about other countries problems than I would have otherwise. I am pleased that US Congressional leaders have demonstrated more of a personal interest in foreign affairs. We were pleased with Senator Byrd’s visit to Europe.6 We are also pleased that there is interest in the US in the success of Summits. In a number of ways this Summit has already achieved some success by encouraging positive programs in certain countries. The proof of our efforts is what we do here and what the declaration says. For instance, progress in the MTN is essential. We should emphasize the progress that has been made, show appreciation for our negotiators, give them support, and encourage them to continue with this progress. There are also protectionist measures. To the extent that we 5 Carter arrived in Bonn on Thursday, July 13. On Friday, July 14, he met with West German officials in Bonn; the next day, he visited Frankfurt and Berlin. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) 6 Byrd visited Spain, Belgium, the Federal Republic of Germany, and the United Kingdom July 1–9.
