International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues to be co-chairman of the Cabinet-level Task Force with State, if one is formed, thus reaffirming my own judgment concerning the lack of a lead agency in this field.4 AID is the more negative, but equally equivocal as the other agencies, and concedes the need for someone at the Executive Office level to pull together a “composite report” which is precisely what we suggest.5 We have no State comments. They may not have been consulted since Eizenstat’s request went to “State/AID” according to OMB, and there is no State response included in the Hutcheson package. My assessment has not changed one iota on this classic case of Executive Branch turf protection. HEW sees itself grabbing the international health issue and has Kennedy’s backing to grow. AID sees its prerogatives jeopardized, recognizes the low (8–10 percent of total budget) priority given to health, but wants to make its own decisions. OMB sees its reorganization assignment being crowded by a mechanism which bridges both policy and functional reorganization, domestic and international programs, and the potential emergence of another mechanism within the Cabinet to do what it perceives itself as capable of accomplishing. The Domestic Council position is much less clear; however, it seems to me that there are two factors possibly disturbing them: 1. The Cabinet structure bridges domestic and international; 2. It offers the possibility that a planning and analysis mechanism may be created which is not subject to day-to-day legislative and managerial responsibilities. This characteristic of institutional separateness from day-to-day responsibilities would be distinct from all the major Presidential advisory structures: CEA, OMB, NSC, and the Domestic Council. OMB, for example, had to establish new layers, essentially creating a new entity outside the day-to-day operations of OMB in order to fulfill their reorganization mandate. They also felt it necessary to hire new outside staff. Interestingly, Peter has not hired one international health person, mendations which would then be reviewed by the Task Force. If necessary, the Task Force could then make further recommendations to the President to insure an integrated U.S. international health policy.” (Ibid.) 4 In a June 7 memorandum to Lance, Califano, in addition to proposing the coordinating committee, commented: “If and when a Cabinet-level task force is formed, I believe HEW should have a more central role within the executive overview committee than suggested in Jack’s memo. At a minimum, I would like to co-chair such a committee with Cy Vance.” (Ibid.) 5 Gilligan, in a June 3 memorandum to Lance, proposed that each agency author drafts on the “parts of this exercise which fall within its own area of competence.” He added that completed drafts would be circulated to the other agencies for comment; Bourne and his staff “would then prepare a composite report to which each agency could react. The final report would then reflect agreement by all agencies, or where necessary, alternative agency views on specific points.” (Ibid.)
