International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
945
to be co-chairman of the Cabinet-level Task Force with State, if one is
formed, thus reaffirming my own judgment concerning the lack of a
lead agency in this field.4 AID is the more negative, but equally equiv-
ocal as the other agencies, and concedes the need for someone at the Ex-
ecutive Office level to pull together a “composite report” which is pre-
cisely what we suggest.5 We have no State comments. They may not
have been consulted since Eizenstat’s request went to “State/AID” ac-
cording to OMB, and there is no State response included in the
Hutcheson package.
My assessment has not changed one iota on this classic case of Ex-
ecutive Branch turf protection. HEW sees itself grabbing the interna-
tional health issue and has Kennedy’s backing to grow. AID sees its
prerogatives jeopardized, recognizes the low (8–10 percent of total
budget) priority given to health, but wants to make its own decisions.
OMB sees its reorganization assignment being crowded by a mecha-
nism which bridges both policy and functional reorganization, do-
mestic and international programs, and the potential emergence of an-
other mechanism within the Cabinet to do what it perceives itself as
capable of accomplishing. The Domestic Council position is much less
clear; however, it seems to me that there are two factors possibly dis-
turbing them:
1. The Cabinet structure bridges domestic and international;
2. It offers the possibility that a planning and analysis mechanism
may be created which is not subject to day-to-day legislative and mana-
gerial responsibilities.
This characteristic of institutional separateness from day-to-day
responsibilities would be distinct from all the major Presidential advi-
sory structures: CEA, OMB, NSC, and the Domestic Council. OMB, for
example, had to establish new layers, essentially creating a new entity
outside the day-to-day operations of OMB in order to fulfill their reor-
ganization mandate. They also felt it necessary to hire new outside
staff. Interestingly, Peter has not hired one international health person,
mendations which would then be reviewed by the Task Force. If necessary, the Task
Force could then make further recommendations to the President to insure an integrated
U.S. international health policy.” (Ibid.)
4 In a June 7 memorandum to Lance, Califano, in addition to proposing the coordi-
nating committee, commented: “If and when a Cabinet-level task force is formed, I believe
HEW should have a more central role within the executive overview committee than suggested in
Jack’s memo. At a minimum, I would like to co-chair such a committee with Cy Vance.” (Ibid.)
5 Gilligan, in a June 3 memorandum to Lance, proposed that each agency author
drafts on the “parts of this exercise which fall within its own area of competence.” He
added that completed drafts would be circulated to the other agencies for comment;
Bourne and his staff “would then prepare a composite report to which each agency could
react. The final report would then reflect agreement by all agencies, or where necessary,
alternative agency views on specific points.” (Ibid.)
