Afghanistan 665 month, the Soviets have added the concept of a guarantee that outside interference, once stopped, will not be resumed. A. Cessation of Interference According to the Zemskov non-paper delivered to the British on March 3, “one cannot speak seriously about a political solution . . . without a complete and guaranteed cessation of all forms of outside interference, including armed interference, directed against the government and people of Afghanistan.” Thus, there can be no discussions of any kind until outside interference is stopped. During the de Leusse visit in early March, the French inquired as to whether the Soviets expected the US to admit that it was guilty of interfering in Afghanistan.4 The Soviets replied that they did not require a formal or public admission of guilt; a de facto cessation of interference would be sufficient. In framing their position this way, the Soviets are basically insisting that the US and Afghanistan’s neighbors accept responsibility for the insurgency and the Soviet reaction. They are thus arguing implicitly that the causes of Kabul’s problems are entirely external and that the yardstick by which Moscow would measure cessation of interference would be abatement of rebel activity. B. Guarantee Cessation of foreign interference in itself would not, apparently, be sufficient to lead to a Soviet withdrawal. Moscow has added that there must be “guarantees” that interference would not resume. The Soviets have not spelled out precisely what they mean by guarantees. Indeed, it seems unlikely that Brezhnev had any plan in mind, when 4 During a meeting with the Chargé in Paris, March 6, the Secretary General of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs, de Leusse, reported on his recent visit to Moscow. De Leusse recounted his opening statements on French policy toward the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan: 1) France understood the insurgency as “chiefly characterized by the revolt of an entire people against a foreign intervention;” 2) the situation had compelled the Soviets to become further enmeshed in Afghanistan; 3) Afghanistan threatened détente between the Soviet Union and Western Europe, and Soviet leadership “must make a political decision to resolve the situation;” 4) tensions continued to rise as time passed; and 5) France believed only a “political solution” could resolve the crisis. That solution would include three elements: “withdrawal of foreign military forces from Afghanistan,” self-determination for the Afghan people, and “Afghanistan should not constitute a threat to its neighbors, and guaranteeing in particular that the country cannot be the stake or the instrument of rivalry of the superpowers.” De Leusse relayed the Soviets’ point-by-point refutation of his presentation, from which the French concluded that the dialogue with the Soviets over Afghanistan left them “very puzzled” and had reached an endpoint for the time being. (Telegram 7809 from Paris, March 7; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800118–0489)
