310  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Soviet heavy SS-18s or Soviet ICBMs, or even Soviet ballistic missiles. It 
would be the US slow-­flying, second-­strike ALCM force. (S/NF)
Furthermore, once we open the “as equipped” verification issue, 
the Soviets will ask why similar approaches cannot be taken to ver-
ify gravity bombs and short-­range attack missiles, thus reopening the 
important Reykjavik bomber counting rule. Also, “as equipped” for 
ALCMs will only encourage the Soviets to push harder on SLCMs.
The bomber/ALCM issues may be ripe, however, for further 
moves, the Soviet negotiators have indicated that although they still 
insist on an “as equipped rule” for ALCM bombers which is “factual,” 
it would be something like the number of actual attachment points pro-
vided rather than something like the maximum theoretical (or perhaps 
even demonstrated). The Soviet side characterizes this as a more “real-
istic” approach, but does not provide for legal ACLM discounting nor 
does it provide for the easier verification associated with the American 
“attribution” approach. Rather, the new Soviet “realistic” approach 
complicates verification further and now also provides for the “break-
out” threat which had been one of the criticisms of the American “attri-
bution” approach. Actually, we have not expressed great concern about 
ALCM “breakout” because the deployment of additional ALCMs in 
ALCM bombers normally requires the displacement of a significant, 
and sometimes larger, number of gravity bombs and Short Range 
Attack Missiles and are “slow flyers” anyway. Nevertheless, the Soviet 
propose that Bears be counted at 6 ALCMs (U.S. estimate is 6 internal 
for a total of 18 AS–15s or a total of 14 if AS-X-19s are carried externally) 
and that the Blackjack be counted as 12 (its current internal carriage 
capability). Our next step on ALCM should be to pick up on this “dif-
ferentiation” among ALCM carriers and propose that Bears and B–52s 
be attributed with 6 to 8 ALCMs and that the Blackjacks and B–1Bs (if 
and when they are deployed with ALCMs) would be attributed with 
10 to 12 ALCMs. We should submit this in a package which includes a 
strong position on ALCM range, ALCM armament, and conventional 
bombers.
Finally, some have suggested that we will be unable to conclude a 
START treaty that meets our standard of “effective” verification if we 
permit mobile ICBMs or take certain positions on bombers or ALCMs. 
I personally believe that we can sell the START treaty with our current 
definition of “effective verification.” A relatively straightforward work 
program can prepare the way. We must acknowledge, of course, that no 
verification regime can be perfect, but, if we appear to lower our stan-
dards in order to sell START, we will dig ourselves into a political hole 
on ratification from which we may not recover. (S/NF)
