3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
734
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
—The President’s views on this matter, however, have been
changed by three events:
(a) The Vienna Summit. This required the President to read deeply
in Soviet and Marxist history, philosophy and politics and to ponder
the continuing outward thrust of Soviet foreign policy.
(b) The Soviet Brigade in Cuba. This focused for the President the di-
lemma which we face in trying, on the one hand, to achieve strategic
stability and balance with the Soviet Union and, on the other hand, to
restrain its mischievious policies in vulnerable areas throughout the
world.
(c) The Afghanistan Crisis. This has brought home to the President,
as no previous event during his Administration, the brutal cynicism of
the Soviets, the outward thrust that their system requires, and their
willingness to sacrifice a detente relationship with the US to the needs
of Soviet expansionism.
—The President is determined not to allow the Soviets to have
their cake and eat it. He is convinced that the only way to stop Soviet
expansion in Southwest Asia and into the Persian Gulf area is for the
United States to adopt a firm and unequivocal policy of resistance to
Soviet machinations. He believes that the Soviet rape of Afghanistan
should not be viewed as an isolated event, but that it has to be seen in
the context of what has been happening elsewhere in the world in such
places as Angola, Ethiopia, Yemen and Cambodia. The Soviets are
posing a challenge to us, he believes, and we must respond to it.
—As a result of this changed perception, the President will ensure
that during the remainder of his first Administration and throughout
the next Carter Administration the US Government will be speaking
with one voice on Soviet affairs.
—He has come to realize that, both in terms of our relationship
with Moscow as well as in terms of formulating US Government policy
for dealing with the Soviet Union, it is essential that we enunciate
clearly what US policy toward Moscow really is and that appearance of
divided opinion on our part can not only be ineffective but dangerous
as well, since it can lead to miscalculation.
—As a result, during meetings with his key advisors the President
has directed that his Administration speak and act with one voice on
this central aspect of American foreign policy.
—Those policymakers within the Government who are not in
accord with the President’s views will shortly be leaving the
Administration. (S)
In sum, the above approach would enhance the President’s polit-
ical stature, the popular perception of his leadership ability, as well as
the argument that we need experience and steadiness at the tiller during
