530
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
support both in bilateral assistance and in mobilizing diplomatic and
other resources. You should, therefore, be firm in presenting our actions
and program of assistance in a positive light and avoid any sense of
defensiveness about our participation in Pakistan’s security. (S)
Jimmy Carter
188.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
[article number not declassified]
Washington, January 31, 1980
SPECIAL ANALYSES
AFGHANISTAN: The Babrak Government’s Bleak Prospects
by [less than 1 line not declassified] CIA
After a month in power, the Soviet-installed government of President
Babrak Karmal has little prospect of becoming more than a transparent cover
for Soviet military occupation. There is evidence that Moscow is disappointed
in Babrak’s performance, and rumors are widespread in Kabul that the Soviets
are planning to replace him. In the near term at least, there is little chance
that the Soviets could put together any government that would be viewed as
more than a puppet and have any chance of staying in power if Soviet troops
were withdrawn. ([classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified])
Babrak’s Problems
Babrak’s regime has virtually no popular backing. Dissatisfaction
is widespread in all major cities, and in some instances has resulted
in public demonstrations. Attacks by individual Afghans against Soviet
troops continue as do clashes between Afghan and Soviet Army units.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
There are numerous reports of passive resistance among Afghan
civil servants, and one has indicated that 400 Soviets have been brought
in to help keep the major ministries running. Support for Babrak within
the ruling People’s Democratic Party is attenuated by a continued
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–
81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, NIDs. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified]. The full version of this National Intelligence Daily was not
filed with this collection. The article printed here was found in this form.
