260 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement CH–20. Letter from the Officer in Charge of Chilean Affairs (Phillips) to the Ambassador in Chile (Howe)1  Washington, April 8, 1959. Dear Mr. Ambassador: I enclose two self-­explanatory memoranda2 concerning a recent proposal by the Office of Civilian and Defense Mobilization to sell some 128,000 tons of copper held in the Defense Production Act3 inventory. I need hardly tell you that we were somewhat alarmed when we first heard of this proposal, particularly since we had gotten the idea that OCDM intended to move quickly and might do so without adequate consultation with other agencies of the U.S. Government, let alone the foreign governments which might be affected by this action. As a result of the meetings described in these memoranda, however, we believe that the situation is under control and that OCDM will not take any precipitous action. Nevertheless, there is every reason to-­believe that the Administration will move eventually to get rid of this copper. You may be sure that we will do our best to see that the Chileans are consulted and that the disposal plan will not operate to their disadvantage. In fact, if we do have a big copper strike in the U.S., the DPA copper could probably be sold, after settlement of the strike, without seriously disrupting the market. It is conceivable that such sales might actually benefit Chile if they helped to prevent another price runaway such as occurred in 1955–56 and which the copper producers would like to avoid if at all possible. I am sending you these memoranda at this time merely to alert you to what is going on here. As you will note the whole matter is highly confidential and must not be discussed with anyone outside the Embassy, nor should any allusion to this letter be made in official communications. As and when OCDM comes up with a decision to sell and the sales procedures to be followed, we will expect to consult the Embassy formally as to the possible economic and political impact of the OCDM proposal on our relations with Chile. It would be nice, of course, if a copper disposal program, when it comes, could somehow be related to a new suspension of the copper 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 31, “Copper.” Confidential. The source text is a carbon copy bearing Phillips’ typed name. 2 The referenced memoranda, dated respectively March 31 and April 2, 1959, recorded conversations between representatives of the Department of State and OCDM officials. They are not printed. 3 For text of the Defense Production Act of 1950, see 64 Stat. 798.
