World Hunger and Food Policy
763
237.
Letter From Orville Freeman to the President’s Special
Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne)1
New York, November 4, 1977
Dear Dr. Bourne:
Your October 5th letter2 was on my desk when I returned from an
extended trip in Asia. I would like to respond in considerable length to
all five of the questions to which you direct my attention.3 However,
your letter calls for response by October 21st, so let me quickly summa-
rize where the first four areas you name are concerned by emphasizing,
as I sure others to whom you have written will do, that the key is
“political.”
I could name on the fingers of one hand the developing countries
where strong and determined programs to accomplish the necessary
increase of food production and distribution have been carried out.
Historically, few political leaders have had the will or strength to de-
velop and carry out the necessary programs to affect the major changes
that are essential if the long and complex chain of relationships, run-
ning from land ownership to finance, inputs, technology application,
production, storage, processing, and, finally, marketing is to be altered
in a fashion designed to accomplish the necessary increase in produc-
tivity. In my judgment, the President could do nothing more important
for the food and hunger cause than to press, in every way possible and
on all occasions personally, on the chiefs of state that they must put
their “back” into agriculture and food development. No country in his-
tory (except a few city-states), has enjoyed marked economic progress
without a vigorous and successful agricultural base. As you are well
aware, only about half of the good land in the world is being used, and
probably only about one third of the technology is currently effectively
applied. The “makings” are all there; what is needed is the political will
to put together and carry through programs (including outside sup-
port) to expand production and distribution in the country where it is
needed. The political risk to do so is usually high and payoff in visible
results comes slowly.
1 Source: Minnesota Historical Society, Mondale Papers, Vice Presidential Papers,
Central Files, AG 8, World Food Problem. No classification marking. In a November 7
note to Mondale, Freeman wrote that he had sent the letter to the White House. (Ibid.)
The letter is typed on stationery of the Business International Corporation of which
former Secretary of Agriculture Freemen was President and CEO.
2 Reference is to an October 5 letter Bourne sent to various addressees; see Docu-
ment 231. A copy of Bourne’s letter to Freeman is in the Minnesota Historical Society,
Mondale Papers, Vice Presidential Papers, Central Files, AG 8, World Food Problem.
3 Reference is to the five “possible hunger policy areas” outlined in an attachment
to Bourne’s October 5 letter. (Ibid.)
