712  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Ydígoras has handled his politics with exceptional astuteness and 
it can be argued that his “soft” policy toward the left, for which he has 
been censured by some sectors, has done much to reduce class ten-
sions in that country, and has served to sort the sheep from the goats 
in the left-­of-­center political area which, under Castillo Armas tended 
to be lumped together as “communist”. For this, he has received some 
recognition. On the other hand, his “soft” policy toward the country’s 
economic and financial problems has caused considerable concern 
to the Department and other agencies. In essence, the attitude has 
been that Ydígoras has not acted adequately on the excellent advice 
he has received for placing Guatemala’s economy and finances on a 
sound basis. He has not, for example, pressed with the forcefulness 
the adoption of such measures as broader income-­tax coverage and 
a reevaluation of properties for tax purposes. On the assumption 
that Ydígoras could assure his government adequate revenues by 
adopting such measures, and that Guatemala’s budgetary problem 
could be resolved with relative ease (as by recourse to private bank 
credit), a Departmental-ICA team recommended in June the grant of a 
$3.5 million loan to Guatemala from MSP funds, which would enable 
Guatemala to make its counterpart contribution to ICA projects and 
thus get these under way, and that facilities be given the GOG for uti-
lization of wheat agreement revenues. These, it was recommended, 
should suffice to keep the Guatemalan situation under control. The 
$3.5 million loan was signed through Eximbank on June 29. We were 
at the time quite firm, in answering Congressional inquiries, in say-
ing we believed these measures were sufficient to satisfy Guatemala’s 
reasonable needs, and opposed grant aid. Meanwhile, we encouraged 
the GOG to present promptly to DLF and Eximbank requests for loans 
to finance projects intended to stimulate the country’s economy and 
develop a feeling of optimism.
These arrangements were received with marked lack of enthusi-
asm by Guatemalan authorities. Ambassador Alejos remarked that 
it was cash his government needed, in 1960,3 and not in the year or 
years to come. President Ydígoras made the same point very strongly 
3 In a memorandum of July 5 to Acting Secretary Dillon, Rubottom stated that 
the International Cooperation Administration made available to the Government of 
Guatemala $3.5 million in unobligated special assistance funds on a short-­term loan in 
February, and $800,000 in June to relieve an acute cash shortage. (ARA/OAP Files, Lot 63 
D 146, “Alejos, Carlos (Ambassador); Guatemala, 1960”). In addition, the International 
Monetary Fund agreed to a Standby Arrangement with Guatemala which made avail-
able $15 million during the period June 6, 1960-June 5, 1961. For further information, see 
International Monetary Fund, Annual Report of the Executive Directors for the Fiscal Year 
Ended April 30, 1961 (Washington, 1961), pp. 27–30.
