3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 658 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI Cuba’s activities in the Caribbean and in Central America7 (as well as in Africa) and inform them of the costs to our relationship of continued Soviet support (or even acquiescence) in Cuba’s activities. In this connection, we are transferring a few limited examples of dual-use high technology to the PRC. (S) —With Cuba, we should seek to use the Cuban Americans as a potent force for influencing the Cuban people. They are returning to the island for frequent visits, and we should benefit from the insights gained during their visits. We should also increase the influence of U.S. culture on the Cuban people by promoting cultural tours and by permitting an arrangement to distribute U.S. films on the island.8 (S) RECOMMENDATION: That you approve the objectives and measures described above.9 (U) 7 Carter wrote in the margin next to this point: “ok.” 8 Carter wrote in the margin next to this point: “ok.” 9 Carter checked his approval and initialed the memorandum. Carter’s decisions were disseminated as Presidential Directive/NSC–52. PD/NSC–52 is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXIII, Mexico, Cuba, and the Caribbean. 226. Memorandum of Conversation1 New York, September 24, 1979, 5:15–6:40 p.m. PARTICIPANTS U.S. USSR The Secretary Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko Ambassador Marshall Shulman First Deputy Foreign Minister Mr. William D. Krimer, G.M. Korniyenko Interpreter Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin Mr. V. Sukhodrev Foreign Minister Gromyko welcomed the Secretary and said he was glad that they had a chance to have a chat. The Secretary said that he was also glad to have this opportunity. Gromyko said that since New York was the Secretary’s home, it would be only logical for the Secretary to start the conversations and he would therefore ask him if he had anything new to convey. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 16, Soviet Brigade (Meetings With Soviets), 9/79. Secret. Sent via Alpha Channel. The meeting took place at the Soviet Mission to the United Nations.
