896  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
166.	 Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the 
Soviet Union1
Washington, November 6, 1990
376592. Subject: PPCM Letter
1. (Secret) Entire Text.
2. Text follows at Para 3 below of a letter from Secretary Baker to 
Foreign Minister Shevardnadze on PPCM. Please deliver it ASAP. There 
will be no signed original. We are providing this now so the Soviets will 
have time to react at Thursday’s2 meeting.
3. Dear Eduard,
— During our recent meeting in New York, we acknowledged 
that considerable progress has been made in the START negotiations, 
but that a great deal more work was required before we could bring 
the treaty to a successful conclusion. One of the most important, time-­
consuming, and difficult issues remaining before us is the establish-
ment of perimeter-­portal continuous monitoring (PPCM) at production 
facilities for ICBMs subject to non-­deployed missile limits.
— As you know, throughout the START negotiations, the United 
States has made clear that agreement on measures permitting effective 
verification is necessary if mobile ICBMs are to be permitted in START. 
Both sides have made major efforts to devise mobile ICBM verification 
provisions, and much progress has been made. Still outstanding, how-
ever, is the core of the mobile verification scheme: rules to implement 
our agreement in principle that PPCM will be established to monitor 
production of all ICBMs with mobile variants.
— We need to resolve this issue now, both because of its cen-
tral importance to the treaty and because of the number of detailed 
procedures which must be agreed to implement the basic arrange-
ment. In that spirit I would like to propose the following approach 
to PPCM. This compromise goes far to address your stated concerns. 
Your acceptance of this proposal will set us on the path to completion 
of the START agreement.
— The US has proposed to establish PPCM at the solid rocket 
motor plants where all first stages of mobile missiles and their silo-­
based variants are produced. You have expressed concerns over the 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
N900008–0205. Secret; Nodis; Immediate. Sent to NST Geneva. Drafted by Timbie; 
cleared by Hadley, Lehman, MacEachin, and in JCS, NSC, S/S, and S/S-O; approved by 
Bartholomew.
2 November 8.
