January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1293 Egypt—with the private backing of His Majesty and Jordan—to say what they want. They should ask. How do they induce Israel to withdraw, and to realize a solution? There is no entity to deal with—no moderate responsible voice. That is all he (the President) asks. He is not asking the Palestinians to sit down and say they accept Camp David. He is asking Egypt, the PLO, and His Majesty to get the mayors to speak publicly, to say that they represent the Palestinians and this is what they want and how they will go about getting it. It will not be easy; there will be obstacles. He hopes His Majesty will think about this, and talk with the mayors and Arafat about it. If they see an opening leading towards a 100% solution, they can talk about how to proceed to realize their dreams, etc. This is what we need, and don’t have it. Their position now is all or nothing. King Hussein said that he can go back and carry these thoughts and ideas. Could they succeed or not? He is not sure. Jordan had never appealed for an engagement of a group from the West Bank and Gaza. The President said that they (the Palestinians) think there is opposition to it. King Hussein asked whether his friends (i.e. the U.S.) could think— if there is a lack of real progress—about a fresh start, including everyone. The President said that a “fresh start” is easy to say and hard to do—it would take us back to where we were three years ago. There are hard problems. Even the Arabs could not agree among themselves. Should the Soviets be in? This is impossible. The Prime Minister said that the emphasis before was on procedure, not on substance. The President said that that is what we got. The Prime Minister said that if we can get an idea—of selfdetermination—then the PLO and others could not resist. But to ask them to commit themselves to a dead end—the autonomy talks— would abridge their right to self-determination. The President said that there is no abridgment on the final status of territories, after five years. The Prime Minister asked about Israel’s intentions. The President said he didn’t know. The Prime Minister said that for the Palestinians, it would only be five years of legitimacy for Israel, while it absorbed the West Bank and Gaza. Jordan knows Begin and those who went before him. The President said he was not trying to defend them. The Prime Minister said that the Arabs were on the receiving side. There is a long record. Begin tries to negate U.S. pressure, and engages in the appearance of talking, while building settlements. Look at the
