Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II erations to bear on programs that are essentially commercial in nature such as the CCC credit program. He said he understood that the State Department had been in discussions with the Agriculture Department about this matter and that there was currently an issue as to CCC credits for Chile. Mr. Christopher responded that as to strictly commercial programs such as the CCC and EXIM programs, it was our policy to convey our views and advice to the agency concerned when that agency wished to bring a problem to our attention. He said our role was advisory. He said there are some cases, such as Uganda, where we thought it clearly unwise to go forward with such programs. Senator Talmadge said he could not agree more. Senator Talmadge reiterated that he appreciated Mr. Christopher coming to brief him. Mr. Christopher referred to the interest that some of the Senator’s colleagues had expressed in holding hearings on the PL 480 matter and said he would be happy to meet with them to provide further details. The Senator asked Mr. Denlinger which Senators had expressed an interest in hearings. Mr. Denlinger responded that 14 of the 17 members of the Agriculture Committee had sent a letter to Senator Talmadge expressing interest in hearings on this matter,5 but that he thought the information we had provided might make hearings unnecessary. The Senator said that in any event hearings could not be held until January and asked Mr. Denlinger to provide each of the 14 Senators in question a copy of the letter Mr. Christopher had just provided. The Senator again thanked Mr. Christopher for his time, and we departed. In the anteroom as we departed Mr. Christopher explained to Mr. Denlinger that we hoped they would not distribute the draft contractual provision in view of the possible negative effect of such distribution on the on-going negotiations. Denlinger said he understood this risk and would therefore not distribute the draft provision. 5 In the November 16 letter to Talmadge, members of the Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry expressed concerns about the administration’s apparent delay in signing Title I agreements and requested that Talmadge hold hearings “in order to explore with the Administration ways to expedite the programming of P.L. 480 commodities.” Signatories included Humphrey, Dole, McGovern, Hayakawa, Allen, Bellmon, Helms, Lugar, Stone, Curtis, Young, Melcher, Eastland, and Zorinsky. Dole sent a copy of the letter to the President under cover of a November 17 memorandum requesting that Carter personally intervene in the matter. (Carter Library, White House
