3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
655
The Secretary replied, saying that he regretted very much the neg-
ative character and tone of the response. He said he had hoped we
would work together to find a satisfactory solution to this problem. He
found the Soviet statement and the fact that doors seem to be closing on
this kind of cooperative effort to resolve the problem in a mutually-
satisfactory way deeply troubling.
The Secretary repeated his previously-expressed concern over the
negative effect a failure to resolve the issue would have on overall
US-Soviet relations; the consequences for the ratification of SALT were
all too obvious.
The Secretary concluded by saying he would study the text of the
Soviet note, discuss it with the President, and would be in touch with
Dobrynin. Dobrynin said he would be in New York with Gromyko, but
would come back to Washington whenever the Secretary wished.
Attachment
Attachment to the Memorandum of Conversation4
September 17, 1979
There followed an off-the-record informal conversation, along fol-
lowing lines:
MDS asked whether Dobrynin had any intimation from his side-
communications with Moscow if there would be some responsiveness
to the possibility of concrete actions by the Soviet Union that would
serve to alleviate U.S. concerns.
Dobrynin replied that he did not know. He said he had not re-
ceived any suggestions from the U.S. of the kind of actions we had in
mind, and had not therefore transmitted any suggestions along these
lines to Moscow.
The Secretary then advanced some tentative illustrative sugges-
tions, saying he was thinking aloud, and was not intending this for
transmission to Moscow at this stage. He asked what Dobrynin’s per-
sonal reaction might be to suggestions that would include such matters
as, for example, the elimination of the brigade headquarters, so it could
be made amply clear that it would not function in a combat capacity,
and the removal or transfer from Soviet control of some of the major
combat equipment, such as the tanks, the armored personnel carriers,
or the artillery. These were just illustrative of the kind of actions which
4 Secret; Sensitive. For Secretary Vance only. Drafted by Shulman.
