Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1053
Hill. But thus far it has been manageable and not too disruptive. We 
will need to keep working to keep it that way.
I think there will be some requirement to develop possible nego-
tiating material and moves on our part. Some might argue that we 
should at least have a first set of meetings to stiff the Soviets to see if 
they come around—even citing the CFE precedent. I think START is a 
different case altogether and that if we don’t have something to work 
with and offer ourselves—if only to prime the pump—we are going to 
find a dry hole. After all, the President’s letter on CFE opened the way 
to a solution in part by offering Gorbachev some reasonable steps.
Finally on timetable, it just seems to me hard to get the necessary 
decisions here in time for me to meet with Moiseyev in Geneva much 
before the first of next week. The Ungroup needs to develop substantive 
options on the outstanding issues. And then we have to have another 
Principals meeting to make decisions when you get back from your 
next trip either this Saturday4 or Monday.5
It is not inconceivable that we get to a draft of a substantive letter 
from the President to Gorbachev before then and even without going 
through a Principals meeting, i.e., in the course of this week with us 
checking with you long range. That said, I think the more likely thing is 
it will require the face to face Principals meeting I mentioned.
As I said above, I will give you more on this later in talking points 
for the Principals meeting tomorrow.
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Department of State6
Washington, June 3, 1991
Issues that need to be resolved to complete START
Downloading
 In February the US toughened its position to permit download-
ing only of the SS–N–18 and the Minuteman III.
 The Soviets want the right to download the SS–N–18 plus two 
other existing types on each side.
 This issue is not being addressed in Geneva, pending consider-
ation at a higher level.
4 June 8.
5 June 10.
6 Secret.
