754
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and political policies and conditions still prevent sustained food output
increases in many developing countries, and in addition reduce private
and public investment flowing to agriculture. There also are other con-
straints to expanded food output in developing countries which must
be overcome such as inadequate management and shortage of trained
manpower, capital shortages, inadequate and inappropriate tech-
nology, substantial post harvest losses due to inadequate storage facil-
ities, and productivity losses due to people debilitated by hunger and
disease.
—Dealing effectively with problems of under consumption and
malnutrition. Though there is at present no widespread famine in the
world, many millions of people (estimates range between 400 million
and one billion) do not have an adequately nutritional diet. Underlying
this problem is the issue of effective demand among groups of people
and individual countries. We have learned that economic growth and
prosperity does not necessarily produce additional benefits for the
poorer members of society, including access to necessary food supplies.
While the problem is focused in the poorer developing countries, it is
worldwide in scope, existing often in large pockets in middle income
LDC’s and in rich countries as well.
—Feeding the hungry and malnourished requires significantly im-
proved food distribution systems both among countries and within the
poorer developing nations. The food crisis of 1972–1974 evidenced
many instances of localized famine in countries and regions where ade-
quate food supplies were available, but inadequate transport systems
made it impossible to deliver the food where it was needed most. Im-
proved distribution systems mean not only getting more food to the
neediest, but also ensuring better food supply/demand balance locally
and regionally. Unless food imports are kept in reasonable balance
with local production and purchasing power, domestic food prices and
agricultural incentives may be reduced. We need to carefully review
the level of our food aid and other food exports and seek to establish in-
ternal programs in recipient countries to increase productivity, pur-
chasing power, and demand prior to and along with the arrival of im-
ported food.
—Restraining excess population growth rates which represent a
threat to long term food supply/demand balance. In this connection,
responsible population growth control programs are required. Based
on current growth rates, the world’s population will double to 8 billion
people by 2010. Feeding this many people will be extremely difficult,
with a possibility of widespread famine in years of bad harvests. Since
about 80% of the projected population growth will occur in developing
countries, the population problem will be compounded, even more
than today, by distribution problems.
