662 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI count in START whatever the range of the missile. Karpov: Our proposals do not use the word “fighter,” only bomber and heavy bomber. Bartholomew (reads the text of paras 10 and 11): Paras 10 and 11 as written exclude the case I am talking about and satisfy me. But because this was a point of contention with Akhromeyev, and because this is critical to us here, I want to say the Soviets are not saying to us that if we have a tactical fighter and put on it a conventional cruise missile above the agreed range, then it counts in START whether in the 1600 or the 100. Karpov: Our proposal deals with only bombers or heavy bombers, not fighters. There is a definition in START that when an aircraft carries an ALCM, it becomes a heavy bomber. Bartholomew: Carries a nuclear ALCM. Karpov: You need to look at all the provisions. Bartholomew: We need to be clear on this. Karpov: Maybe the translation is not careful. Your translators should check the Russian. Bartholomew: I am disturbed, and not getting the clear answer I hoped for. This point is absolutely critical to us. It is the first point Secretary Baker stressed to you this morning. START is about nuclear weapons. We cannot agree that if we take a conventional ALCM over the range and put it on a Piper Cub, this combination is treated as a heavy bomber in START, either in the 1600 or the 100. This is totally unacceptable. I was looking for a flat statement from you. If the missile is conventional, putting that missile on an aircraft does not make it a START accountable heavy bomber. Karpov: I will take that remark of yours as homework. Bartholomew: This will have a souring effect if I cannot say that this problem is behind us. Karpov: Our proposal does not address fighters. We speak only about bombers and heavy bombers. Bartholomew: Just because an aircraft is equipped with a conventional ALCM does not mean it should be counted against START levels. Bartholomew: I take the Soviet proposal as I read it as not saying that putting a conventional ALCM above the agreed range on an aircraft makes that aircraft a START accountable heavy bomber. This is what I understand. I am happy that this is the case. Any other interpretation is absolutely unacceptable here. It all comes down to these two points. Karpov: We must take into account the discussion in Geneva about the definition of a heavy bomber, and look at the record of the Washington Ministerial. Bartholomew: We felt so strongly that one of the main points Secretary Baker made to Shevardnadze was on precisely this position the Soviet negotiators had advanced. We need to be clear on this. If we proceed, we will need to proceed on the basis of those two points.
