Haiti 751 Mr. Rubottom then reviewed the sense of the meeting as followed: (1) That the cost survey be top priority. (2) That ICA and State would look into the problem of economic consultants for the GOM. (3) That the Haitians be informed of the adverse aspects of nationalization of the power industry, without trying to sell them on any specific private power measures. (4) That the DLF then take up the financing of the Artibonite project completion.3 Mr. Kimball said that the cost survey would come to about $15,000. 3 On September 23, Samuel C. Waugh, President of the Export-Import Bank, advised the Department of State in a letter to Assistant Secretary Rubottom that the Haitian government was in default to the Bank for the sum of $500,000 in connection with the Artibonite loan and for the sum of $25,000 in connection with an additional loan. Waugh added: “It is our option that no assistance by other governmental agencies should be given to Haiti unless it maintains its debt payments to this Bank. Even though assistance may be coming from other agencies, we are strongly of the opinion that the sanctity of obligations should be preserved and such a concept impressed upon the Haitians. If a debtor is to be relieved of debt payments while receiving aid, it would create a harmful precedent for the loaning activities of this government.” (103–XMB/9–2358) HA–9. Letter from the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Sprague)1  Washington, September 23, 1958. Dear Mr. Sprague: I refer to Mr. Rubottom’s letter of September 9, 19582 which recommended the assignment of United States Marine Corps training personnel to Haiti provided that the Haitian Government would agree to permit such personnel to operate under conditions deemed satisfactory by the State and Defense Departments. As you know, representatives of the Department of Defense (Colonel Victor Croizat, USMC) and of this 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 738.58/9-958. Confidential. Drafted by Warner and cleared in draft with Spencer and Athol H. Ellis of the office of the Special Assistant for Mutual Security Coordination. 2 See the summary of the letter to Irwin in the memorandum from Wieland to Snow of August 28, Document HA–7.
