items or component parts are sent direct to their destination.” ARTICLE 5 “Without prejudice to any obligations to which they may have subscribed under international conventions dealing with transit, the High Contracting Parties, when they have reason to believe that any consignment of arms, munitions or implements of war in transit through their territory’ does not conform to the provisions of the present Convention, undertake to investigate the circumstances and if necessary to prohibit the transit.” It is suggested that before the word “transit” the word “land” be inserted. The Department feels that it would be undesirable to conclude a convention which might conceivably be construed as authorizing the detention, for examination, of ships temporarily in transit through the territorial waters of one of the High Contracting Parties merely because of the suspicion that such ship might possibly contain a consignment of arms not properly authorized. Such a provision might easily lead to abuse. Further, this Government would not wish to be obligated by an international convention to exercise such a supervision with respect, for example, to ships passing through the Panama Canal. Nor would it desire that such a supervision be exercised under the present Convention upon American vessels passing through, or temporarily remaining in, the territorial waters of other countries. The Department feels that the phrase “does not conform to the provisions of the present Convention” is too broad and general. It is suggested that it be replaced by the phrase “is not properly authorized.” Furthermore, it might be pointed out that a third State would presumably have no opportunity to examine goods shipped in bond over its territory and shall not therefore be under any obligation to control arms so shipped. A provision to the effect that “articles shipped in bond” should not be disturbed might be considered in this connection.

ARTICLE 6 “Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 7, arms and munitions in Categories II and III may, if the exporter’s country so desires, be exported without licence. Provided, nevertheless, that in the case of arms and munitions of Category II the High Contracting Parties hereby undertake to determine from the size, destination and other circumstances of each consignment whether these arms and munitions are intended for war
