Nicaragua 875 Nicaraguan revolutionary group led by Alejandro Martines Saenz. He considered this was an act of desperation on the part of the group since he felt that the group was on the point of exhaustion from lack of supplies. Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa stated that while his government was fairly well satisfied with the recent actions taken by the Government of Honduras in this matter, he still believed there should be additional forceful and coordinated action by the two governments to eliminate these rebel groups which constitute a threat to the good relations of the two governments. He stated that President Villeda was being misled at times in the matter of these rebel groups by his Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andres Alvarado Puerto, whom the Ambassador claimed had Castro leanings—­feelings which he felt President Villeda also shared. With regard to the charges made by Castro regarding the activities of Chester Lacayo, the Ambassador stated that if the Unites States presented the matter to the IAPC, then Nicaragua was ready to state how absurd was the Castro charge that the United States was a participant in any revolutionary plot directed against Nicaragua and that this was merely another attempt by Castro to upset the Caribbean. He added that the Lacayo affair was another example of abuse of the good faith of the Unites States by such people as Chester Lacayo. He described Lacayo as crack-­pot with visions of grandeur as evidenced by his adopting the title of “Colonel”. At this point Mr. Stewart interposed the observation that the Department also had considered Lacayo to be an irresponsible trouble-­maker and for this very reason we had refused to receive a visit from him here in the Department. According to Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa, the recent bombing incident in Managua which caused the death of a watchman had been perpetrated by four teenage students. He claimed the students had been indoctrinated with such ideas by the recently ousted Cuban Ambassador to Nicaragua, Pinoa Machado. The ambassador stated that Nicaragua was prepared to present these facts to the IAPC as additional evidence of Cuban meddling in the internal affairs of Nicaragua. Mr. Mallory expressed his agreement that such evidence should be presented to the IAPC by Nicaragua and stated that he hoped the other Central American countries would do likewise. With further reference to the Chester Lacayo affair, the Ambassador claimed that Fernando Arguello, a Nicaraguan leader of the “Sandino revolutionist movement” in New York, had induced his brother-­in-­ law, Francisco Cardona of “La Prensa” in New York, to have published in his paper certain statements about Chester Lacayo’s contacts with Department of State officials. According to the Ambassador, these published statements by Cardona in “La Prensa” tended to substantiate the Castro charge that Lacayo had in fact maintained such contacts as had
