National Security Policy  385
to help him get the budget as low as possible. He made this speech of 
about half an hour.
I agreed with his statements.
Then he asked each of the Service Chiefs, not the Secretaries but 
the Services Chiefs, to make a speech in general terms, nothing specific, 
he wanted philosophical discussions.
Mr. McElroy tried to have the time divided into five minutes peri­
ods for the Secretary followed by his Chief, but Max Taylor was told to 
start it just the same.
Gen. Taylor: Made a speech on deployments, on our world-­wide 
responsibilities. Stated that this was no time to cut personnel because 
of its effect on other nations.
Adm Burke: I made a speech stating that I believed Khrushchev, and 
that we hadn’t read Marx, Lenin and Stalin enough. I thought that 
Khrushchev was going to use every trick in the book to try to beat 
us, including local wars, subversion, economic pressure, political, and 
everything else, and that we had to defeat him at every turn on each 
one of these moves. I agreed with the President that we could not 
continue going in debt indefinitely. I stated that the military could 
only solve a part of the problem and perhaps only a small part. As the 
President pointed out, the real problems in a conflict with the Soviet 
Union were not military problems, but were economic and political 
problems. The same thing was true inside the United States. The real 
problem inside the United States was political and not military. For 
example, the tremendous sums that were going into farm subsidies 
(this was a subject which had been previously discussed a little bit). 
The people were working for dollars instead of pride of workman­
ship which meant that everybody was out to get as much money as 
he could. This meant competition for money among various groups 
which perhaps caused a lot of inflation, and certainly did cause greatly 
increased prices for our military hardware. Labor and management 
both had to be controlled to bring prices down and to keep inflation 
from going up. Somehow or other we had to get the idea across that 
we were in a really dangerous period and that this period would last 
for generations, and that we had to sustain ourselves for generations 
of fight.
I then stated that I thought we should reexamine our air defense 
capabilities—­there was too much money going into air defense. We 
were defending ourselves too much and spending too much money on 
marginal systems for their psychological effect.
We should perhaps reexamine all of our general war retaliatory 
systems and choose quantities of the various systems available which
