450 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 139. Report Prepared by the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance1 Washington, April 30, 1978 REPORT OF THE INTERAGENCY GROUP ON HUMAN RIGHTS AND FOREIGN ASSISTANCE CONCERNING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF U.S. HUMAN RIGHTS ACTIONS IN THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS Pursuant to PD/NSC–30,2 the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance submits this report on the effectiveness of recent U.S. actions in the international financial institutions (IFIs) concerning human rights. As provided in the PD, this report deals specifically with: —Congressional attitudes and prospective legislation; —views of other nations as to the propriety and legality of our actions; and —the effect of our actions on the advancement of U.S. human rights objectives. Before examining these particular subjects, it will provide context to take an overall look at the human rights actions the U.S. has taken in the IFIs since January 1977 and to consider briefly the process by which these actions have been determined. I. Overview In general, we have been moderate in using our voice and vote in the IFIs in behalf of human rights. Of the over 500 loans that have been voted upon in the IFIs since January 1977, we have voted against only 10 and abstained on only 17 on human rights grounds. All of these loans were approved over our objection, although in a few cases we received support from other countries. In addition, we have sought to defer consideration of about 20 loans pending human rights developments in the countries in question; in several of these cases, the deferrals were only temporary. That the number of loans the Interagency 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North–South Pastor Files, Subject File, Box 55, Human Rights: 1–5/78. Confidential. Under an April 27 covering memorandum, Oxman sent a copy of the report to the members of the Interagency Group, directing the members to forward any agency comments to him by May 1. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 18, PD 30—Response (final)) Dodson also sent copies to Mondale, Vance, Harold Brown, Blumenthal, Bell, Kreps, McIntyre, Young, Gilligan, George Brown, Turner, and Reinhardt under a June 9 covering memorandum. (Ibid.) 2 See Document 119.
