458
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
later for the sake of peace. I brought it to Parliament. My old friends
were in revolt against it. I don’t think that the peace talks should be sus-
pended. For every draft I will give another draft. This is the nature of
negotiations.
President Carter: I think it is important that Secretary Vance explain
to you personally at some length because some of the matters that con-
cern you are not compatible with President Sadat’s position. He has
never intended to reverse his commitment once it was made, as far as I
know, on any issue. Although I went to him on the ambassadors, at the
request of your own negotiators, who told me they would withdraw
from al-Arish and the central part of the Sinai early, and on that basis I
went to President Sadat and asked him for a one-month commitment
on the ambassadorship exchange and that’s why he gave it to me.
Prime Minister Begin: Mr. President, may I interrupt you for a mo-
ment. But everything was ad referendum. The Government makes the
decisions, not our negotiators.
President Carter: I understand, Mr. Prime Minister, but that proviso
was not mentioned at the time that Dayan and Weizman and Barak all
told me there would be an early withdrawal from el-Arish. But in spite
of that, President Sadat told me this afternoon that he was not going
back on his commitment to me to exchange ambassadors within one
month.
Prime Minister Begin: I got this information from my own friends
yesterday on the phone.
President Carter: Mr. Prime Minister, I just talked to President Sadat
on the telephone. I think the time schedule for the elections and the es-
tablishment of the self-government are very important to President
Sadat. I think here again Secretary Vance can explain what President
Sadat’s position is. I think that he is not as interested in an exact
number of months as he is in the certainty of the elections being held.
But I think that he has one advantage. Once he tells me something
through his negotiators, that it is a final and definite commitment, I
don’t have to worry about it. I live in a democracy also in which I know
that I have to refer agreements made to the Senate if they are in the
treaty form. It is very difficult to negotiate over and over with the Is-
raeli Government on the same issues once we thought it had been
concluded.
Prime Minister Begin: No, sir, we don’t negotiate over and over. We
found two points on which we did not agree. We proposed compro-
mise proposals which were not acceptable by the other side. The Gov-
ernment has to take decisions. We don’t negotiate over and over again
anything as far as we are concerned. When we got the draft letter,
which was unacceptable to us, which Dayan told the Egyptian negoti-
ating team, then again those five or six months are uncertain. We
