1977  47
sponsored by ARPA, the Advanced Research Projects Agency.2 Six areas 
are discussed: space warfare and surveillance, anti-­submarine warfare, 
armored and air vehicles, and C3 (command, control and communica-
tions). All six represent very interesting technological advances; how-
ever, two—­space warfare and air vehicles—­represent technologies with 
truly far-­reaching policy planning and force structuring implications:
Space Warfare: ARPA is to demonstrate in 1980 a very high-­power 
laser which could be transported into space and used as an anti-­satellite 
(ASAT) system. Impact: The US has no effective ASAT system at pres-
ent. ARPA estimates that two of these high-­power lasers, mounted in 
maneuverable satellites, could destroy the entire Soviet satellite popu-
lation in less than 24 hours. Such a device, in orbit, would apparently 
not violate the 1967 space treaty which bans placing weapons of mass 
destruction in space.
Air Vehicles (sensitive): This fall, ARPA plans to fly an advanced 
design, relatively high performance aircraft which is essentially invis-
ible to all known and projected radar systems and which cannot be 
tracked by heat-­seeking missiles. Impact: Potentially enormous, both 
tactically and strategically. ARPA envisions using the aircraft in the bat-
tlefield area either to “roll back” enemy surface-­to-­air missile (SAM) 
launch systems or to act as “spotter” aircraft to direct fire against 
ground targets. Other possible applications might be in development of 
a new generation of “spy” aircraft or, more importantly, in substantially 
improving cruise missile penetrability against highly defended targets. 
This latter application could, for example, have a substantial bearing on 
future decisions regarding the B–1. (We are seeking additional, detailed 
technical data and will report our findings shortly.)
2 Attached but not printed is an April 1 memorandum to Carter from Brown, under 
which he forwarded a March 7 memorandum from the Defense Advanced Research Proj-
ect Agency on “Some Current Technological Initiatives and their Related Mission Oppor-
tunities for the 1980s.”
