Covert and Overt Operations
887
—We might work out a direct message to Beheshti from a private
or Congressional group to be delivered by the Algerian Ambassador
or through their own contacts. One purpose of approaching Beheshti
through the Algerian Ambassador would be to try to determine the
basis for Beheshti’s participation in an agreed final solution.
—A letter from Members of our Congress has been delivered to
the new President of the Iranian parliament by the Swiss Chargé and
he has reacted substantively.17 There might be a role for a more pointed
Congressional message to him or to other members of the Iranian
parliament. Once we have gauged Iranian receptivity, we might con-
sider proposing to the Congressional leadership a bipartisan Congres-
sional delegation to visit Tehran to seek the release of the hostages from
the parliament. The delegation, as noted above, would presumably be
in a position to assure an appropriate Congressional investigation of
U.S.-Iranian relations once the hostages are released.18
—It is also possible in addition to the private approaches described
above to make a substantive public statement at an appropriate
moment. A written message to an individual may not be sufficiently
dramatic or may not be politically useful in the Tehran context to catch
the attention of the Iranians or to develop a situation in which those
who want to resolve the crisis can proceed. We have hesitated to make
public statements which would fall on deaf ears in Tehran, but if we
thought the time was right we might say something about our policies
toward Iran after the release of the hostages. Now that the Shah is
dead, a statement incorporating our position that we will not stand in
the way of Iranians who wish to seek assets in this country might have
a political impact.
Step #3. As these various approaches progress, our purpose would
be to narrow the field and to identify a target in Tehran for a negotiating
effort and to identify the best channel for communicating with that
individual or group. Depending on responses to our more general
approaches, our purpose at this stage would be to introduce a specific
package on which the Iranians could focus and which could become
the basis of a negotiation. We would try to design the approach and
the package in such a way as to include a suggestion for the Iranians
on how the hostage issue might be presented to the parliament. Our
staff work will continue in a very small group to develop short papers
on each of the main elements of a possible package so we will be ready
to move promptly.19
In proceeding through these steps, we would start with the position
paper which you approved early in the crisis and which we have used
17 See Documents 309 and 329.
18 In the left margin beside these paragraphs, Carter wrote: “Draft these now. Have
them ready.”
19 In the left margin beside this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Ok—Get Bill [Miller] &
Lloyd [Cutler] to help.”
