Afghanistan 485 interests of the fraternal Iranian people. And we expect our Iranian brethren to assume a reciprocal stance.” (Comment: We are unaware of any Iranian forces lined up on their side of the Afghan-Iranian frontier, whereas upwards of 25,000 Soviet troops are near that border.) 8. We have been deluged by American (and other) journalists for whom we have given background, unattributed press briefings. One of the issues upon which those representatives have focussed is the Soviet rationale for beefing up their military presence on the Iranian- Afghan border. It is clear that many of them suspect that the Soviets may have designs on Iran. 9. Economically, Afghanistan seems to be more or less at a standstill. There is little or no development activity going on in the country at present. In Kabul, commerce is dead, according to our Afghan contacts. Commercial imports declined sharply in the late summer, owing partially to Pakistani measures blocking re-exports (smuggling) of tires, textiles and other imported commodities to that country, and have reportedly remained down. Foreign exchange reserves stood at about dols 420 million as of mid-December, according to a source with excellent contacts in the Finance Ministry, reflecting both the decline in commercial imports and a relatively high rate of exports during most of 1979. We lack data whether there has been a decline in reserves since the December 27 Soviet invasion; we suspect there has not been yet. 10. Wheat, the Afghan staff of life, is becoming both scarcer and very much dearer in the Kabul bazaars. Bazaar merchants attribute this development both to the problem of bringing wheat in from the producing provinces as a result of the Soviet intervention, and to hoarding on the part of Kabulites. There is also a strong rumor that the anti- Soviet protest strikes, which have reportedly occurred in Kandahar and Herat, may spread to Kabul within the next fortnight. 11. Reports continue to reach Kabul sporadically about clashes between insurgents and Soviets in various provincial areas. An Afghan source, who is believed to report accurately what he hears, spoke recently to a merchant who had come to Kabul last week from Doshi (about mid-way between Kabul and Baglan on the road to the north). The merchant swore on the Koran that he had seen a band of rebels near Doshi chanting death to the Russians and carrying the heads of seven decapitated Soviets. Source felt confident that his informant was telling the truth. Amstutz
