Human Rights 595 —Should provide brief overview of the country’s human rights situation, as well as historical, legal, cultural, religious, political, and other factors to establish adequate perspective. See 5.A above. Section 1: Respect for the integrity of the person, including freedom from: A. Torture Is torture prohibited by law, or custom? —Does it occur? How frequently? What methods are used? Is torture used in interrogation? What are the sources of reports of torture? Are they credible reports? —If torture does occur, is it authorized by the government? If not authorized, is it condoned? If it occurs without government sanction, what is the government’s response? Is anyone disciplined? B. Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment —If such treatment occurs, when does it occur? Immediately after arrest? During interrogation? While awaiting trial? During detention after conviction? —What form does it take? —Are there summary executions? If so, to what extent? —Have there been reports of prison officials using such treatment? Are they credible reports? Or police? Does government condone such actions, or does it seek to prevent them. —What are prison or detention conditions like? Do those held have adequate health care? Is diet adequate? Are they allowed visits from family members? Attorneys of their choice? Are classes of imprisonment used, i.e., between political and ordinary prisoners? —Does the International Committee of the Red Cross have access to detainees? C. Arbitrary arrest and imprisonment —Are there political prisoners? (see para. 5.B. above.) How many? If our estimate differs from that of human rights organizations, can we explain this difference? —Does the government acknowledge holding political prisoners? If it does, how does it justify their detention or imprisonment? —Does habeas corpus or its equivalent exist? Is it honored in practice? —Does the law permit “preventive detention?” Are there safeguards on preventive detention? Does it have a fixed term? Can it be extended? —Are persons arrested and held without charge? How long can they be thus held?
