1050  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
by a narrow margin.4 In this connection you will recall that the 
Commission, responding to appeals by United States producers who 
had been forced to curtail production by about 25%, recommended 
some months ago that I not only impose quotas but increase the duties 
on lead and zinc as well.
In an effort to find some other solution, the Department of State, 
in cooperation with your distinguished Ambassador in Washington, 
endeavored to obtain agreement of other major exporters to a tempo-
rary, voluntary reduction of exports. It was hoped that such an agree-
ment would allow time to study the causes of imbalance between 
world supply and demand for lead and zinc and to consider the best 
means for dealing with this problem. While a majority of the interested 
nations were found willing to undertake a study of the longer range 
problem, these discussions, as well as those which followed in London 
under the auspices of the United Nations,5 revealed that a temporary 
arrangement to cope with the existing emergency would not immedi-
ately be feasible.
The action which I have thus taken will obviously have the effect 
of reducing Peruvian exports of lead and zinc to the United States 
market. It does not, however, alter the existing tariff structure and will, 
I am hopeful, prevent a further decline in the prices which Peruvian 
exporters obtain for these commodities in this market. Moreover, 
these import quotas, which are compatible with international discus-
sions regarding export controls, are subject to review whenever cir-
cumstances may warrant, including possible resolution of the current 
problem of imbalance through multilateral action. The Department 
of State has therefore been instructed by me to maintain its efforts to 
this end in cooperation with other governments. I am confident that 
Peru will continue to take a most constructive part in this endeavor.
I wish again to affirm the high regard I have for your Excellency 
and for the Peruvian people.6
Sincerely,
Dwight D. Eisenhower
4 S. 4036, 85th Cong., a bill providing for subsidy of the import-­stricken mining 
industry, passed the Senate, July 11, but was rejected by the House of Representatives on 
August 21.
5 Representatives of 32 countries and six observers met in London in September 
1958 to consider the current and future condition of lead and zinc production and con-
sumption. A Lead and Zinc Committee was established to consider the views of partic-
ipating governments and report to a subsequent meeting. Relevant documentation is in 
Department of State files 340.54 and 411.006.
6 In telegram 176 from Lima, September 24, Ambassador Achilles quoted 
President Prado’s reply, urging reconsideration or suspension of the import quotas 
(823.2545/9–2258).
