282  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
The Soviets are saying that “relocations” should only require a post-­
notification within 48 hours after arrival at the destination.
7. The other major development is the Soviet dropping of “deploy-
ment area” for road-­mobile ICBMs, even though it was their idea origi-
nally. The adverse effect of this, however, is softened by another change 
which, for the first time, accepts our position that all routine movements 
out of restricted areas will require both pre- and post-­notification. In 
light of this, we need to decide whether to continue to press for the 
concept of deployment areas.
Throw-Weight Protocol
8. Emphasizing that the concept of “range capability” is the key 
to the entire U.S. throw-­weight protocol, the Soviets have repeatedly 
expressed concern that the protocol does not provide the specific data 
and methodology needed to calculate this theoretical value. If I can sat-
isfy the Soviets on this point, it is conceivable that I can sell them on 
the general U.S. approach. (They have not mentioned the Soviet draft 
protocol so far this round.) While being careful not to compromise sen-
sitive sources and methods, we need to be as forthcoming as we can in 
making the calculation of “range capability” more explicit.
Conversion or Elimination Protocol
9. We need to determine what items of a missile are subject to elim-
ination. The U.S. side has argued in Geneva that only those elements of 
a missile enumerated in the protocol are exempted from elimination, 
i.e., reentry vehicles and guidance set. The Soviet position is muddled 
but is closer to the argument that only those missile parts explicitly 
cited for elimination are subject to elimination; everything else may be 
salvaged. We need guidance on whether we should include an explicit 
statement in the protocol that all elements of a missile not exempted 
from elimination must be eliminated.
10. In addition the U.S. side needs to determine how it plans to 
eliminate SLVs. U.S. procedures for elimination of ICBMs or SLBMs 
converted for delivering objects into the upper atmosphere or space 
(erstwhile SLVs) do not make clear whether only the first stage of a 
converted missile is accountable as a space launch vehicle or all stages 
of such a missile are accountable.
11. We have yet to define “a missile.” The basic U.S. Treaty defines 
a missile as the first stage motor of a treaty-­accountable solid ICBM or 
SLBM, or simply the first stage of a liquid ICBM or SLBM. However, 
U.S. procedures for the C or E protocol presume that an entire missile 
is preserved for elimination, including all stages and the PBV. In other 
words, for the purposes of the C or E protocol, the U.S. side is defining 
a missile differently from a missile elsewhere referred to in the basic 
treaty. By the logic of the U.S. approach, the United States could not
