Afghanistan had a multiplier effect, each magnifying the significance of the other, and causing both sides to react with greater stridency and rigidity than might otherwise be the case. Heightened tension has affected each side’s media treatment of the other. The Soviets probably see themselves as victims of officially-inspired US press accusations—just as we see ourselves as the injured party in an escalating public dialogue. Faced with these trends, the Soviets are concerned that US-Soviet relations are moving inexorably toward a continuing downslide, in which the whole range of our cooperative activities, including arms control, would come into question. We believe the Soviets would see such a development as contrary to their interests, and that they would hope to avoid it. Developments since Vienna have given them cause to doubt this will be possible, however, and there is a good chance that the review now under way is designed to develop concrete policy options for dealing with a bilateral relationship they may conclude will continue to deteriorate. This would be reflected in their approach to the following specific issues. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.] Editorial Note By mid-December 1979, U.S. intelligence reporting indicated that the military buildup on the Soviet-Afghan border and in Afghanistan was quickly intensifying. This prompted Secretary of State Vance to order both Marshall Shulman, his Adviser on Soviet Affairs, and the Ambassador to the Soviet Union, Thomas J. Watson, Jr., to seek an explanation from Soviet diplomats regarding the ultimate Soviet objectives in Afghanistan. Analysis [text not declassified] detailed the military buildup in several reports and memoranda. The Strategic Warning Staff of the CIA issued memorandum [text not declassified] December 14, which reported on military activity involving air transport, ground forces, [text not declassified] which [text not declassified] indicated “Soviet intent to deploy additional combat forces to Afghanistan.” [text not declassified] these developments included an increase in the number of aircraft and airfields involved in airlift operations to Afghanistan; significant movement of heavy ground equipment, including convoys of cargo trucks, armored personnel carriers, anti-aircraft guns, howitzers, and tanks: [text not declassified]. The report concluded by noting that a recent TASS commentary marking the anniversary of the Soviet-Afghan Treaty of
