34 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Defense will examine the best means of conducting reconnaissance flights of F–14 bases and provide a recommendation tomorrow. (TS) 7. Midway. Although the members of the SCC favored diversion of the carrier, a careful weighing of the pros and cons persuaded them that it would be inadvisable. Cancellation of the port call which is scheduled to begin tonight would immediately become known and would be played by the press in an inflammatory way tomorrow. This could disrupt the various efforts that are under way on the diplomatic front and even endanger the hostages. We gain very little. The Midway can break off its port call at any time and be 4–5 days away from the Persian Gulf. Since our scenarios call primarily for use of the Midway in a punitive operation, rather than the rescue effort, gaining a day or two does not seem worth the risk. On balance, the SCC recommended proceeding with the visit, keeping the task force on call if the situation takes a turn for the worse. (TS) 14. Record of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1 Washington, November 8, 1979 In the course of the meeting, Vance brought up the Shah’s health, how soon he might be moved back to Mexico. Brown added that he would look into a military medevac C–9 aircraft to help speed up the move. The Shah might still be full of post-operation tubes and so forth. I was aghast at this turn of the discussion, and I watched Brzezinski boggle. Then he began in low voice, saying that if we were to return the Shah now, under any circumstances, to Mexico, we would be backing down to the demands of student mob in Tehran. A month ago we backed down to the Soviets and Cubans after declaring that we found the status quo unacceptable.2 Now we shall back down again. What will this mean for our international role as a global power? What will it mean for our allies? Who will find us credible on any commitment 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic Files, Box 13. Secret. Brzezinski chaired the meeting. There is no drafting information. See also Document 13. 2 In August, U.S. intelligence reported the existence of a brigade of Soviet troops in Cuba. Carter addressed the nation on October 1 but chose not to challenge the Soviet presence since investigations confirmed the brigade was the remnant of a much larger force that had been in Cuba since the early 1960s. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXIII, Mexico, Cuba, and the Caribbean.
