368 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Bartholomew suggested that the group turn to SLCMs. He noted that Shevardnadze had spoken of an obligation on SLCMs that might be separate from a START Treaty. Karpov interrupted to say there must have been a misunderstanding. The Minister didn’t say “separate.” He said that SLCM obligations did not have to be in the text of the START Treaty, but would be agreed “in connection with” the Treaty. Burt said that in Washington there had been a suggestion that such an approach might be similar to the Backfire declaration in SALT II. Would that be a model? Karpov responded that a similar approach might be used. The important thing was that any exchange of statements create obligations for both sides to limit SLCMs and provide for measures of verification. We should consider what kinds of verification measures can be agreed, perhaps a combination of OSI and technical means. While discussing trial methods of verification, why not discuss SLCM verification? Burt asked whether verification experiments on SLCMs were a precondition to considering approaches for dealing with SLCMs. Karpov said the two sides had agreed in principle to trial verification methods. The Soviet side insisted that some methods be applied to cruise missiles. Burt asked again whether trial verification of SLCMs was a precondition. Karpov said it was “part of the parcel.” Burt asked whether the Soviet side still proposed limits on conventional SLCMs. Karpov replied that, because of the similarity between conventional and nuclear SLCMs, it was useful to have limits on the non-­nuclear as well. Burt said that the Secretary had earlier rejected the idea of entering into negotiations on naval arms. Did the Soviet side consider completion of such negotiations to be a precondition for START? Karpov asked whether the Secretary had actually been so categorical in rejecting talks on naval arms. Burt said he had been. Karpov said the Soviet side understood U.S. arguments about sea lanes of communication, allied guarantees, and so forth, and was not against discussing the safety of those routes. Burt said he thought Shevardnadze had spoken about narrow negotiations on naval nuclear arms. Karpov replied “that too.” There could be a U.S.-Soviet seminar on the functions of navies as a basis for achieving further understanding of these issues.
