1978 467 capability against the current National Target Base than today’s forces. The minimum modernization force would also be as well-­hedged against force-­wide degradations and against catastrophic failure of any one component as today’s forces. This greater non-­silo retaliatory capability will be the result of planned improvements in the SLBM and bomber forces, including increased day-­to-­day alert rates. 3. The incremental cost for “fully” modernized forces that present a relatively strong essential equivalence picture, provide an extensive hard-­target capability, and hedge against catastrophic failure in any force element would be $30–45B (constant 1979 dollars); +$15–22B in discounted (10%) dollars. Foregoing the extensive hard-­target capability could save $6–10B (constant 1979 dollars); +$2–5B in discounted (10%) dollars. 4. There are no significant differences between Triads providing quick-­response vice non-­quick-­response hard-­target capability in terms of cost, essential equivalence measures, total hard-­target capability, non-­silo retaliatory effectiveness or hedging. This issue will have to be decided on the other important factors, primarily timeliness of response and whether or not we want to “threaten” the Soviet ICBM force or attempt to drive them to a mobile ICBM or more SLBMs. 5. Under the assumption (not assessed in this study) that [less than 1 line not declassified] Dyads of Trident II and bombers (plus silo-­based MM III for use in limited exchanges) could be given much the same capabilities as comparably priced Triads. In particular, balanced Dyads could hedge as well as Triads against force-­wide degradations of effectiveness, and even against catastrophic failure of one leg. Therefore, conclusions about the relative advantages of Triads vs. Dyads depend on judgments about [2 lines not declassified] 6. [1 paragraph (7 lines) not declassified] 7. Given a decision to deploy an extensive QRHTC, a force emphasizing the baseline MX in MAP basing would be significantly more cost effective than a force with both MX and Trident II, whether or not MX and Trident II were developed jointly in a common missile program. However, a Triad without Trident II would provide no hedging of the QRHTC. [Omitted here is the remainder of the report.]
