Venezuela 1301 his ear and eye injuries had completely cleared up. Doctors have subjected him to rigorous diet and rest and he happily reported his blood pressure was down to 130 (I had been reliably informed it had been as high as 220). President told me details of his horrifying experience following explosion and then related details of Dominican involvement in attempt against his life. Since it was impossible for President to read three Chafardet documents due to condition of his hands, he requested me to do so. However, I first read him carefully prepared statements in Spanish giving substance Department’s A–2 stating in effect we considered it undesirable release actual documents at this time. President made no comment on this and asked me read documents. I read about ten pages of Chafardet’s letter July 24 to Perez Jimenez when President became utterly bored and requested me to read Trujillo’s letter of September 20. I did so and showed him document with signature. He made no direct comment on this document. He immediately launched into virtual harangue on Trujillo’s nefarious operations over years. He asserted Trujillo is completely ruthless and capable of anything. He said his immediate concern and apprehension is Trujillo may attempt drop bombs on Caracas and oil fields or mount new attempt against his life. He told me precautions had been taken to defend against air raid and showed me anti-­aircraft battery set up just outside Palacio Miraflores. He said were Trujillo to be so foolhardy Venezuela must retaliate immediately. He admitted Venezuelan air capabilities are very limited and he actually inquired if U.S. would permit Venezuelan planes refuel in Puerto Rico. I then referred to Allan Stewart’s conversation with Oropeza Castillo.3 After assuring President we welcome his constructive efforts, I gave him substance DEPTEL 1114.4 President expressed deep and serious concern over recent developments in U.S.-Cuban relations and was acutely apprehensive U.S. might deem it necessary engage in some military operation against Cuba. He virtually pleaded that under no circumstances should U.S. be drawn into such move. He made it clear U.S. position vis-­a-­vis Cuba is good, that it has been provoked to an extreme, that Castro is menace to Western Hemisphere, that his actions are those bordering on a mad man, but that U.S. must restrain itself. He said were U.S. to engage in military action, directly or indirectly, it would 3 Reference is to Presidential adviser, Alejandro Oropeza Castillo, who had been asked to propose a plan, which Betancourt was interested in sponsoring, that would allow Latin American countries to offer guaranteed payment of property expropriated by Cuba in order to relax Cuban-U.S. tensions. (737.00/6–2060) 4 The referenced telegram, June 27, 1960, authorized the Ambassador to indicate that the United States welcomed Betancourt’s constructive efforts as suggested by Oropeza in his conversation with Stewart. (737.00/6–2060)
