Comprehensive Test Ban
333
A. TTB/PNE Ratification
As requested in the PRM, the issue of ratification of the TTB/PNE
Treaties has been analyzed in the context of alternative approaches to a
CTB. Arguments in favor of ratifying these treaties include:
—The Soviet leadership is firmly committed to these treaties as
tangible evidence of the benefits of US-Soviet cooperation, and have re-
peatedly stressed the importance of their ratification.
—There would appear to be a distinct advantage to the US in codi-
fying the innovative verification provisions of these treaties both in the
CTB context and in other arms control areas.
—The treaty provisions would be helpful in verifying the present
mutual restraint in limiting tests to 150 kt, particularly if CTB negotia-
tions are prolonged.
—It would also be advantageous to ratify the treaties to preclude
Soviet renouncement of this constraint and resumption of high-yield
testing.
On the other hand, critics of the treaties have argued that the 150 kt
threshold is too high and that the PNE Treaty would legitimize PNEs.
However, these treaties represent the first real progress towards a CTB
in many years and an Administration perceived as urgently working
towards a CTB should have little difficulty in overcoming any opposi-
tion to ratification.
As a result, there is consensus in the Working Group that these
treaties should be ratified as a common step in all of the alternative ap-
proaches to a CTB which follow.
B. Participation in Negotiations. There is also interagency agreement
that, whether or not preceded by a moratorium, a CTB should be em-
bodied in a binding international agreement open to all states; that any
CTB initiative should be preceded by thorough consultations with our
allies; and that CTB negotiations should begin with a bilateral US/So-
viet phase (possibly trilateral, including the UK), and should eventu-
ally proceed to a multilateral phase in which the agreement would be
concluded. There is also agreement that such multilateral agreement
would probably not take effect in the foreseeable future if it required
adherence by all nuclear powers before entry into force. Accordingly, if
we decided to commence CTB negotiations at this time, the most real-
istic near-term possibility would be an agreement of limited duration
that needed only US and Soviet adherence to enter into force. The ques-
tion of possible LTBT amendment as the enabling mechanism for a CTB
was investigated on a preliminary basis. There would be obvious diffi-
culties in managing a 103-nation negotiation and some risk that the
LTBT might be undermined in the process. It might be possible to
“bind” countries, such as Egypt, Israel or Brazil, who are parties to the
LTBT but have refused to accede to the NPT. However, these countries
could find a pretext to withdraw from the LTBT if they perceived it in
