Negotiating Channels 427 162. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, January 24, 1980 SUBJECT Iran We are approaching a new point in our relationship with Iran where some fundamental choices must be faced. Our basic dilemma can be defined as follows: —With the Soviet threat to Iran growing more explicit (and given our new level of commitment in the area) we will have a greater interest in propping up any anti-communist regime in Tehran, and there will be a growing inclination to try to fashion a cooperative relationship with the Khomeini regime after a new president is elected; —But the very presence of the Khomeini regime lends itself to continued collapse of the society, the danger of civil war, and the very real risk that the left will capitalize on the foibles of the present leadership to strengthen its position for a takeover from within. The questions we must ask ourselves at this point are: 1. Is the Khomeini regime salvageable? Is it capable of evolving over time into a government which provides even the minimal level of internal stability and self-defense capability? 2. Is the risk of a communist takeover in Iran greater from an actual Soviet intervention, or is the greater risk an internal growth of leftist power? 3. How can we simultaneously seek to get the hostages back, bolster an anti-communist regime, and strengthen Iran’s capability to resist a possible Soviet intervention? In my view, the regime in Iran is perilously close to total collapse. Khomeini is committed to an unrealistic vision of a pure Islamic society, but he is leaving the organizational work to God. He is an old man, physically unwell, and totally lacking in any practical sense of how to manage anything, let alone a major nation. The people of Iran were thrilled at his leadership in bringing down the Shah, but fundamentally they do not share his vision. As time goes on, the gap between his image and the reality of governmental chaos have become increasingly 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran 1/11/80–1/31/80. Secret. A stamped notation in the upper right corner of the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.”
