Haiti 777 in Haiti returned to Cuba following semi-­official Haitian charges of his complicity in the invasion. The Haitian Ambassador in Cuba also returned to Haiti and neither government has since maintained diplomatic personnel in the other’s capital (although both governments officially maintained the fiction that relations are normal). The provocative and irresponsible actions of the Castro Government in Cuba continue to be a source of concern and a serious threat to the security of neighboring countries. Haiti is in an especially vulnerable position because of its physical nearness to Cuba, its military and economic weakness, and its geographical attractiveness as a stepping-­ stone for a Cuba-­based expedition against the Dominican Republic. The Dominican Republic also poses a continuing threat to Haitian territorial and political integrity. Since 1937, when Dominican forces perpetrated a border massacre in which more than 10,000 Haitians were killed, Trujillo agents have persistently tried to intervene in Haitian affairs. Since the advent of Castro to power in Cuba (January 1959), Trujillo has sought to assure the benevolent neutrality of Haiti in his struggle with Castro and, if possible, to obtain positive support from Haiti against Castro. With United States encouragement the Government of Haiti has thus far resisted heavy pressures from both the Dominican Republic and Cuba. However, the marked increase in domestic unrest in the Dominican Republic in recent months may foreshadow violent political upheavals in that country in the near future. It is believed probable that the Cuban Government would try to take advantage of a revolutionary situation in the Dominican Republic to install a Castro-­type régime there. In such circumstances pressures on Haiti from both Cuba and the Dominican Republic would rapidly increase. The dangers to the United States security in the Caribbean are especially serious in view of the Communist influences now evident within the Cuban Government. It is considered to be in the United States interest to provide Haiti with the military equipment, materials, and services described above using up to $300,000 of funds available for military assistance in fiscal year 1960. The furnishing of military assistance on a grant basis to any Latin American nation is subject to several conditions. First, under Sections 105(a) and 141 of the Act, the President must determine that the increased ability of the nation to defend itself is important to the security of the United States, and that the furnishing of such assistance will strengthen the security of the United States and promote world peace. Second, Section 105(b)(4) of the Act provides that military equipment and materials may be furnished to a Latin American nation only in furtherance of missions directly relating to the common defense of the Western Hemisphere and that, unless the President determines otherwise, internal security requirements shall not be the basis for such a
