532
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
A deterioration in Afghan-Iranian relations also could pose prob-
lems for the United States. While the United States might benefit from
further deterioration in Tehran’s already strained ties with Moscow,
widespread Iranian support for the Afghan insurgency might give the
Soviets an excuse to intervene in Iran. [portion marking not declassified]
Appendix
Country Case Studies
Iraq: The Baathist Target
Tehran believes Iraq is its most promising target for subversion in
the Arab world. Shias constitute approximately 55 percent of Iraq’s
population, but they traditionally have been ruled by Sunni Arabs who
compose only 25 percent of the country’s 12.5 million people. The
Shias are concentrated in southern Iraq. Major oil pipelines, strategic
installations such as the port of Basrah, and the Persian Gulf oil termi-
nals are located in this area, and the southern oilfields depend heavily
on Shia labor. [portion marking not declassified]
Iran has long had close ties with the Iraqi Shias. About 250,000
Shias of Iranian ancestry reside in Iraq, most near the two Shia holy
cities of Karbala and Najaf. One of Iran’s most respected clerical leaders,
Ayatollah Khoi, resides in Najaf, and Ayatollah Khomeini spent 13
years in exile there. [portion marking not declassified]
The Iranian leadership sees the Baathist regime in Baghdad as a
militarist regime devoid of popular legitimacy and insufficiently
Islamic. Khomeini doubtless recalls with some bitterness that Iraqi
leaders ousted him from his Najaf exile in October 1978 because of
their desire to keep relations with the Shah on an even keel. [portion
marking not declassified]
Moreover, Tehran views the Iraqi Government as a threat to the
Islamic Republic. Tehran is well aware that the Iraqis are supporting
dissident groups in Iran, including the Kurdish, Arab, and Baluchi
minority groups and is probably aware of former Prime Minister Bakh-
tiar’s contacts with Iraq. Iran also recognizes that Iraq is its major
competitor for influence in the Persian Gulf. [portion marking not
declassified]
Since early 1979, the Iranians have provided some limited support
to Iraqi Shia dissidents. This support primarily has been propaganda—
leaflets and tape cassettes advancing Khomeini’s views have circulated
among the Shias calling for the overthrow of the Baathist regime.
[portion marking not declassified]
Iranian media have also focused on Iraq, making the Baghdad
regime Iran’s second major target of hostile propaganda after the
United States. Tehran radio features a 45-minute daily program
