744
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Mr. Roosevelt: Well, first of all, about the present capabilities. [1½
lines not declassified] and after an initial period of confusion they all ap-
peared to be presenting the same picture, which was one of very sub-
stantial disruption, that the leadership was still relatively firm in its in-
tentions, but that the rank and file had pretty much dropped away. Has
anything come in since I left to give a different picture on that?
Mr. Waller: No.
Mr. Roosevelt: They tried to arrange a demonstration on Thursday
morning at 11:00 o’clock of which we got word, [less than 1 line not de-
classified] and the Security Forces got word, and it never even showed
its head. I mean a few of them came creeping out looking for friends
and didn’t find any and scurried right back underground again, and I
would say that for the present time the Tudeh is in as bad shape as it
has been. When was it last proscribed?
Mr. Wilber: February, ’49.
Mr. Roosevelt: Yes, well, it is probably in worse shape than that.
Furthermore, the parties with which it has been allied recently, or with
which it might have allied, are also in bad shape—the Iran Party. Has it
been confirmed that Zirakzadeh’s brother cut his throat?
Mr. Wilber: We heard his older brother actually committed sui-
cide, but we haven’t any additional confirmation.
Mr. Roosevelt: We have that too, and it was evident that the Iran
Party had lost confidence in his leadership, and the great danger, of
course, was an alliance between the Tudeh and the Iran Party.
Mr. Wisner: Well, what measures are being taken to further smash
the apparatus and the machinery of the Tudeh Party?
Mr. Roosevelt: Well, both the Shah and Zahedi promised me that
very vigorous measures would be taken. What slowed them up was the
defection of this Police Chief of whom we had been hoping a great deal.
[3 lines not declassified] But what happened, on Wednesday morning the
guy took to the hills, and finally a day or so later we managed to arrest
him. So the machinery that had been set up to take care of that just
never functioned. Now when I last spoke to the Shah and Zahedi about
it and pointed out the urgency of the matter, they said that they recog-
nized the urgency, and what they proposed to do was combine the
Army and the Police, or at least assign Army Officers and Army units
to strengthen the Police and really go after these people in a big way.
Mr. Wisner: And the arms caches, surely they must be able to find
those?
Mr. Roosevelt: According to the newspaper reports they have al-
ready found one of the two major ones. At least I saw that in the London
Press.
