316
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Those priorities strike me as sound for 1970, 1973, 1977 and for the
foreseeable future. Looking back over the year, however, I find a
number of mistakes in our managing of these priorities.
The opening shots on the East-West front last spring were well
aimed, and we appeared launched on a promising campaign, clarifying
the realities of the relationship and the price of the game. By summer,
however, our policy was shot through with schizophrenia. Dropping
off the comprehensive SALT proposal and allowing confusion to creep
into the human rights policy, muting it, put the Administration right
back in Henry’s position. On the one hand, it appeared that we might
indeed make the East-West relationship fit the realities of a “new con-
text.” On the other hand, we seemed to believe that politically we need
a SALT deal as badly as the Soviets do. Moreover, putting SALT above
the West-West relationship (NATO) was bound to create difficulties
with the allies, as it clearly is doing. And it was bound to give the Chi-
nese cause to lecture us just the way they lectured Henry about the
USSR.
The proliferation of other arms talks, in a different context, could
be a strong gambit, but in the present context, it may be confusing to
our allies, the Soviets and to our own public and the Congress. It locks
us more firmly in Henry’s predicament of an unrealistic promise of
what the talks will yield and prevents their effective use as part of a po-
litical strategy.
The only part of the East-West front where we have avoided a mis-
step is in economic interaction. The Jackson-Vanik amendment6 is
saving us from ourselves by preventing movement while we are not or-
ganized for a coherent strategy in trade, credits and technology. Here
we need both a strategy and an Executive Branch organization for con-
trolling the East-West economic interaction in and for cooperation with
the Congress. In the best event, the returns on this front will be modest,
but certainly we can avoid “giving away the farm,” or creating that
impression.
How can we overcome this schizophrenia in East-West relations?
First, we must realize that politically Moscow needs SALT much
worse than we do. We only need SALT if it is something like the com-
prehensive proposal, i.e., if it constrains and reduces in a very signifi-
cant—not a marginal—way. The Soviets greatly need the talks politi-
cally as “the centerpiece” of East-West relations. For Moscow, SALT
must represent to the American public the only thing that is saving the
West from the Soviet military arsenal: it must keep our political atten-
tion. Otherwise, the East-West relation will appear less important,
6 See footnote 11, Document 55.
