Romania 599 3. Issue is not Raised by President or Secretary This course would avoid difficulties in our relations and maintain consistency with PL–21. The Romanians have already been informed at a high level of U.S. legislative requirements. The U.S. has other levers (for example, the MFN/emigration hearings) with which to exert pressure on human rights issues. (EUR supports.) Recommendations: 1. That the President briefly raise the issue with Ceausescu. (HA supports.) 2. That the Secretary raise the issue with the Foreign Minister. (S/P and HA support.)6 3. That the issue not be raised during the visit. (EUR supports.) C. The Rauta Case Constantin Rauta was a Romanian official with intelligence responsibilities who defected just before Ceausescu’s official visit to the U.S. in December 1973. Rauta is now an engineer at the Goddard Space Flight Center. He was traveling as a diplomatic courier and asked U.S. officials to help him trade his classified pouch for Romanian permission for his wife and young son to join him in the United States. We convinced him of the impracticality of such an exchange given the imminent arrival of the Romanian President and the pouch was returned unopened to the Romanians. The principal Romanian objection to allowing Mrs. Rauta and the child to emigrate is that the family’s reunification would be seen as a reward to a traitor and would encourage similar defections. Ceausescu is reportedly familiar with all the above aspects of the case, apparently regards Rauta’s defection as a personal affront and is the only person who can decide the fate of Rauta’s wife and child. Our representation on humanitarian grounds have been stubbornly rebuffed by Romanian officials who insist that because Rauta is a traitor, this is not a human rights matter. They may maintain that our raising it in this context only confuses matters. We do not accept that view but are prepared to resolve this issue on any practical basis. Prospects are not bright in the near future but we intend to persist. OPTIONS 1. The President Raises the Issue with Ceausescu This would signal the strongest interest in resolving this longstanding case and our understanding that only Ceausescu holds the key to 6 Christopher approved Option 2 on April 8.
