September 18–December 16, 1978
355
not confined ourselves to decisions taken and language agreed at CD
because some of the questions asked of us looked beyond the CDA to
what might happen in the process. It is inherent in everything con-
tained in those replies, I assured Begin, that the ideas will be negotiated
by the parties.
27. As to the matter of prior consultations with Israel, I drew
Begin’s attention to the fact that the second part of many of the ques-
tions asked for US positions. In the CDA is embodied what was agreed
by the three participants. Just as Israel had made reservations on cer-
tain issues, so the United States reserves its position on a number of
questions. In the communications between heads of state as we have
not felt it proper to clear our views with a third state. It is fair to say, I
continued, that Israel’s views on a full range of questions are known to
us and we realized that Israel would not like some answers on issues
where we have an honest difference of opinion. The US replies, how-
ever, do not commit Israel. We will enter negotiations, when they arise,
in good faith and will inevitably face some differences of viewpoint. As
we have told the Arabs as well, we cannot guarantee the results of the
negotiating process but we can advance our ideas and cope with new
concepts that arise.
28. Begin said he understood my points and that we are all free
men when it comes to expressing opinions. He knew that the US had
been asked by Hussein about matters concerning the CDA but Begin
had found in our responses novelties, ideas that are not in the CDA and
concepts which were inconsistent with the CDA. This was Israel’s se-
rious complaint. Much in our response to Hussein had nothing to do
with Camp David. He concluded without enumeration that some of the
US replies were excellent and he had chosen not to dwell on them.
29. I told Begin that I wanted to take a moment to explain to him
what I have been doing on this trip so that he would know first-hand. I
said the CDA has posited a series of negotiations—first Sinai, then the
Palestinian and Jordan aspects, Syria, and finally Lebanon. As he knew
the Egyptians had been raising in the Washington negotiations the
question of relationships within the series. While there is no formal
linkage, we need to maintain, and discharge the commitments we all
assumed at CD. I have been seeking to figure out how to carry out these
obligations and had been seeking the ideas of Jordan, Saudi Arabia and
Palestinians about the way to crystalize the process and capitalize on
the opportunity before us. I said I believe in what we did in CD and
would like to find ways to generate moderate Arab support for Sadat
and the peace process.
30. Begin replied that he was glad I understood that I should not
use his comments on the US replies with the Palestinians with whom I
would be meeting (he had earlier asked that I not do so and I assured
