Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX (9) Israel-Egypt peace blow to USSR & victory for me & U.S. Arab opposition—will it fade? Can Sadat handle it?8 (10) Threats from any spread of radicalism in the Mid East. (11) Get Sadat’s ideas on the concept of a broad security consultative arrangement in Mid East/N Africa region.9 (12) Post-treaty steps re Saudis & Jordanians? Syrians? Iraqis?10 (13) Post-treaty steps re Palestinian problem?11 (14) Cautiously seek Sadat’s assessment of U.S. military and/or monitoring presence in Sinai (Etzion).12 Zbig: Your assumption & demeanor should reflect absolute conviction that proposals on peace treaty are in Egypt’s interests. Do not acknowledge any doubt about this. We must implement Camp David accords together. Sadat should not insist on speaking for W Bank Palestinians.13 8 In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “Begin anti- Soviet.” 9 Under this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “(Brown visit)” and “broad strategic initiative needed. US-Egypt—his ideas needed.” 10 In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “how to widen the scope of our relations.” 11 Below this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “West Bank.” 12 In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “peace related.” Below this sentence, Brzezinski wrote “(15) Need your assessment. Tell him what you’re doing.” In the right-hand margin, next to this 15th point, Brzezinski drew a box within which he wrote: “The beginning of a strategically [important?] relationship.” 13 In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “you prevailed.” Under this sentence, Brzezinski added two separate notes. In the first, he wrote: “broader strategic perspective which [only?] a President can have—not a legalistic approach.” In the second, Brzezinski wrote: “Presidential level—[ignore?]” In the right-hand margin, Brzezinski wrote: “he had to have: 2 things.—[target?] date.—no previous treaty.— Begin? will never [interpret this?] language on 6.” Next to this last point, Brzezinski added, “this [draft?] does not prevail.”
