Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
763
in a series of statements, speeches, etc., are we finally going to get some
of the credit we deserve. This, after all, was the central tactic of your re-
cent trip to Europe,29 where each speech and statement reinforced all
the others—and eventually it got through to the media, which saw this
as a highly effective foreign policy effort. The message also got through
to our Allies, and their response also played well here. This can, in my
view, be repeated in the campaign here this fall—starting with your ac-
ceptance speech.30
[Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.]
29 After the Venice Economic Summit, the President visited Vatican City, Belgrade,
Madrid, and Lisbon before returning to Washington on June 26.
30 Delegates to the Democratic National Convention nominated the Carter-
Mondale ticket. On the evening of August 14, the President delivered his acceptance
speech; for the text, see Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book II, pp. 1538–1539.
153.
Address by Secretary of State Muskie1
Los Angeles, California, August 7, 1980
Human Freedom: America’s Vision
We stand for human freedom. It is what unites us as a people. It is
what distinguishes us from our adversaries. It is our compass in the
world to defend our freedoms at home and to advance human freedom
around the world.
There are those who suggest that the freedom of other people is
none of our business, that with enough military hardware our freedom
can be secure while the freedom of others is stifled, that our purpose in
the world is to preserve the status quo.
I say, and I believe you say, that is an invitation to trouble. It is a
narrow vision of ourselves and of the world. It would be a foreign
policy of reaction.
We must, of course, equip ourselves with the arms to defend our
vital interests. But that’s not enough. We must also arm ourselves with
the conviction that our values have increasing power in today’s world.
1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, September 1980, pp. A–C. Muskie delivered
his address before the United Steel Workers of America. The opening paragraphs of the
speech are omitted in the original.
