846 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 153. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, September 11, 1990, 1524Z 9640. Subject: START: Readjusting Our Sights 1. Secret—Entire Text. When Will We Finish? 2. While Rick and Lint are in Moscow,2 I have the unusual luxury of a few minutes to think and will use the opportunity to jot down a few random ideas and accept the risk that what is going on now in Moscow may make some of them OBE. The pace here has reached the point where a typical day has 5–6 meetings with the Soviets. We are trying to place greater emphasis on small groups focusing on specific issues, rather than the traditional large meetings. This was my idea to some extent, but one result is that it is even more difficult now for your loyal State people to keep an eye on everything. Another is that it is now frequently impossible to get a quorum for an internal U.S. meeting because key people are always off in a meeting with the Soviets. Nevertheless, I would not call this the endgame yet. There are far too many unresolved issues for that. In fact, much of our activity since the summit has resulted in increasing the number of brackets as new and sometimes rather one-­sided U.S. positions are tabled, bracketed by the Soviets and then become the subject of difficult and time-­consuming meetings. The Burt-Nazarkin meetings are likewise the subject of intense efforts, but are painfully slow in reducing the list of 110 issues. 3. My bottom-­line judgment is that it is not realistic to plan to finish this treaty before the end of this year. Last spring, I recommended setting a goal of November, but progress at and following the summit has been nowhere near what was needed to achieve this goal. The delegations will naturally have to meet any deadline our leaders set, but you will not like the results if that deadline is in 1990. Assuming a highly successful series of Foreign Ministers’ meetings this month and next, plus very intense work by the delegations here, I believe our schedule should now be to resolve essentially all the issues by mid-December, break for the holidays, return in January and plan to sign at a summit in 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D900839–0349. Secret; Immediate. 2 Burt and Brooks spent September 9–13 in Moscow as part of a delegation led by Bartholomew. No formal memoranda of their conversations with Soviet officials were found. Handwritten notes are in Department of State, Verification, Compliance and Implementation, Lot 06D436, Verification, Compliance and Implementation Subject Files, 1983–2005, JCIC-VII Sept. 90.
