430
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
nating any military benefits. They maintained that our proposal on du-
ration of the PNE ban is unsatisfactory, since it would provide no in-
centive to reach agreement on arrangements for conducting PNEs.
Instead, they called for a definite time limit (three years) for negotiating
such arrangements, after which the moratorium on PNEs would ex-
pire—presumably whether or not those arrangements had been con-
cluded and whether or not the treaty on weapon tests continued.
We, of course, emphasized that it would be unthinkable for us to
leave PNEs unconstrained while the weapons test ban continued. So-
viet Delegation members appreciate why their proposal would not be
acceptable to us, but have not hinted at any means of solving this
problem and have instead pointed out that the PNE issue continues to
involve substantial bureaucratic stakes in Moscow, thus making it diffi-
cult for them to alter their position very soon.
Internal Seismic Stations. Although our detailed proposals will not
be ready until January, we outlined our general thinking on the design
of the stations and indicated that, as long as agreement can be reached
on the technical requirements for ensuring the receipt of timely and au-
thenticated seismic data, we would not object to Soviet manning of sta-
tions in the USSR.
The Soviet response was somewhat ambiguous. The technical
members of their Delegation seemed receptive to our concept and par-
ticularly interested in receiving sophisticated U.S. equipment for the
stations. At the higher, political level, however, a more cautious posi-
tion was taken. They seemed particularly sensitive to any appearance
of the internal stations making inroads on Soviet sovereignty, and ex-
pressed concern about whether the U.S. concept permits sufficient
Soviet national responsibility and control over the stations on their
territory.
We cannot expect a definitive Soviet reaction until we have pre-
sented our ideas in detail next round. However, in light of the impor-
tant political and ideological implications of “authenticated” inter-
nal stations for the Soviet leadership, I would be very surprised if
achieving Soviet acceptance of an effective arrangement did not require
a prolonged and difficult negotiation.
General Comments. Although the Soviet negotiators repeatedly ex-
pressed appreciation of our Working Paper and the detailed explana-
tions given them, there was no new movement on their part on the
issues of PNEs, treaty duration, and internal seismic stations. Indeed,
some slight hardening of position could be discerned. It should be re-
membered that, in putting forth on November 2 the revised Soviet po-
sitions on a PNE moratorium and entry into force, Morokhov stressed
that the Soviet leadership expected some reciprocal movement on our
