American and chosen by a special panel composed of members of The Hague Tribunal or some of them. I doubt very much if the Senate would ratify a treaty for arbitration unless the agreement for submission be submitted to the Senate. That has been the universal practice and I am convinced that it would have to be followed in this case. MATTERS OF AN INTER-AMERICAN JURIDICAL NATURE (Private International Law) Topic 3. One of the subjects on the agenda of the Sixth Pan American Conference is the codification of Private International Law. The Commission of Jurists which met in Rio de Janeiro in April, 1927, recommended for consideration by the forthcoming conference at Habana a projected code prepared by Dr. Bustamante, the Cuban delegate on the Commission of Jurists. The Department attaches hereto a memorandum in which the provisions of the project are briefly analyzed and discussed (Appendix No. 7).19 It will be seen that there are fundamental reasons why the United States could not agree to a code in the form of this project. The first and most important obstacle to the preparation of a satisfactory code of Private International Law results from the difference between the system of jurisprudence obtaining in the United States, which had its origin in the English Common Law, and that obtaining in other American countries, which had its origin in the Roman Civil Law. It will be seen that the project here in question is based primarily on the theory of the law of nationality, whereas the system in the United States is based on the theory of territorial law, the principle of which is that the law in force in the territory shall apply to all persons within the territorial jurisdiction regardless of their nationality. Many of the provisions of the project are entirely foreign to our legal system. Others are so at variance with the principles of law established in this country as to render impossible their acceptance. An additional reason why this Government could not subscribe to a code of this character is that a vast majority of the subjects covered are matters
