1002
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the content and timing of a suggested program in technology in 1979
starting with the President’s State of the Union message.5
5 Vance highlighted this paragraph and wrote “Yes—please do” in the adjacent
margin.
316.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for International Organization Affairs (Maynes) to Acting
Secretary of State Christopher1
Washington, September 8, 1978
SUBJECT
Committee of the Whole Suspends Work Pending General Assembly Discussion
of Mandate
After two days of intensive caucusing by the G–77, the Committee
of the Whole met this afternoon to have the Chairman announce a deci-
sion to suspend the Committee’s work pending General Assembly dis-
cussion of its mandate. The G–77 decided that it wanted no further sub-
stantive discussion of issues until the question of the Committee’s
decision-making authority is resolved.
Since Jamaica and others in the G–77 leadership came to the COW
meeting with the purpose of forcing the issue of decision-making and
fully prepared to pay the price of scuttling the Committee if their tactics
didn’t work, there was an air of inevitability about the breakdown and
little immediate bitterness expressed. Foreign Minister of Jamaica
stressed the fact that “one country” was responsible for the failure to
reach agreement, and further finger-pointing at the United States can
be expected. However, a number of Western delegations supported the
U.S. position with varying degrees of enthusiasm.
As a result of the impasse in the COW, the General Assembly de-
bate on North/South issues will no doubt take on a confrontational
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
81D134, Box 3, Memorandums—RNC—1978. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Robert
Barry, Director of the Office of UN Political Affairs, Bureau of International Organization
Affairs. Sent through Cooper.
