42
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
emigration under Jackson/Vanik, we would also recommend negotiation
of a trade agreement incorporating MFN and making Hungary eligible for
USG credits. If Hungary will not provide such assurances, we would
then have to consider the possibility of modification or suspension of
the Jackson/Vanik amendment with respect to Hungary.
Effect on Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia
Under both options—as under the provisions of NSDM 2122—
several aspects of our bilateral relations with Bulgaria and Czechoslova-
kia would need to be nearly normalized before considering MFN and
credits for each country. The following normalization steps would
be envisaged:
—Bulgaria: We would encourage the Foreign Bondholders Protec-
tive Association to complete its negotiations with the Bulgarian Govern-
ment on behalf of US holders of defaulted pre-war Bulgarian dollar-
denominated bonds.
—Czechoslovakia: We would seek, as a matter of primary impor-
tance, to renegotiate a settlement of nationalization claims acceptable
to the Congress in order to meet our responsibility to US citizen/
claimants, many of whom are now advanced in years. We would
complete negotiation of a cultural and scientific exchanges agreement
and put into effect the consular convention which has already been
negotiated.
Given these normalization steps, Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia
would press for MFN and credits. However, the policy question of
extending MFN/credits eligibility to Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia (or
the GDR) is not expected to arise until the Jackson/Vanik amendment
has been modified. This does not appear an early prospect given the
present course of US-Soviet relations and attitudes on the Hill. Bulgaria
and Czechoslovakia, like the Soviet Union (and the GDR), reject giving
the assurances on emigration which are required by the Jackson/Vanik
amendment. Modification of Jackson/Vanik may come about later in
the wake of improved US-Soviet relations and practical progress on
the emigration problem. In that event, the trade agreement negotiated
with the Soviet Union in 1972—and providing MFN and credit eligibil-
ity for the Soviet Union—could then come into effect without further
negotiation.
Under Option III, following modification or suspension of Jackson/Vanik,
we would require—beyond such normalization steps as described above—
some evidence that Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia (and the GDR) had made
2 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. E–15, Part 1, Documents on Eastern Europe,
1973–1976, Document 8.
