1438  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
be as simple as possible as to what we will and will not do in broad 
terms: It should not, as a policy document, set out all the complexities 
and considerations to be taken into account in giving effect to, or in 
negotiating, our basic position.
Dulles
376.	 Telegram Dulte 4 From John Foster Dulles at USUN1
New York, August 21, 1958, 6 p.m.
Dulte 4. Eyes Only for the Ambassador. Following is text of letter 
to Secretary from Macmillan handed Secretary by Lloyd in New York 
today:
“August 21, 1958. Dear Foster, thank you for your letter of August 20. 
I have now received the President’s further message and am most grate­
ful for his clear assurances on the exchange of information. I should like 
to assure you that my concern in my messages to the President was not 
simply to protect this country’s nuclear weapons programme. Quite 
apart from this I felt real doubts as to whether your proposed action was 
calculated to extract the maximum advantage for the Western countries 
from the Geneva Conference. I was not thinking so much of world opin­
ion, which I know is not fully with us on this issue, but of the risk of 
throwing away the prize we hope to gain by making the Russians accept 
an international control system on their territory.
As to the larger political problem, I welcome the revision of your 
proposed announcement, which goes a long way to meet my point. I 
still fear that the Russians may be able to escape paying the price for the 
suspension of tests, but I recognize the force of your arguments and I 
agree that the new procedure should reduce that risk. I am also grateful 
to you for accommodating us on the date from which a suspension of 
tests should begin. I am therefore ready to join you in the action now 
proposed. I am sending Selwyn some suggested amendments to your 
draft announcement which I hope you may feel able to accept.
My intention is to make a parallel announcement at the same time 
as yours. I am still not sure that we need make these announcements 
1 Source: Repeats telegram to London transmitting letter from Macmillan to Dulles. 
Secret. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.6511/8–2158.
