Eastern Europe Region
67
the economic and technological assistance gained through cooperation
may allow the Soviet leadership to avoid, delay, and limit reforms
which otherwise might be forced on an unwilling Soviet leadership.
In other words, this approach is more likely to block than facilitate
evolutionary change.
2. Emphasize a more cooperative relationship with Moscow while not
emphasizing a cooperative approach toward East Europe.
This is what many understood—wrongly or rightly—to be the
Sonnenfeldt doctrine. Its assumption is that interests in the world order,
if commonly shared by Washington and Moscow, take precedence over
detaching East Europe from the Soviet Bloc. Its proponents might argue
that cooperation with Moscow must come first, loosening up that
regime, which is a pre-condition for significant political liberalization
in East Europe.
Its critics could argue that it, like the first approach, merely allows
Moscow to evade reforms through exploiting Western economic and
technological assistance and at the same time to prevent significant
loosening of its hegemony in East Europe. It makes the Washington-
Moscow relationship look like a super-power coalition against which
an East European state like Romania, for example, has an increasingly
difficult time playing its maverick role. Nor can the neutrals be sure
that their policies will not be the victim of a Moscow-Washington
understanding. Finally, the West Europeans find that they can take
European security less seriously because the U.S.-Soviet relationship
ensures it. West Europeans are left free to pursue whatever policy lines
they choose without as much concern for building a NATO policy
consensus.
3. Emphasize cooperation with Eastern Europe but not with Moscow.
The case for this policy would be that it promises to exacerbate
Soviet control problems by creating alternative sources of support for
East European regimes over a long evolutionary period. At the same
time, it would deny the USSR the benefits of economic and technologi-
cal assistance and whatever relief that could provide the leadership.
The Politburo would face not only growing independence in East
Europe but also sharpened dilemmas between political control and
efficient use of human and material resources within the Soviet
economy.
The objection to this approach might be that the fruits of coopera-
tion—especially economic interaction—would not stop in East Europe
but would filter through to Moscow in any event. Furthermore, eco-
nomic assistance to East Europe would alleviate some of the tensions
created there by consumer dissatisfaction and inefficient resource allo-
