890 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 274. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown and Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, July 19, 1979 SUBJECT Military Assistance for Egypt You asked2 about the possibilities for enhanced military assistance for Egypt. We conclude that it is important for the United States to move beyond the immediate program of assistance agreed during the Treaty negotiations. As you know, during Mubarak’s June visit we undertook to develop3 a longer term (five year) military assistance plan with Egypt. We are now preparing for the first round of talks in Cairo on this plan,4 with the aim of completing the plan by October 1st. In the planning process we will be reviewing Egypt’s force structure and missions as well as equipment requirements. It will be our aim to encourage Egypt to make reductions in its force structure and to limit equipment requirements to those needed for replacement and modernization of obsolete or unsupportable Soviet equipment. We will severely discourage force expansion. Moreover, wherever possible, we will encourage Egypt to make the most of the Soviet equipment it has now, and will offer technical assistance for this purpose.5 We are looking at ways to help Egypt’s de- 1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files, FRC 330–82–0205, Egypt 1979 Jan–July. Secret. A typewritten notation in the upper left-hand corner of the memorandum reads: “orig[inal] hand carried to the WH by S.” 2 See Document 262. 3 See footnote 4, Document 260. 4 A delegation led by McGiffert began four days of talks on the Egyptian supply relationship on August 11. McGiffert met with Sadat, Mubarak, and Ali in Alexandria, August 11, for a discussion of regional security concerns, a meeting Sadat described as “the start of a real cooperation between Egypt and the U.S. based on a mutual understanding and a mutual strategy.” (Telegram 16352 from OMC/Cairo, August 13; Washington National Records Center, OSD Files, FRC 330–81–0446, DEM Memcons/Reporting Cables) McGiffert had an earlier meeting on August 11 with Mubarak and Ali. The memorandum of conversation is ibid. The delegation’s technical discussions with Egyptian military officials which culminated in the Egyptian presentation of an equipment “priority” list (estimated at $10–12 billion) is summarized in telegram 16584 from Cairo, August 15. (Ibid.) 5 In response to a June 22 request from the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, the Central Intelligence Agency produced a July 29 research memorandum evaluating the Egyptian military’s need for maintenance on its Soviet-supplied weapons systems. The memorandum concluded that the economic sanctions imposed by the Arab states, especially Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates, “will seriously delay Egypt’s plans to reequip its armed forces with new weapons and will force Cairo to seek still more Western help to repair or retrofit existing Soviet equipment. Al-
