890
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
274.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown and
Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1
Washington, July 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Military Assistance for Egypt
You asked2 about the possibilities for enhanced military assistance
for Egypt. We conclude that it is important for the United States to
move beyond the immediate program of assistance agreed during the
Treaty negotiations.
As you know, during Mubarak’s June visit we undertook to de-
velop3 a longer term (five year) military assistance plan with Egypt. We
are now preparing for the first round of talks in Cairo on this plan,4
with the aim of completing the plan by October 1st. In the planning
process we will be reviewing Egypt’s force structure and missions as
well as equipment requirements. It will be our aim to encourage Egypt
to make reductions in its force structure and to limit equipment re-
quirements to those needed for replacement and modernization of ob-
solete or unsupportable Soviet equipment. We will severely discourage
force expansion.
Moreover, wherever possible, we will encourage Egypt to make
the most of the Soviet equipment it has now, and will offer technical
assistance for this purpose.5 We are looking at ways to help Egypt’s de-
1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files, FRC 330–82–0205, Egypt
1979 Jan–July. Secret. A typewritten notation in the upper left-hand corner of the memo-
randum reads: “orig[inal] hand carried to the WH by S.”
2 See Document 262.
3 See footnote 4, Document 260.
4 A delegation led by McGiffert began four days of talks on the Egyptian supply re-
lationship on August 11. McGiffert met with Sadat, Mubarak, and Ali in Alexandria, Au-
gust 11, for a discussion of regional security concerns, a meeting Sadat described as “the
start of a real cooperation between Egypt and the U.S. based on a mutual understanding
and a mutual strategy.” (Telegram 16352 from OMC/Cairo, August 13; Washington Na-
tional Records Center, OSD Files, FRC 330–81–0446, DEM Memcons/Reporting Cables)
McGiffert had an earlier meeting on August 11 with Mubarak and Ali. The memorandum
of conversation is ibid. The delegation’s technical discussions with Egyptian military offi-
cials which culminated in the Egyptian presentation of an equipment “priority” list (esti-
mated at $10–12 billion) is summarized in telegram 16584 from Cairo, August 15. (Ibid.)
5 In response to a June 22 request from the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, De-
partment of State, the Central Intelligence Agency produced a July 29 research memo-
randum evaluating the Egyptian military’s need for maintenance on its Soviet-supplied
weapons systems. The memorandum concluded that the economic sanctions imposed by
the Arab states, especially Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates, “will seri-
ously delay Egypt’s plans to reequip its armed forces with new weapons and will force
Cairo to seek still more Western help to repair or retrofit existing Soviet equipment. Al-
