2
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
2.
Editorial Note
While the administration of President Jimmy Carter pondered its
options for anti-satellite capabilities, it also tried to establish a “co-
herent” space policy. The President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, “concluded that this issue is of a high pri-
ority nature warranting a timely, comprehensive review and statement
of national policy.” In an undated draft Presidential Review Memo-
randum, he tasked the various departments involved in national secu-
rity decision-making to weigh in on the administration’s strategy. In
particular, he asked that the departments examine “the relative impor-
tance of the use of space for the different yet interrelated goals of our
civil, military, and intelligence programs.” (Memorandum from Brze-
zinski to the Secretaries of State, Defense, Interior, Agriculture, Com-
merce, the Directors of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency,
Central Intelligence, the Office of Science and Technology Policy, and
the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion, March 5, 1977, and draft Presidential Review Memorandum; Li-
brary of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 22,
1977 Missiles and Space Policy)
On March 14, 1977, Director of Central Intelligence Stansfield
Turner urged Brzezinski to create a Policy Review Committee devoted
to space policy, which would be chaired by Secretary of Defense Ha-
rold Brown, and argued that “No policy initiative likely to have major
effects, e.g. ASAT negotiations, should be permitted until those effects
have been carefully assessed.” (Memorandum from Turner to Brzezin-
ski, March 14; Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional
Files, Box 41, Folder 3, PRM–23 [3])
Paul Warnke, the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament
Agency, concurred with Turner, and noted that “of particular concern
to the arms control effort is that the policy options and recommenda-
tions delineate clearly what the impact of possible US actions might be
on maintaining the free use of space and what effect changes in the op-
eration of US satellite programs for military, intelligence and civil pur-
poses might have on our verification capabilities.” (Memorandum
from Warnke to Brzezinski; Carter Library, National Security Council,
Institutional Files, Box 41, Folder 3, PRM–23 [3])
Carter issued Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC 23, “A Co-
herent National Space Policy” on March 28, which included the deter-
mination of “the appropriate degree of system survivability, defensive,
and offensive capabilities in space, and arms limitations initiatives.”
The memorandum is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XXV, Global Issues; United Nations Issues. (Ibid.)
