704  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
automatically draw to him entire gamut from somewhat right of cen-
ter. Ydígoras dilated on possibilities working with Galich saying he 
needed cooperation in Congress from new PR deputies elected and not 
obstructive tactics as Villagran Kramer and Castillo Arreola. [text not 
declassified] At appropriate moments and bearing in mind Department’s 
instruction, I adverted to future dangers, the peril which Arevalo would 
bring and the necessity for astute appraisal and action. I suggested that 
were he successful in establishing some working relationship with 
Galich and were Galich successful in establishing some leadership over 
PR, it were desirable maintain in working relationships by at least non-
combative situation with a moderate left at moment non-Communist.
Department’s instruction A-56 was slightly modified by Embassy 
to fit in with conditions of the moment and in view President’s par-
ticular susceptibilities. In keeping with Department’s very thoughtful 
permission and with show of frankness I allowed President to read our 
revised next.8 Regarding those parts of Department’s instruction which 
perhaps were a little more pointed on the political side, he did not 
voice observations. He did, however, read whole document with very 
close attention taking what I would judge to be at least 20 minutes so 
to do. He asked questions respecting individual words in English. He 
stopped from time to time to discuss particular points which showed 
he apparently seizing significance. He made particular mention in a 
considerable discussion of Department’s observation that splinter par-
ties of the left would quickly unite under Arevalo.
On loans, he declared that in spite of a considerable memory for 
detail, he had never been told reason why certain loan applications had 
been rejected. I did not fail to point out this was during time of Roberto 
Alejos. He said he now realizes it was not American Government which 
had been poorly disposed, but rather Guatemala proposals which had 
been improperly presented. He also now realized that the package 
handed Dr. Milton Eisenhower, which they had believed was properly 
done and which Dr. Eisenhower had characterized as the finest presen-
tation he had seen, did not constitute a proper loan application.
The President expressed particular pleasure over Department’s 
suggestion that it might prove desirable to make some public utterance 
in connection with democracy and constitutional governments and I 
said I had used that point in making my address to him the previous 
evening at the Presidential palace which he pointed out is to be pub-
lished in full today.9
President voiced concern about himself and like-­minded Latin 
American colleagues at what appears to be a spirit of understanding 
manifest following visit Premier Khrushchev to U.S. He said Americans 
8 Not found in Department of State files.
9 No record of this address of November 9 was found in Department of State files.
