594  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
There is no disagreement on this point. The second concerns each side 
making annual statements on the planned stocks of long-­range SLCMs, 
with the maximum number specified for each of the next five years.
Bartholomew (holding up the text2 of the Moscow bracketed draft 
SLCM declaration): This is the document in english that was agreed 
in Moscow except for the brackets. It is the basis for the statement 
by our two ministers that SLCMs “would be dealt with by parallel, 
politically-­binding declarations for the duration of the START Treaty.” 
Akhromeyev: There is agreement on this.
Bartholomew: We are talking about nuclear missiles. Akhromeyev: 
Yes, nuclear-­armed SLCMs. Bartholomew: As you see in the Moscow 
text, we are prepared to say “will not exceed” but “maximum” is not 
appropriate to a political document. Akhromeyev: This is not treaty 
language. In principle we have agreement.
Akhromeyev: Moving to paragraph 4, agreed in the negotiating 
record would be the total number of long-­range SLCMs and the num-
ber on each type of warship. Our ministers talked about this in Moscow 
and we believed we reached agreement. As long as the sides are aware 
of the types of warships that carry SLCMs, and the numbers on each 
type, the sides would have the ability to monitor numbers of SLCMs.
Bartholomew: This point introduces the idea of an agreed limit 
on the number of SLCMs overall and the number for each ship type. 
We cannot accept this, and this is contrary to what we did in Moscow 
and the Moscow joint statement. Burt: I don’t understand the reference 
to agreement in the negotiating record. It was clearly stated on your 
side that the understanding on SLCMs would be separate from START. 
Akhromeyev: We are talking about the context of a separate paper.
Bartholomew (holding up the bracketed text of a draft SLCM dec-
laration): What is this that ministers addressed in Moscow? An Under 
Secretary of State and a Deputy Foreign Minister and two Ambassadors 
worked this paper. We regarded it as agreed except for brackets. What 
were we doing?
Nazarkin: What Akhromeyev is saying is consistent with the 
Moscow common elements. Bartholomew: There is no mention here of 
limits on numbers or by type of ship. That is inconsistent with the very 
nature of this document.
Narzarkin: It is right that the Moscow document does not mention 
numbers or levels. We did not reach agreement on the issues that deter-
mine those levels—­whether nuclear-­armed missiles or all SLCMs, and 
2 The draft statement on SLCMs is in Department of State, Office of the Under 
Secretary for Arms Control, International Security Affairs, Lot 01D127, 1969–1990 Subject 
Record of James P. Timbie, START Meetings (Bartholomew) April 1990.
