646 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I ernment that is in power, unless it is so obnoxious to our own standards and principles that we cannot accept it. “So, the Soviets are inclined to stir up trouble; we’re inclined to try to dampen trouble and to provide peace. That’s one thing that gives them an advantage when there is trouble. But I think we have stood up well against them, and I think we can continue to do it in the future on a peaceful, competitive basis. There’s no doubt in my mind that the ideals and the principles and the basic strengths of America can prevail and have prevailed.” (Ibid., pages 1607, 1611–1613) At 4:15 p.m. that afternoon, in the Briefing Room at the White House, the President spoke to reporters concerning the presence of a Soviet combat brigade in Cuba. Earlier, at a September 5 press conference, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance had asserted that this development “is a matter of serious concern.” (Department of State Bulletin, October 1979, page 14) Carter referenced Vance’s remarks and added: “We are confident about our ability to defend our country or any of our friends from external aggression. The issue posed is of a different nature. It involves the stationing of Soviet combat troops here in the Western Hemisphere, in a country which acts as a Soviet proxy in military adventures in other areas of the world, like Africa. “We do have the right to insist that the Soviet Union respect our interests and our concerns if the Soviet Union expects us to respect their sensibilities and their concerns. Otherwise, relations between our two countries will inevitably be adversely affected. We are seriously pursuing this issue with the Soviet Union, and we are consulting closely with the Congress. “Let me emphasize that this is a sensitive issue that faces our Nation, all of us, and our Nation as a whole must respond not only with firmness and strength but also with calm and a sense of proportion. “This is a time for firm diplomacy, not panic and not exaggeration. As Secretary Vance discusses this issue with Soviet representatives in the coming days, the Congress and the American people can help to ensure a successful outcome of these discussions and negotiations by preserving an atmosphere in which our diplomacy can work.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pages 1602–1603)
