Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 729 to accommodate those new claimants to economic and political power which they have not had in the past. There are two obvious preconditions for an effective American foreign policy: a strong national economy and a strong national defense. That’s why I placed the highest priority on the development of a national energy policy, which our country has never had. That’s why we must win the struggle against inflation—and I’ve been very pleased lately at the trend in interest rates and the good news we had this morning on the Producer Price Index.3 The Congress and I are moving resolutely toward this goal; in fact, every single American is involved. This common effort to deal with a worldwide economic challenge does require some sacrifice, and I’m determined that the sacrifice will be fairly shared. The response of our democracy to economic challenges will determine whether we will be able to manage the challenge of other global responsibilities in the 1980’s and beyond. If we cannot meet these international economic problems successfully, then our ability to meet military and political and diplomatic challenges will be doubtful indeed. Although it will not be easy, the innate advantages of our Nation’s natural bounty which God has given us and the common commitment of a free people who comprise American society give us the assurance of success. We must also be militarily strong. The fact is that for 15 years the Soviet Union has been expanding its military capabilities far out of proportion to its needs for defense—a 4or 5-percent real growth above the inflation rate compounded annually for 15 years has caused us some concern. For much of this same period, our spending for defense had been going down. If these adverse trends had continued, we would have found ourselves facing a severe military imbalance, an imbalance all the more threatening because of mounting global turbulence. That’s why I have launched a broad modernization of our strategic and conventional forces and worked to strengthen our alliances. We and our allies have pledged ourselves to sustained, real annual increases in our defense spending. Our task is to build together a truly cooperative global community, to compose a kind of global mosaic which embraces the wealth and diversity of the Earth’s peoples, cultures, and religions. This will not be an easy task. The philosophical basis of such a community must be re- 3 On May 9, the Bureau of Labor Statistics issued its monthly Producers Price Index report, which indicated that prices paid by retailers rose only five-tenths of one percent during April. (Edward Cowan, “Producer Price Rise Cut to 0.5% in April; Cost of Food Drops,” The New York Times, May 10, 1980, pp. 1, 31)
