1977  15
Secretary Vance: On the Lance, I’m for dropping it, but do we have 
enough spares to continue our support to our allies?
Secretary Brown: I’ll check.
General Brown: I know we’re not here to debate the issues now, but 
I do want to make two points. Secretary Vance has made a very import-
ant point about the perceptions of our allies. We have been very critical 
of the British defense posture decisions for the last two years. We have 
confirmed our support for NATO and the Vice President has given 
them assurances. If we replace two active brigades with reserves, we 
will be acting just like the British. We have reached the point in trying 
to sustain our reserve forces where our recruitment objectives are based 
on what we can get, not what we need. I don’t know how we would 
man two additional reserve brigades.
President Carter: Zbig, how soon can we get four to five hours on 
this? I will want a written presentation first.
Dr. Brzezinski: We’ll do it next week.
President Carter: Possibly on Saturday afternoon.4 You can have 
supper with me, and we could continue in the evening.
Dr. Brzezinski: You would want (OMB Director) Lance there.
President Carter: Yes; he and I both need educating. I have no idea 
of excluding anyone. Set up an adequate amount of time so that I can 
learn and share my thoughts with you.
Dr. Brzezinski: And we will get into political issues?
President Carter: Yes. This has been a productive meeting.
Dr. Brzezinski: The press is going to want to know the subject of this 
meeting. I don’t think we need always necessarily tell them what NSC 
meetings are about. I’m a little reluctant to say it was on the defense 
budget.
President Carter: Just tell them it was on budget issues, not defense.
4 Reference is either to Saturday, January 29, or Saturday, February 5. No record 
of a meeting on either date was found. On January 31, Carter met with his advisors in 
the Cabinet Room from 4:30 to 6:30 p.m. to discuss the FY 1978 defense budget. (Carter 
Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No minutes of the conversation 
were found.
