790  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
181.	 Telegram Tocah 162 to Herter in Geneva1
Washington, July 20, 1959, 9 p.m.
Tocah 162. For Secretary from Acting Secretary. Reference: Cahto 154.
At PB meeting Friday Defense member indicated SecDef willing 
go along with Gray’s paragraph 12–­a as drafted providing agreement 
reached on inclusion of following sentence as footnote or in record of 
action:
“Paragraph 12–­a of NSC 5906 was approved by the President with 
the understanding that it is not to be interpreted as a change in policy 
but rather as a clarification of exiting policy with respect to the use of 
nuclear weapons and the requirement for maintaining balanced forces.”
Department PB member said proposal probably acceptable to State 
but would prefer have language above in record of action rather than 
footnote. Treasury, Budget, OCDM agreed; Chiefs reserved; sentence 
believed satisfactory because makes no change in substance of Gray 
S draft paragraph 12–­a which we willing accept. Additionally, refers 
“requirement” for balanced forces which not elsewhere mentioned.
Remaining question merely whether policy is to be consid­
ered “change” or “clarification” but since we have already agreed to 
Gray formula further argumentation this point in NSC would cer­
tainly be unproductive. Accordingly I called McElroy and confirmed 
Department’s acceptance of his suggested sentence for inclusion in 
record of action. When I saw him on Sunday I told him that we felt 
language represented new policy but if he preferred to call it clarifica­
tion that would be satisfactory by us as long as it understood that new 
language as such would henceforth be guiding without reference to 
superseded languages. This seemed satisfactory to McElroy and unless 
you have other instructions this is line I intend to take in NSC.
Dillon
1 Source: Discussion of proposed revisions in NSC 5906, basic national security policy. 
Top Secret. 1 p. NARA, RG 59, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 67 D 548, Military and Naval Policy.
