Comprehensive Test Ban
531
Secretary Vance said it was his understanding that what we were
talking about were experiments in an enclosed space.
Gromyko said it would be necessary to obtain additional informa-
tion and confirmation regarding the purposes of the experiments, if the
U.S. side could provide them, because the Treaty does place a great re-
sponsibility on the three countries involved.
The Secretary expressed his hope that the Soviet side would give
some further thought to what appeared to be a radical change in the po-
sition of the Soviet side with respect to the machine Warnke had talked
about. He could tell Gromyko that without doubt these three elements,
this tri-partite verification process, would be very important in terms of
Congressional consideration.
Gromyko said that the U.S. Government would best know how to
deal with the U.S. Congress; he could not provide any advice in this re-
spect. At the present time he could add nothing to the Soviet position. It
seemed to him that the Soviet side had displayed a great deal of flexi-
bility in the negotiation of the CTB Treaty. Thus, when the main ques-
tion had appeared to be the question of duration, the Soviet Union had
accepted the U.S. position, but now seismic stations were regarded as a
matter of new importance.
Warnke said he could not accept the statement that this was a new
matter. It had been an essential part of our position from the very
beginning.
Gromyko recalled that in May President Carter had characterized
the question of duration as being the most important question. He
would refer the Secretary to the record of that conversation to confirm
this fact.6
The Secretary said that what the President had in mind was based
on his impression that duration was one matter on which there was dis-
agreement. In the CTB negotiations, duration and verification were of
coequal importance.
Gromyko reminded the Secretary that in May he had told Presi-
dent Carter that the Soviet Union would be prepared to accept a five-
year term for the Treaty in the event that all other matters were agreed,
including verification. The President quite definitely stressed duration
as the most important question.
He could see that there was still some distance between the respec-
tive positions on the test ban treaty. This was not a simple matter; he
would suggest that the Delegations continue their work. In general, the
attitude of the Soviet Union, based on principle, toward the advis-
ability of concluding a treaty on the complete banning of nuclear
6 See Document 201.
