Romania population’s needs, the Government has on two recent occasions sought comment from the general public on proposed legislation affecting housing and food distribution. In an analogous move, the official trade unions have published for comment the issues to be discussed at the quinquennial trade union conference early next year. The future of Romania’s economy seems more uncertain than at any time in the last decade. Ceausescu’s goal of turning Romania into a developed country by 1985 is now clearly unattainable. Romania no longer has the raw material and manpower reserves which fueled the double digit growth rates of the past decade. In particular, Romania’s oil production is declining, and net oil imports, estimated at $1.2 billion in 1980, are an increasing drain on the economy. Nevertheless, Ceausescu continues to emphasize investment and rapid growth. This policy only exacerbates Romania’s most serious problem, its growing balance of payments deficit, which was $1.7 billion in the first six months of 1980, more than the total deficit for all of 1979. Romania’s hard currency debt also jumped by more than $2 billion in the last six months. Unable and unwilling to introduce real economic reforms, Ceausescu has resorted to shuffling personnel and tinkering with the economy. The 1981–85 Plan has undergone a series of revisions and has still not been approved. Measures supposedly aimed at decentralizing decision-making and creating worker incentives have had little impact—except to increase confusion and cyncism among workers and managers. At the same time, we have also seen evidence that the GOR is being forced to make shifts or cutbacks in some programs to save hard currency, reduce spending and be somewhat more responsive to consumer needs. These actions seem designed more to prevent a spread of the “Polish virus” to Romania than to serve a part of a coherent approach to Romania’s economic problems. For the average Romanian, the effects are clear. A journalist-defector recently observed to us that shortages in the stores are unprecedented, even for a communist country. For the first time in Romania’s 2,000 year history, the country is no longer able to supply its population with one of its major staple food items, Romanian cheese. Our Embassy reports that given the low quantity of most food and consumer goods available and inadequate housing, it is safe to say that the standard of living of the average Romanian is in slow decline. (Romania presently stands only ahead of Albania in standard of living in Europe.) The same defector told us that the mood of the Romanian intelligentsia is pessimistic. Those who have any awareness of events outside Romania see no hope for economic or political improvements in Romania as long as the Government maintains its over-exaggerated push for foreign trade and industrialization at the expense of the consumer
