National Security Policy  423
124.	 Memorandum of Conversation Between Eisenhower and 
Gray1
Washington, December 24, 1958, 9:45 a.m.
1. I discussed the Record of Actions of the December 18 NSC meet­
ing with particular reference to the Status of the Military Mobilization 
Base Program. I reminded the President that he had indicated that he 
wished the Department of Defense to keep under study the question 
of whether its mobilization base planning should continue to assume 
a mobilization period of six months prior to D-Day. The President said 
that he felt that it should be studied but that his guess was that plan­
ning had to assume both such a period and no period whatsoever. I also 
pointed out to the President that he had indicated that the Department 
of Defense should continue its efforts to find a means of taking bomb 
damage into account in its mobilization base planning while not mak­
ing damage assumptions so extravagant that no planning is feasible. 
I indicated to the President that Assistant Secretary McGuire felt that 
it would be helpful to be asked to report back to the NSC on develop­
ments arising out of this study and I asked the President’s approval 
for inclusion of a directive to this effect in the Record of Action. The 
President approved such a directive.
2. I discussed the Record of Actions of the December 23 NSC meeting 
with particular reference to the intelligence briefing with respect to Cuba. 
I indicated to the President that I was a little concerned as to what should 
be reflected in the Record of Actions in view of the indeterminate discus­
sion. I suggested to him that the Record should reflect the statement that 
“responsible departments and agencies, particularly the Departments of 
State, Defense and Justice and the CIA are keeping the situation in Cuba 
under continuing scrutiny with a view to taking appropriate actions in 
U.S. security interests, and to making necessary contingency plans.” The 
President felt that this would be satisfactory with the addition of a clause 
reading, “on the initiative of the Secretary of State.”
With further reference to the intelligence item with respect to 
Cuba, I pointed out to the President that I had not been informed as 
to what was going on but that I had not pressed for any kind of direc­
tive in the meeting because it was not clear to me whether there were 
1 Source: Military mobilization base, situation in Cuba, intelligence procedures, 
Geneva conferences on test suspension and surprise attack. Top Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower 
Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up, Meetings with the President. Drafted 
on December 30.
