Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976 2. If your opening comment involves a reaction to Ford’s response, you can use that opportunity to raise the above theme very briefly, indicating to the public that this is the key question for Americans to ponder, then attack Ford on the specific question, and then use your own opening answer for a fuller definition of the basic theme as suggested under #1 above. 3. Remember: your audience is the nation and not the questioners. So focus on the fundamentals and not only on the questions—and keep hammering at the basic theme of no Presidential leadership and of no American vision for a world that needs direction and architecture. 4. In general, I feel that Ford’s non-performance in this area ought to be attacked more sharply and more pointedly than was the case with his domestic performance. For example, on detente, does he agree with Kissinger or with Reagan? On Cyprus, he should be faulted in some detail for his nonperformance and for tolerating Kissinger’s poor record.3 The critical implications of this for Western Europe and for Israel ought to be underlined. Similarly, on Angola, the ineptness of his leadership and of Kissinger’s handling of this matter ought to be highlighted and related to the present uncertainties about the future of the African continent.4 (Kissinger’s recent “success” regarding Rhodesia5 can be diminished by the suggestion that it was made necessary by his failings in the past and that in fact the “success” is still very uncertain.) In general, I should think that a major purpose of the debate on foreign policy would be to leave the public with a clear impression that Ford has provided no leadership. In other words, even if Ford claims successes for his foreign policy, the public should be left with the view—as- 3 Reference is to the ongoing conflict between Turkish and Greek Cypriots on Cyprus. On September 30, Kissinger addressed the UN General Assembly and referenced the “stalemate on the Cyprus problem.” He noted that any settlement of the problem would need to come from the Cypriot communities, although the United States would assist in “restoring momentum to the negotiating process.” For the full text of
