Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
49
2. If your opening comment involves a reaction to Ford’s response,
you can use that opportunity to raise the above theme very briefly, in-
dicating to the public that this is the key question for Americans to ponder,
then attack Ford on the specific question, and then use your own open-
ing answer for a fuller definition of the basic theme as suggested under
#1 above.
3. Remember: your audience is the nation and not the questioners.
So focus on the fundamentals and not only on the questions—and keep
hammering at the basic theme of no Presidential leadership and of no
American vision for a world that needs direction and architecture.
4. In general, I feel that Ford’s non-performance in this area ought
to be attacked more sharply and more pointedly than was the case with
his domestic performance.
For example, on detente, does he agree with Kissinger or with
Reagan? On Cyprus, he should be faulted in some detail for his non-
performance and for tolerating Kissinger’s poor record.3 The critical
implications of this for Western Europe and for Israel ought to be
underlined.
Similarly, on Angola, the ineptness of his leadership and of Kissin-
ger’s handling of this matter ought to be highlighted and related to the
present uncertainties about the future of the African continent.4 (Kissin-
ger’s recent “success” regarding Rhodesia5 can be diminished by the
suggestion that it was made necessary by his failings in the past and
that in fact the “success” is still very uncertain.)
In general, I should think that a major purpose of the debate on for-
eign policy would be to leave the public with a clear impression that Ford
has provided no leadership. In other words, even if Ford claims successes
for his foreign policy, the public should be left with the view—as-
3 Reference is to the ongoing conflict between Turkish and Greek Cypriots on
Cyprus. On September 30, Kissinger addressed the UN General Assembly and refer-
enced the “stalemate on the Cyprus problem.” He noted that any settlement of the
problem would need to come from the Cypriot communities, although the United States
would assist in “restoring momentum to the negotiating process.” For the full text of
Kissinger’s address, see Department of State Bulletin, October 25, 1976, pp. 497–510. For
documentation on U.S. policy toward the Cyprus conflict, see Foreign Relations, 1969–
1976, vol. XXX, Greece; Cyprus; Turkey, 1973–1976.
4 Presumable reference to the three-way struggle for political control over the
former Portuguese colony of Angola. The Ford administration had covertly supported
the National Front for the Liberation of Angola (FNLA) and the National Union for the
Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) during the Angolan civil war. Congressional op-
position to this support culminated in an amendment to the FY 1976 Defense Appropria-
tions bill (P.L. 94–212) prohibiting any use of funds in the bill for indirect or direct activ-
ities in Angola. (Congress and the Nation, volume IV, 1973–1976, p. 878) On January 29,
1976, Kissinger testified before the Subcommittee on African Affairs of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, outlining the implications of Angola for U.S. foreign policy. For the
transcript of his testimony, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVIII, Part 1, Founda-
tions of Foreign Policy, 1973–1976, Document 67.
5 Presumable reference to the September 24 announcement that Rhodesian Prime
Minister Ian Smith would accept a British-U.S. formula for the transition to majority rule
in Rhodesia. (Bernard Gwertzman, “Kissinger Cautions That Decision By Rhodesia Is
‘Only the Beginning’,” The New York Times, September 25, 1976, pp. 1, 5) Kissinger had
met with Smith and a Rhodesian delegation in Pretoria, South Africa, during his Sep-
tember 14–24 trip to Tanzania, Zambia, South Africa, Zaire, Kenya, and the United
Kingdom.
