Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II and all they can reach. When food can be distributed within Kampuchea, there too it will go to hungry people, regardless of their political affiliation. The Commission cautions that statements by the U.S. Government can also have the effect of reducing public interest in helping Kampucheans. For example, statements alleging a lack of support from other governments tend to divert public attention from the crucial need of famine victims and from the success stories of food distribution. The seizure of American hostages in Iran has also diverted attention away from the famine in Kampuchea, but more importantly, it could dampen the public willingness to provide assistance for any developing nation for some time to come. The public tends to lump developing nations together and see the antagonistic actions of one as indicative of all. Many Americans are now questioning whether the United States should bother to help poorer nations, when they may respond by capturing U.S. citizens and denouncing the U.S. Government. The U.S. mood to turn inward has certainly been expressed to Members of Congress during the Congressional recess, and may be reflected in Congressional action, or inaction, during the coming session. On these and other issues, the Commission recommends that the President assure that the American public is frequently informed about what is happening in Kampuchea and Thailand, and that the information include the good being accomplished as well as the problems involved in a relief effort of this size.10 Congressional action The Commission believes that the U.S. Congress should take several immediate actions relevant to the Kampuchean assistance effort and that the Administration should support those Congressional actions. The Commission recommends that the Congress immediately undertake joint oversight hearings by both the House and Senate on the Kampuchean relief effort.11 10 The Department of State outlined efforts in this area, highlighting the President and the First Lady’s participation in meetings of the National Cambodian Crisis Committee and the Department’s response to numerous public inquiries concerning the ref-
