892
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and all they can reach. When food can be distributed within Kampu-
chea, there too it will go to hungry people, regardless of their political
affiliation.
The Commission cautions that statements by the U.S. Government
can also have the effect of reducing public interest in helping Kampu-
cheans. For example, statements alleging a lack of support from other
governments tend to divert public attention from the crucial need of
famine victims and from the success stories of food distribution.
The seizure of American hostages in Iran has also diverted atten-
tion away from the famine in Kampuchea, but more importantly, it
could dampen the public willingness to provide assistance for any de-
veloping nation for some time to come. The public tends to lump devel-
oping nations together and see the antagonistic actions of one as indica-
tive of all. Many Americans are now questioning whether the United
States should bother to help poorer nations, when they may respond by
capturing U.S. citizens and denouncing the U.S. Government. The U.S.
mood to turn inward has certainly been expressed to Members of
Congress during the Congressional recess, and may be reflected in
Congressional action, or inaction, during the coming session.
On these and other issues, the Commission recommends that the Presi-
dent assure that the American public is frequently informed about what is hap-
pening in Kampuchea and Thailand, and that the information include the good
being accomplished as well as the problems involved in a relief effort of this
size.10
Congressional action
The Commission believes that the U.S. Congress should take sev-
eral immediate actions relevant to the Kampuchean assistance effort
and that the Administration should support those Congressional
actions.
The Commission recommends that the Congress immediately undertake
joint oversight hearings by both the House and Senate on the Kampuchean re-
lief effort.11
10 The Department of State outlined efforts in this area, highlighting the President
and the First Lady’s participation in meetings of the National Cambodian Crisis Com-
mittee and the Department’s response to numerous public inquiries concerning the ref-
ugee situation. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P800052–1803)
11 Noted Tarnoff, “While we do not believe that joint oversight hearings are likely to
be called, we would welcome hearings by the appropriate committees of the Senate and
the House. In any event, Administration officials will be testifying on all aspects of the US
refugee effort, including Khmer relief, in the consultations with Congress required by the
new refugee legislation.” (Ibid.) The United States Refugee Act of 1980 (P.L. 96–212; 94
Stat. 102) was signed into law by President Carter on March 17. Among other things, the
act created the position of U.S. Coordinator for Refugee Affairs.
