January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1247 373. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State, the White House, and the Embassy in Israel1 Cairo, May 18, 1980, 1546Z 11149. Subject: Letter From President Sadat to Prime Minister Begin. Ref: Cairo 11148.2 1. (S-entire text). 2. Following is the text of the letter from President Sadat to Prime Minister Begin which was handed to Ambassador Ben Elissar earlier today (Sunday). In giving me the text, Foreign Minister Ali stressed that we should hold in strictest confidence the fact that it had been provided to us. 3. Begin text. Dear Prime Minister Begin, —In our meetings and correspondence alike, we pledged to do everything possible in order to facilitate the process of reaching agreement on the establishment of a self-governing authority with full autonomy for the West Bank and Gaza. We discussed in length the necessity of making tangible and adequate progress in the autonomy negotiations in the light of our joint commitment to work for a comprehensive peace settlement of which all the parties benefit. In our meeting at Aswan,3 I emphasized to you the need for issuing new directives to our delegations with a view to accelerate the pace of progress and overcome the existing problems. Subsequently, we held separate talks with President Carter in Washington to stimulate movement in this direction.4 —However, I must tell you in all candor that I was disappointed by the lack of meaningful progress despite the intensification of the talks. You would recall that I drew your attention to the geopolitical considerations which make it imperative for both of us to set our priorities in such a manner that would enhance the prospects for reaching agreement. Despite our difference of opinions on several issues of substance, it has always been my conviction that it should not be that difficult to reach agreement so long as we are working in the context of a transitional arrangement and not that of a final settlement. We are not working in a vacuum either. We have the “Framework for Peace in the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 19, Egypt: 5/80. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room. 2 Sent May 18. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870047- 2414) 3 See Document 327. 4 See Documents 354 and 356–359.
