Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —On bilateral issues the Secretary is understood to be handling security assistance levels directly, and T, H and DOD need to be consulted on the advisability of releasing figures on individual countries ahead of the Congressional presentation. Subject to H’s views, selective consultations with key Congressmen are probably an essential ingredient depending on the nature of the President’s final decision. The Harkin amendment problems are urgent but need careful consideration by E and the interested bureaus before we decide on Congressional moves. —H has already recommended that the Secretary see the human rights advocates on the Hill before he leaves on his trip.4 We also have some ideas on how you could help as well. Long-term Strategy —The “guidelines” paper on criteria for implementation of current legislation5 is being reviewed now and should be made available to you and the Secretary for decision now—not in the longer term—just as soon as it can be finally processed. —Bureau strategy papers strike us as being something that should be incorporated in the longer range policy study. Indeed the excellent draft outline of the proposed long-term policy study6 includes such sections, and in other new country and regional PRM’s (Korea and ARA, e.g.) human rights sections are already in preparation. —I doubt if either the President or the Secretary should make a full scale speech on human rights until the policy paper is completed and approved. They are doing fine now with short interpolations of principle and objective, without getting into much more difficult and sensitive details. —Certainly work is needed on new legislation, but this too must await the development of basic follow on policy decisions. Finally, there are a number of other points which need to be considered in our view—generally those contained in my earlier January 21 memorandum to you7 on possible initiatives. We also need to get reports from other bureaus, particularly H, PM, EB and the geographic bureaus. 4 Jenkins made a formal recommendation to Vance on February 10; see Document 13.
