3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
93
hand not knowing what the left hand was doing. He did not know
whether he had expressed his thoughts clearly, but it should be clear
that the United States and the Soviet Union should combine their ef-
forts. If that were done, other nations would join in, and that would
benefit the general cause of world peace and the peoples of our coun-
tries. Gromyko hoped the Secretary would not think that the Soviet
Union was pursuing some sort of advantage or political capital in this.
He thought that a solution that would benefit all would be facilitated
by developing cooperation between our two countries, provided, of
course, that the United States was interested and willing. The Soviets
would even be prepared to consider the question of concluding sepa-
rate agreements banning the development and manufacture of radio-
logical weapons, taking into account the interest in this question which
was displayed by the US side. Repeated contacts on this matter had al-
ready taken place. It had also been discussed in the UN General As-
sembly. This was a major question, one that had significance not only
for today, but also for the future.
The Secretary said he would respond briefly by saying that we had
found on the basis of experience that for arms control agreements to be
effective, they had to be precisely defined and capable of verification.
Quite frankly, we had problems with the Soviet proposal because of its
broad and general nature. It would be difficult to deal with. However,
we continued to be interested in banning specific weapons categories,
such as the radiological weapons Gromyko had mentioned.
Gromyko said that when the US was ready to engage in specific dis-
cussion of this concrete issue, it should inform the Soviets accordingly.
As for the Soviet draft treaty which appeared to the Secretary to be gen-
eral in nature, in the context of exchanges of views already held at the
level of experts, some specific information was developed. He would
suggest that the Secretary take a look at these materials. Soviet experts
had named some very specific weapons categories. He would ask the
Secretary to signal him when the specialists were ready to exchange
views.
PEACEFUL NUCLEAR EXPLOSIONS
The Secretary agreed. He wanted to say before we got too far away
from the issues of non-proliferation and CTB, that agreement on a com-
prehensive test ban without an exception for peaceful nuclear explo-
sions would do much to stop proliferation and discourage others from
following India’s example. He feared that if an exception were per-
mitted for PNE, we would soon find other threshold countries.
Gromyko said the new treaty would require careful discussion and
drafting but, completely to preclude PNE—could that really be done?
Smirnov said the time would someday come when Americans, too,
would realize the benefits of PNE for national economic purposes.
