786  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Paragraph 36 (page 28) a new paragraph which would apply world-­
wide a policy contained in the current Latin America paper (NSC 5902/1), 
deals with maintaining contact with selected non-­Communist opposition 
elements. I believe that we should add “through appropriate channels”.
Paragraph 37 (page 28) seeks to spell out more clearly our general 
attitude toward newly-­emerging nations.
The third sentence is new, and grows out of our delays in the 
Guinea case. It reads:
(Read third sentence of paragraph 37)
The fourth sentence is new, and applies world-­wide a policy idea con­
tained in the Horn of Africa paper (NSC 5903). The sentence here reads:
(Read fourth sentence of paragraph 37)
Paragraph 38 (page 29) is new. The first sentence is agreed. Then 
we had a split which has since been resolved. At the end of the last 
sentence of this paragraph, which sentence outlines the factors to be 
taken into account when the United States is determining an indepen­
dent course, Defense proposes to add: “recognizing, however, that the 
United States should not allow the attitudes and emotions of the mother 
country unduly to influence actions essential to attaining or preserving 
U.S. objectives in emerging or newly independent countries.”
(Call on: SECRETARY McELROY
SECRETARY HERTER)
Par 39 (p. 31) is old 34, broadened at the suggestion of OCB to 
include, in subparagraph b, U.S. action against non-Communist ele­
ments hostile to U.S. interests. State, Defense and JCS want to keep sub­
pargraph a as it was in the old paper. Treasury would change the last 
clause, as indicated in the second bracket.
(Call on Under Secretary Scribner
Secretary Herter
Secretary McElroy
Admiral Burke)
Par 41 (p. 32) is new. It recognizes foreign labor’s importance in 
opposing Communist efforts to control foreign trade unions.
Par 42 (p. 32) is an agreed paragraph on our foreign economic policy 
except for the last sentence in b. Budget and Treasury would like to keep 
this sentence, which was the second sentence in old 29–­a. Several of the 
consultants and most of the PB questioned this sentence. One argument 
against it was that there is no functional relationship between economic 
development assistance on the one hand and other economic assistance 
and military assistance on the other. Another argument against it was 
that it simply doesn’t happen. Mr. Randall supports the majority.
(Call on Mr. Stans
Under Secretary Scribner
others)
