404
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
standings and declarations which the Administration believes are nec-
essary to make the treaties consonant with U.S. law.
Perhaps the most controversial of the recommended reservations
pertains to Article 4 of the American Convention. This Article deals
with the right to life generally, including both abortion and capital pun-
ishment. Many of its provisions are not in accord with United States
law and policy, or deal with matters in which the law is unsettled. For
example, on Right to Life, Article 4 states: “Every person has the right
to have his life respected. This right shall be protected by law and, in
general, from the moment of conception. No one shall be arbitrarily de-
prived of his life.” There are also several provisions relating to the
death penalty. Consequently, a flat but straightforward reservation is
recommended to the Senate, as follows: “United States adherence to
Article 4 is subject to the Constitution and other law of the United
States.”
In the case of the UN treaties, several reservations are included to
protect possible infringements of the rights of free speech. For example,
the Convention on Racial Discrimination restricts the dissemination of
ideas which promote or incite racial discrimination. A simple reserva-
tion is recommended: “. . . nothing in this Convention shall be deemed
to require or to authorize legislation or other action by the United States
which would restrict the right of free speech protected by the Constitu-
tion, laws, and practice of the United States.” Finally, there is language
in the Covenant on Economic and Social Rights which extreme right
wing groups in the U.S. assert could be interpreted to interfere with the
private ownership of property. While this is a far-fetched argument,
language is recommended which would avoid any such interpretation:
“The United States understands that under the Covenant everyone has
the right to own property alone as well as in association with others,
and that no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property.” In short,
every effort has been made to keep the reservations simple, specific and
consistent with accepted principles of international law.
Bob Lipshutz has reviewed the letter of transmittal as well as
State’s detailed reports, and recommends that you sign the letter of
transmittal. Frank Moore also supports this recommendation. Jim
Fallows cleared the text of the transmittal.
Recommendation:
That you sign both copies of the letter of transmittal at Tab A.2
2 There is no indication as to whether the President approved or disapproved this
recommendation; however, the letter of transmittal to the Senate, attached at Tab A, con-
tains the President’s handwritten signature. For the final version of the February 23 letter
to the Senate, see Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Volume 14, February 27,
1978, pp. 395–96. The White House sent all four treaties to the Senate for ratification on
February 23. (Department of State Bulletin, April 1978, p. 48)
