First Responses hereafter? Vance meekly argued that we don’t have to decide these things as a whole; we can decide the Shah’s disposition and then later do something different in connection to Tehran. ZB responded that he was quite prepared to move the Shah as part of a strategy to get our Embassy personnel back and then retaliate, but only as part of an overall strategy decided in advance. Vance and Brown argued that an overall strategy is not essential because we can take the decisions a step at a time. ZB repeated his lecture, adding that this would be a historical first for the United States as abject capitulation, not a first he cared to participate in creating: backing down before foreign mobs, sullying the dignity of US values and power. He explained that if he were a relative of one of the hostages, he would naturally be grieved about their fate and want a concession made for them. But in the position of responsibility for recommending a decision to the President, he could not let those feelings prevail. We in the SCC must look at the larger American interest and the significance for the fate of Americans and our allies elsewhere. From that viewpoint, Vance and Brown were making no sense at all. Again, he agreed to consider a plan of deception, using the Shah to get our people back, but only as a tactical ruse, not as an ignominious act of surrender. Brown waffled, agreeing with ZB but also arguing that we should not take an overall strategic decision. Rather, take each in light of the current situation. ZB confronted him, “You can’t have it both ways, Harold; you must decide whether you will surrender the Shah to the mob or not. If not, you must accept my points.” Brown leaned, sheepishly, toward agreeing with ZB but tried to leave a loop hole for later escape. Vance’s “lawyer” Weltanschaung, dump the Shah now if expedient, was repeated. Civiletti was the only other person to speak up. He supported ZB fully. Strangely, General Jones remained silent and poker faced. One could only take away a feeling of disgust. Brown’s squeamish smiles and Vance’s naturally dull face revealed, in this exchange, a shocking lack of character and moral courage. A sniveling spinelessness informed their performance. One can only wonder if they are worthy of the power with which they are entrusted. I confess to a deep sense of satisfaction in watching ZB confront them so directly and candidly with the political and moral implications of their positions.
