702 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 As Brzezinski later recalled, during the briefing Carter emphasized that he would not interfere with operational decisions and would give the military maximum leeway within the approved plans. Carter emphasized that every effort had to be made to avoid “wanton killings.” He and Brzezinski also agreed to increase the number of helicopters planned for the mission from seven to eight, but held the number there rather than compromise surprise and secrecy with a larger armada. (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pages 495–497) According to Jordan’s account of the meeting, the closest Carter came to direct operational orders was over the discussion of possible loss of life. Jordan quoted Carter: “I think it is important to keep your mission simple. It will be easy and tempting for your men to become engaged in gunfire with others and to try to settle some scores for our nation. That will interfere with your objective of getting our people out safely. In the eyes of the world, it is important that the scope of this mission be seen as simply removing our people. If innocent people are killed, the Iranians will make a great public spectacle of it and will say we murdered women and children.” (Jordan, Crisis, page 254) In his account of this meeting, Carter wrote that he was particularly impressed with mission commanders Vaught, Gast, and Beckwith. He gave them his complete confidence including the promise of non-interference in the mission. Carter noted also that the helicopters and transport planes were already in position, and, for the first time, they had eyewitness information on the location of the hostages. (Carter, Keeping Faith, pages 507–509) The next day, April 17, Carter wrote the following diary entry: “Vance has been extremely despondent lately, and I called Warren Christopher in this morning to talk to him about what should be done. He advised me to meet with Cy late in the afternoon to add some personal concern to help resolve the problem.” Carter further wrote that he had spoken with Vance who for “the third or fourth time” had “indicated that he might resign.” Carter then wrote that “after he [Vance] goes through a phase of uncertainty and disapproval, then he joins in with adequate support for me. He said he would stay on, but afterward would reserve the right to say that he disagreed with some of the policies on Iran.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, page 511) Carter and Vance met from 5:30 until 6:40 p.m. (Carter Library, President’s Daily Diary) Brzezinski recounted that a small group, which he chaired, began holding daily meetings to fine-tune the rescue mission. He noted that they had stepped up “efforts to deceive the Iranians by initiating a new round of negotiations while pressing publicly for all Americans to leave Iran.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pages 495–497)
