Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI C. Approach Three: Selected Limits to Control the Scope of ASAT Activity (S) This approach would attempt to strike a balance between conflicting philosophies. It would prohibit types of systems which do not yet exist, such as high-altitude interceptors, laser weapons in space, and advanced concepts such as orbital interceptors with multiple warheads. However, it would not attempt to turn back the clock; low altitude interceptors and ground-based lasers would be permitted; it would permit explicitly the existing low-altitude Soviet ASAT systems and low altitude systems for the U.S. (S) Approach Three would also include “rules of the road” and a [less than 1 line not declassified] Fundamentally, however, it would be an attempt to limit the scope of ASAT activities. It might include qualitative or numerical limits on low-altitude ASAT systems as well as the ban on high-altitude interceptors and exotic weapons in space. Pros and Cons for Approach Three Pros Cons —Would place a cap on the —Could lower the threshold for competition and preclude some use of low altitude ASATs by not of the most worrisome explicitly prohibiting them. possibilities (i.e., high altitude interceptors, lasers in space). —[4 lines not declassified] —Would permit the U.S. to —It would allow arms attack low altitude Soviet competition in low altitude satellites [1½ lines not declassified] ASAT systems. —Would avoid some of the —Could lead to complacency, [less than 1 line not declassified] failure to institute survivability most risky aspects of the means and increased comprehensive proposvulnerability. als by permitting some ASATs. —May not be negotiable since most high-altitude satellites are —Would decrease the likelihood American. of physical attacks on U.S. satellites most critical to crisis —Creating a partial sanctuary stability (e.g., warning and for high altitude systems may communication satellites in encourage the redesign and/or high-altitude orbits). replacement of some low altitude systems to become high altitude —May be more negotiable than systems. Approach 4 since it would not
