118 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement had reservations as to the wisdom of this way of going about future missile development. After a brief discussion, the President indicated agreement with the proposal for GAM–77, as a penetration aid for the B–52. The President then asked what the NRRO proposal is, and why it is assigned to Naval Research. Mr. Quarles said that it is the radio tele­ scope project, and that Naval Research has the best experience for this. The President spoke strongly that we have not freed our minds from existing systems and organizations. We continually find ourselves pris­ oners of free-­wheeling activities that have been going on for a number of years in each of the Services. Mr. McElroy said he thought that the NRRO should be an ARPA project, and the President strongly agreed. The President said he would not like to see large sums of money being expended for intelligence activities by a multitude of services and agen­ cies. Ideally, the function should be in the CIA. Practically, we should put such activities more and more into ARPA. He asked that this be put into ARPA. Dr. Killian pointed out the tie-­in between this project and some of the NASA activities, and the President confirmed that there should be coordination as the project develops. The President again said that we are prisoners of custom, and of particular past history in which we have had all of these separate research activities. Mr. McElroy said the activity would be placed under the proposed Under Secretary for Research and Engineering in the new scheme of organization. Mr. Stans recommended that the proposal be put into the budget process, for review and screening. He said he wanted to point out where we seem to be going. The budget has already gotten to the level of $41 billion for FY 59, and $42 billion plus if these accelerations are included. There is a built-­in expansion of a very large magnitude, since these proposals are still in the research and development stage. Mr. McElroy said that we could not hold to $38 billion with the world in its present state. The President pointed out that the civilian and mil­ itary chiefs in Defense have a very heavy responsibility, and that he is tending to lose confidence in some of their recommendations when they come in with proposals for $6 billion to $10 billion augmentations. The President then recalled that the $400 billion shown for POLARIS is going to give us just two submarines. While he did not challenge this proposal, he did feel that this simply confirmed that aircraft carriers have run their course. Mr. McElroy said that he has been very much concerned on this subject. A wide variety of delivery systems seems to be emerging. He now has the Joint Chiefs of Staff studying what would be the best “mix” of delivery systems. The President indicated he supported the continuation of the B–52 production line as recommended.
