Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 75 world that increasingly requires collective responses to basic human problems, and my hope is that our countries can cooperate more closely in order to promote development, better nutrition, and a more meaningful life for the less fortunate portions of mankind. I look forward to meeting you and to discussing with you both our differences as well as our common interests. Meanwhile I propose that we both do all that we can to further the progress of improving US- Soviet relations. I have asked Secretary Vance to prepare to meet with you, if you wish, in the spring to review the progress being made, to discuss key issues which are outstanding. At that time we will want to exchange views on a subsequent meeting between you and me. Any specific suggestions you may wish to communicate to me on these or any other issues will be welcomed and carefully studied. With best personal regards. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter 18. Editorial Note On January 27, 1977, the Department of State issued a statement, in response to a question posed at a January 26 news briefing, concerning the Soviet Union’s treatment of Nobel Prize winning scientist Andrey Sakharov. The statement warned that any “attempts by Soviet authorities to intimidate Mr. Sakharov will not silence legitimate criticism in the Soviet Union and will conflict with accepted international standards in the field of human rights.” (Department of State Bulletin, February 21, 1977, page 138) During a January 31 news conference held at the Department of State, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance discussed the Carter administration’s response to human rights concerns, specifically Sakharov’s case: “Q. Jim Anderson, UPI. Mr. Secretary, on the question of international civil rights, is this Administration going to continue the practice of speaking out on cases such as the Sakharov episode? Or are you going to continue the practice of your predecessor, exerting quiet diplomatic pressure and using his concept of linkage? “Secretary Vance: On the issue of human rights, the President has often expressed his deep concern in this area and has reaffirmed that deep concern in the inauguration address.
