International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
973
help the developing countries meet the basic human needs of their
people. Since I have asked Peter to finish this work by the end of Sep-
tember, I would appreciate your helping him in every way possible.
After I receive his report I will meet with you and discuss your recom-
mendations about the proper course of action to take.
Jimmy Carter
294.
Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to His Assistant (Fill)1
Washington, August 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Health Policy Review
The commitment to address global human needs has become a
fundamental theme of the Carter Foreign Policy. International Health is
a key element in that policy. In part, because the United States has ex-
ceptional technical capability and expertise in this area to offer the rest
of the world, but also because even among the range of issues relating
to human needs, health is the area that is the least controversial and the
most free from broader political concerns. Our study should be aimed
at determining how the resources of the federal government and of the
United States in general could be mobilized most effectively to make
this aspect of the President’s foreign policy a reality.
Specifically, our goal should be to (1) inventory the resources of
the federal government in the international health area, (2) to look for a
mechanism to integrate international health concerns into the foreign
policy making process, (3) to coordinate the resources of the federal
government in such a way that we maximize our effectiveness and
minimize duplication and overlap, (4) to establish a broad blueprint as
to what the role of the United States should be in the world in carrying
its share of the total effort to alleviate suffering through a coordinated
global health strategy, (5) to carefully examine various new initiatives
which we might be able to start that would highlight the concern that
the President has in this area and also be a major new contribution on
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues—
Peter Bourne Files, Subject Files, Box 34, International Health, 8/1/77–8/31/77. No clas-
sification marking.
