1106
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ago the United States was plagued by massive outbreaks of typhoid,
cholera, dysentery, and other waterborne diseases. With the develop-
ment of improved treatment techniques for sewage and drinking water
supplies, including drinking water disinfection, epidemics have been
eliminated.
In a 1974 law, Congress required that public water systems supply
safe drinking water.4 Each of the fifty States had to adopt new drinking
water standards at least as strict as national standards and had to con-
duct adequate monitoring and enforcement programs. To help the
States meet their responsibilities, the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) was directed to provide financial and technical assistance.
The United States has recognized the importance of safe drinking
water and sanitation. Through diversified programs, the problems of
water pollution have been studied and solutions to solve these
problems established, but the problems are not completely solved. It is
recognized that more research and interagency coordination are
needed. While much progress concerning water management has been
made in the United States, many problems remain to be solved during
the coming decade.
U.S. Policies and Programs related to Drinking Water Supply and
Sanitation for Developing Countries
At the Mar del Plata Water Conference, it was agreed to “increase
attention to” community water supply and sanitation for the world’s
poor over the decade of the 1980’s. The U.S. has committed itself to sup-
port the principal objective of the Water Decade, which is to provide
safe water and sanitation facilities for all by the year 1990. U.S. partici-
pation will be carried out both multilaterally and bilaterally with devel-
oping country governments.
U.S. participation in the Water Decade will be government-wide,
involving many of the agencies and departments which have responsi-
bility for domestic water policy as well as those principally involved in
international assistance. The International Development Cooperation
Administration (IDCA) will develop policy and coordinate bilateral
assistance programs for the U.S. Government. The principal opera-
tional instrument for bilateral assistance, however, will be the Agency
for International Development (AID).
The Peace Corps also will make a major contribution to the bilat-
eral assistance effort. This agency has long experience working with
water, sanitation and related matters in rural villages and can supply
4 Reference is to the Safe Drinking Water Act (P.L. 93–523), which Ford signed into
law on December 16, 1974.
