1978 461 (4) Begin the design study for a new submarine, conceptually smaller and cheaper than the TRIDENT.11 If this design proves to be successful, consider it for production beginning in the late 80’s, phasing out production of the TRIDENT then. If not, continue production of the TRIDENT. In either case, we will plan to extend the life of the ­POSEIDON submarines to 25 or 30 years (into the 90’s). IV. Bomber/Cruise Missile Modernization The modernization plan for the air-­breathing leg of the TRIAD has three components: (1) Continue development of the first-­generation cruise missile, leading to an IOC in 1982 and deploying on B–52G’s at the rate of 500 per year until 1988. (2) Begin development of the second generation cruise missile. Whether (and when) to phase over production from the first generation to the second generation is covered in a separate appendix. (3) Begin study of a new strategic bomber. Whether (and when) to begin development and production of this bomber is covered in a separate appendix.12 If we decide to pursue the air transportable ICBM basing approach, the aircraft we would develop would also be compatible with the role of cruise missile carrier and would eventually replace the B–52’s in this role (in the 90’s). No additional funding would then be required for this CMC program during the 80’s. Without this new aircraft we might use an adaptation of a commercial aircraft for the cruise missile carrier role—­as we have been discussing to date.13 V. Funding Requirements FY 79 funding requirements for all of these programs are covered in the FY 79 enacted budget plus our supplemental request. FY 80 total funding requirements are mostly covered in our FY 80 APDM budget at the “basic” program level (139.5B$), though the detailed distribution among programs would have to be revised. At the “decremented” (135.4B$ FY 80) program level, the strategic program funding is approximately one-­half billion dollars less than what is needed for FY 1980 and approximately 3–5B$ less in FY 1981–4. Estimated funding requirements in the 80’s are given in Appendix A for two optional plans depending upon the choice of ICBM rebasing. The costs for 11 Carter underlined the word “cheaper” and wrote “ha!” in the right margin. 12 Appendix D was not found attached. According to the list of attachments, it was to be provided separately; it was not found. Carter wrote “??” in the right margin next to this paragraph. 13 Carter underlined the phrase “adaptation of a commercial aircraft.”
