Wang objected, however, and desired the matter referred to a smaller
committee in which suggestion Mr. MacMurray acquiesced. Mr. Oudendijk
suggested a substitute resolution, but it was the sense of the committee that
the matter could be resolved only by the appointment of a small special
committee to compose the differences. Such a committee composed of Mr.
Oudendijk, Mr. Strawn, Mr. Hioki, Sir Ronald Macleay and Dr. Wang, was
appointed and the committee adjourned subject to the call of the chair.
Sub-Committee of Committee II, First Meeting, November 17, 1925.
The Sub-Committee appointed by the Committee on Provisional Measures
at its meeting on November 14, met on November 17 and Dr. Wang
submitted the following declaration for consideration:
“The contracting Powers other than China hereby recognize
China’s right to enjoy Tariff Autonomy; agree to remove the tariff
restrictions which are contained in existing treaties between
themselves respectively and China; and consent to the going into
effect of the Chinese National Tariff Law on January 1st, 1929.
“The Government of the Republic of China declares that likin
shall be abolished simultaneously with the enforcement of the
Chinese National Tariff Law; and further declares that the
abolition of likin shall be effectively carried out by the first day of
the first month of the eighteenth year of the Republic of China
(January 1st, 1929).”
Some discussion followed as to whether the declaration would form a
preamble or an article of a treaty. Before this question was settled, however,
Mr. Hioki brought up the question of a conventional tariff between China
and Japan. He said that while the Japanese Delegation had endeavored
repeatedly to make it plain that Japan was prepared to assist China in
realizing her national aspiration in regard to tariff autonomy, Japan’s
important and special trade relation with China made it imperative to
conclude a conventional tariff, as had been previously stated. Mr. Hioki
asked if the Chinese Delegation was in a position to make a definite
declaration of their readiness to enter into an agreement with Japan in the
matter of a conventional tariff. Citing certain statements made at the First
