356 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 2. However, he has neatly avoided being drawn into any discus­ sion of “agenda” under Item 2. They have divided our purpose this regard and it is difficult to argue with his position which is substan­ tially that either of us can bring up any subject within agenda Item 2 he wishes any time he wishes. We find ourselves on the other side of our usual controversy in this regard when dealing with Communists. 3. Felt it was in our best interest to agree to Saturday meeting. Nei­ ther of us has thus far opposed other’s proposal for date of meeting. While we have tacitly alternated on suggested date for next meeting I had in fact made suggestion at both of last two preceding meetings and he well realized it was past his “turn” at today’s meeting. Also I felt that as I was successful in getting through today’s meeting without use any of additional material Department has authorized under Item 2 I was in relatively good position for Saturday meeting. 4. With respect implementation feel that I was successful today in obtaining full retreat by Wang from his previous implication announce­ ment did not apply imprisoned Americans. Feel I pressed other ques­ tions at today’s meeting give O’Neill excellent basis for formal approach on unanswered questions affecting UK functions and I hope he will promptly follow up. Gowen Note: Mr. Waddell’s office (FE) notified 10/5/55 3:36 p.m. EMB (CWO) 265. Telegram 817 from Geneva1 Geneva, October 5, 1955, 5 p.m. 817. From Johnson. 1. Two of problems I face with respect to next meeting are Wang’s probable refusal be drawn into any discussion implementation and his already expressed refusal be drawn into discussion of an “agenda” under item two. Have managed maintain present line for almost one month with negative results thus far on return additional Americans. Within narrow frame of obtaining return Americans I would be inclined to continue on and harden our present line up to point of threatening 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–555. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.
