942
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
led by the Yugoslavs. But one of the first casualties in the Afghan war
was Cuba. Having survived a record number of votes in its effort to
gain a seat on the United Nations Security Council, Cuba withdrew
from the race immediately after the Soviet invasion.
Nonalignment has been the Yugoslav vehicle for the achievement
of international recognition and status.12 While nonalignment will con-
tinue to be the pillar of Yugoslav foreign policy, the Yugoslav role in
the Nonaligned Movement will almost certainly diminish without the
charismatic presence of Tito, one of the founders of the Movement.
III. ISSUES
A. U.S. Policy Toward Yugoslavia
1. Suggested Points
—Much progress was made in the development of our bilateral
relations during the past three years. President Tito’s tremendous con-
tribution to this mutual undertaking will be sorely missed. The Presi-
dent will particularly miss the correspondence which he and Tito
exchanged on international issues. We intend to redouble our efforts
to further strengthen our relations, and we are confident that these
efforts will be reciprocated by the Yugoslav side;
—The long-standing U.S. policy of support for Yugoslavia’s inde-
pendence, territorial integrity and unity remains unchanged, as does
our understanding and respect for Yugoslavia’s nonaligned position;
—We have been impressed by the calm, confident behavior of the
Yugoslav Government and peoples during the past few months, which
saw not only President Tito’s illness, but also a rise in international
tension caused by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan;
—For our part, we have tried to dampen unhelpful speculation
and rumors about events relating to Yugoslavia. In this we have worked
closely with the Federal Secretariat for Foreign Affairs in Belgrade and
the Yugoslav Embassy in Washington. Ambassador Loncar’s (LOHN
char) experience and skill have helped us greatly;
—We have also been keeping careful watch on anti-Yugoslav ter-
rorist activity within the United States. The President has made it clear
12 In the “Non-Aligned Movement” section of Mondale’s briefing materials, the
Department noted that Tito’s death left no clear succession in NAM for the leadership
of the moderate group of nations, but that Cuba’s “efforts to exploit the NAM Chairman-
ship to radical ends have been rebuffed notably by the strong resistance of NAM moder-
ates” and that although the United States could not work with NAM as an organization
under Cuba’s chairmanship, it would continue to “work closely on specific issues of
mutual concern with individual NAM members, especially with moderates like Yugo-
slavia.” (Ibid.)
