Chapter 5, May–June 1990  799
number specified in the Washington summit joint statement of 
December 1987;
— Rapid reload of ICBM launchers;
— Long-­range nuclear ALCMs equipped with multiple inde-
pendently targetable warheads.
The far-­reaching reductions and other constraints contained in the 
treaty will be accompanied by the most thorough and innovative veri-
fication provisions ever negotiated.
Taken together, the START treaty’s comprehensive verification 
regime will create a degree of transparency in the military sphere which 
would have been unthinkable only a short time ago. It will not only 
provide for effective verification of the obligations of the treaty, but 
will also greatly increase the mutual confidence which is essential for 
a sound strategic relationship. In addition, this verification system can 
provide a model which may be incorporated into future agreements. 
The verification regime under development includes:
— On-­site inspections: for the purpose of ensuring verification of 
compliance with the treaty, each side will, on the basis of reciprocity, 
conduct twelve kinds of on-­site inspections. As well as continuous mon-
itoring of mobile ICBM production facilities, in accordance with agreed 
procedures. Inter alia, each side will conduct short-­notice inspections 
at facilities related to strategic offensive arms, including inspections to 
verify the numbers of reentry vehicles on deployed ballistic missiles, 
inspections to verify elimination of strategic offensive arms and facil-
ities related to them, suspect site inspections, and various exhibitions.
— National technical means of verification: for the purpose of ensur-
ing verification, each side will use national technical means of verifica-
tion at its disposal in a manner consistent with generally recognized 
principles of international law. The treaty will include a series of cooper-
ative measures to enhance the effectiveness of national technical means 
of verification. There will be a ban on interference with such means;
— Ban on denial of telemetric information: the sides agreed to 
make on-­board technical measurements on ICBMs and SLBMs and to 
broadcast all telemetric information obtained from such measurements. 
Except for strictly limited exemptions, there will be a ban on any prac-
tice including the use of encryption, encapsulation or jamming, that 
denies full access to telemetric information;
— Information exchange: before signature of the treaty the sides 
will exchange data on the numbers, locations and technical character-
istics of their strategic offensive arms. These data will be updated on a 
regular basis throughout the lifetime of the treaty;
— A comprehensive agreement on the manner of deployment of 
mobile ICBM launchers and their associated missiles and appropriate
