Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II eral participants pointed out that FMS cuts would have little effect in the countries concerned and, in fact, could prove counterproductive— for example, in Korea. Others expressed concern that cutting FMS would neither satisfy the Congress nor be effective abroad. 7. The NSC representatives asked for options other than cutting FMS to demonstrate our concern for human rights and there was some discussion of juggling PL–480 funds, economic assistance and multilateral initiatives. Representatives from State and the US Mission to the UN urged a serious effort to obtain US ratification of the Genocide Treaty and the International Covenants on Human Rights, as well as repeal or amendment of the Byrd Amendment.6 These, they argued, would be effective, early signals to the Congress that would buy time for study of the problem and US options in a rational way. It was agreed that the PRM would address these and other possible options. Human Rights Policy Toward Communist Versus Non-Communist States 8. The NSC Staff was concerned about the existence of a double standard in US human rights policy between Communist and non- Communist countries—i.e., that we take firm action against non- Communist countries while merely tut-tutting Communist states. The State Department participants asserted that, in fact, there is no pressure from the Congress to have a single approach to both Communist and non-Communist countries and that there is recognition on the Hill of the existence of a double standard. State contended that public pressure or actions against the USSR would doom to failure efforts to promote human rights there. Kempton Jenkins, Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations, added that there is considerable disenchantment in the Congress with the Jackson/Vanik Amendment7 and a desire to find a way out of the problems it has created. (Tuchman noted that the President has made no decision whether to break with the Jackson/Vanik Amendment, although he has decided to go “all-out” on the Byrd Amendment.) The discussion of this aspect of the human rights problem closed on an inconclusive note.
