Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 some of the worst pressure, CIEC showed little prospect of success,12 and the Nairobi UNCTAD meeting had been a debacle.13 • In the United Nations we were largely isolated and ineffective; the attitude of the Administration in the wake of the Moynihan era did little to stem the downward trend of U.S. opinion toward the United Nations. —Various global issues were simply on the back burner. Many believed, both at home and abroad, that the Indian explosion14 proved that the nuclear horse had already left the barn and it was too late to slam the door. In addition, the U.S. was the world’s number one arms merchant and showed no signs of diminishing its aggressive sales effort. Finally, with respect to human rights, the image of the United States abroad was that of a nation primarily concerned with might and money, only involved with human rights when these happened to coincide with other interests. —International economic issues. By year’s end, the cautious optimism of the summer had given way to growing concern about a slowdown in world economic growth. The Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN), launched in 1973, were moving at a snail’s pace despite commitments of the principal trading countries to a more energetic negotiating effort.15 At home, protectionist pressures from sectors impacted by imports were on the rise. Finally, OPEC announced in late December a 5–10% price increase on oil, an action which would adversely affect trade flows and payments balances in 1977.16 World opinion reflected these criticisms and concerns. Here is a brief sampling: —If the Carter Administration gives more consideration to the views and worries of Allies and friendly countries, “it will be worth much more than Kissinger’s ‘Year of Europe’ . . .” (Frankfurter Neue Press, January, 1977) —The “greatest task facing Japan, the U.S. and Europe this year is to establish a new cooperative structure . . .” (Tokyo’s Sankei, January, 1977) —“There has been a feeling among the Allies that if Kissinger’s policy was flawed, it was his emphasis on the Soviet relationship. They have long suspected that he went further than necessary to be friendly
