Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
287
some of the worst pressure, CIEC showed little prospect of success,12
and the Nairobi UNCTAD meeting had been a debacle.13
• In the United Nations we were largely isolated and ineffective; the
attitude of the Administration in the wake of the Moynihan era did
little to stem the downward trend of U.S. opinion toward the United
Nations.
—Various global issues were simply on the back burner. Many be-
lieved, both at home and abroad, that the Indian explosion14 proved
that the nuclear horse had already left the barn and it was too late to
slam the door. In addition, the U.S. was the world’s number one arms
merchant and showed no signs of diminishing its aggressive sales ef-
fort. Finally, with respect to human rights, the image of the United
States abroad was that of a nation primarily concerned with might and
money, only involved with human rights when these happened to
coincide with other interests.
—International economic issues. By year’s end, the cautious opti-
mism of the summer had given way to growing concern about a slow-
down in world economic growth. The Multilateral Trade Negotiations
(MTN), launched in 1973, were moving at a snail’s pace despite com-
mitments of the principal trading countries to a more energetic negoti-
ating effort.15 At home, protectionist pressures from sectors impacted
by imports were on the rise. Finally, OPEC announced in late De-
cember a 5–10% price increase on oil, an action which would adversely
affect trade flows and payments balances in 1977.16
World opinion reflected these criticisms and concerns. Here is a
brief sampling:
—If the Carter Administration gives more consideration to the
views and worries of Allies and friendly countries, “it will be worth much
more than Kissinger’s ‘Year of Europe’ . . .” (Frankfurter Neue Press, Jan-
uary, 1977)
—The “greatest task facing Japan, the U.S. and Europe this year is to
establish a new cooperative structure . . .” (Tokyo’s Sankei, January,
1977)
—“There has been a feeling among the Allies that if Kissinger’s
policy was flawed, it was his emphasis on the Soviet relationship. They
have long suspected that he went further than necessary to be friendly
12 See footnote 8, Document 6.
13 See footnote 7, Document 47.
14 Reference is to the May 1974 Indian nuclear explosion.
15 See footnote 11, Document 29.
16 OPEC announced the price increase at the OPEC Oil Ministers meeting at Doha,
Qatar, December 15–17. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy Crisis,
1974–1980, Document 113.
