1955 429 307. Letter 14 from Johnson to McConaughy1 Letter No. 14 Geneva, October 21, 1955 Dear Walter: I do not know when this letter will reach you but I hope that it may be of some value in contributing to your more long range thinking back there. It is very much in the nature of “thinking aloud” and represents distillation of many “bull sessions” we have had here on the subject. We have now for several meetings discussed primarily renunciation of force. One of the things about which we have been puzzling is why Wang has been so willing to drop his subjects and at least talk around our subject. One theory, which I set forth in my telegram 924 of today, is that they are willing to see the talks kept going either more or less indefinitely or at least through the Foreign Ministers’ Conference and do not desire to take any steps that would tend to bring matters to a head. Another theory we have been discussing since I sent my telegram is that they see in this subject possibility of pressing their undoubted desire for the withdrawal of our forces from the Taiwan area within such a framework, whereas they full well realize that its introduction as a subject by them would have been rejected by us as outside the scope of these talks. This leads me to an attempt to analyze what their thinking may be with respect to our renunciation of force proposal. Despite its surface appearances, I believe the Chinese Communists may well view the pro­ posal as very unequal from their standpoint. They may well feel that it would require them to make substantial political concessions while we are making virtually none. It would not increase the assurances which they now have from us against military attack contained in our treaty with the GRC, our general obligations under the UN Charter and our public statements. At the same time we would continue to maintain in close proximity to them our present heavy preponderance of air and sea power. Also, the Chinese Communists may estimate that such a declara­ tion would carry with it for them the following other disadvantages: a) It would carry with it a tacit acknowledgment of the existence of the GRC far more than any other act they have thus far taken. The PRC is in a much stronger international position than any of the rump Communist governments in other divided countries which for the most part have no status outside the Communist bloc. The tacit recognition 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
