El Salvador  597
sideration to the type of assistance that might best help to solve some 
of the problems faced by the Government of El Salvador. It now pro-
poses that, in lieu of a Military Assistance Program, the United States, 
through the International Cooperation Administration, assist the govern-
ment here in improving the capability of those units and organizations 
charged with public security and with control over the national frontiers. 
It is believed that this assistance can best be accomplished by:
a. Bringing to El Salvador a well qualified consultant to survey, 
within the shortest order or time, the organization, operations and 
equipment of the public security forces and to recommend measures 
for improving their effectiveness.
b. Providing through special assistance funds a modest number 
of light motor vehicles and the necessary communications equipment.
The recommendation contained in paragraph a. above has been 
discussed with General Lopez Ayala, Sub-Secretary of Defense in 
charge of public security, by the USOM Director, who found the General 
warmly in accord. It has also been discussed with Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, Dr. Ortiz Mancia, who on July 15 reported to the Chargé that 
the matter had been discussed with President Lemus. The latter was 
greatly heartened by this show of interest and, in giving his approval, 
expressed his hope that the specialist could arrive and the study be 
completed at the earliest possible date.
Background
As recorded in the referenced communications from this Embassy, 
President Lemus over the course of the past ten months or so has made 
several direct appeals to me for assistance from the United States in 
improving the capability of the internal and public security forces of 
El Salvador. This matter was raised by the President once again during 
the visit here on June 7 of Mr. C. Allan Stewart, Director of the Office of 
Central American and Panamanian Affairs. Taken from a Memorandum 
of Conversation dated June 7, 1960,5 the conversation on this subject 
went as follows:
[Here follows quotation from paragraph 3 of June 7 memorandum 
of conversation.]
A few days following this conversation, President Lemus gave the 
Chargé a memorandum incorporating the requested information. A 
copy of this memorandum and a translation thereof are attached.6 As 
pointed out by the President at the time of handing over the memoran-
dum, one of the greatest current threats to the security of El Salvador 
lies in the open possibilities for infiltration of national borders. This 
5 See Document ES–16.
6 Dated June 8, 1960; not printed.
