International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
503
I am confident that the post-Summit actions which have been
taken, and which will be taken, by the Japanese, German, and Amer-
ican governments will lead to improved world economic prospects.
This will be a difficult and prolonged process, but we have made a
good start. I welcome your letter as evidence of our continuing cooper-
ation in this process.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
to report his concern. (Telegram 14808 from Tokyo, August 17; National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D780335–1005) See also footnote 4, Document 154.
161.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, September 15, 1978
SUBJECT
IMF–IBRD Meeting
I agree with Mike Blumenthal’s recommendation that you speak
for 5–10 minutes to the annual IMF–IBRD meeting.2
If you spoke about your efforts to fight inflation, reduce oil im-
ports, and expand exports, I believe you could make the same favorable
impression on this audience that you did on your Summit colleagues.
Since this audience is made up largely of bankers, who have a lot more
to do with the buying and selling of dollars than your Summit col-
leagues, this should help to strengthen the dollar.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Finance/Dollar: 1978. Confidential. Sent for
information.
2 In a September 15 memorandum to Carter, Blumenthal urged him to reconsider
his decision that Blumenthal deliver a statement on his behalf to the opening session of
the annual joint IMF and World Bank meeting, which was scheduled to be held in Wash-
ington September 25–28. Blumenthal asserted: “Recent developments in the exchange
markets have placed the state of the dollar and the conduct of U.S. economic policy
squarely at the center of world attention. Under these circumstances, your failure to ap-
pear at the meeting may be taken as an indication that you do not place the dollar
problem high on your list of concerns. Your mere absence could, therefore, adversely af-
fect the dollar in the market.” (Ibid.)
