Covert and Overt Operations —Deception. The press, the Iranians, and all other observers— including the Soviets—will not be easily lulled a second time. —Internal Unity of Purpose. Any new attempt must have the kind of dedicated purposefulness which went into the first. Certainly, an operation of this magnitude cannot be planned and run from the White House. Those who will be called upon to risk their lives must have a sense of participation. They must believe in what they are doing, not just be ordered to do it. We learned some important lessons in the first operation. The most important was that the Iranians are as disorganized and vulnerable as we suspected. We can with some confidence deliver men and materiel to points inside Iran with considerable confidence of remaining undetected. We should absorb that fact into our future planning to look at new possibilities. I recommend that a small group be assembled at some location (e.g. [less than 1 line not declassified] a Delta Team facility) for an extensive damage assessment effort. This would involve a total analysis of lessons learned, a complete assessment of assets and capabilities, and a mandate to recommend to the President alternative courses of action. This “total immersion” exercise should include, at a minimum, the key leaders of the team which made the recent attempt, the most capable and hard-nosed planners from the JCS, CIA operatives with on-theground experience and knowledge of overall Agency capabilities, and a few carefully selected individuals with knowledge of the political realities as well as an appreciation of the bureaucratic realities in this town. The group should be given at least a week to put something together. There are a series of specific alternatives which this group could be asked to flesh out: —Gradual infiltration of personnel on the ground in Tehran or vicinity, with a quick strike and evacuation by a few planes at the last minute. —Establishment of a base camp in a tribal area or remote location in preparation for a quick “snatch” and evacuation. —Examination of infiltration overland from Turkey by truck. —A one-shot operation using a C–5 or several large transports with their own transportation (APCs?) operating from a location as near as possible to Tehran. —“Commandeering” transportation from lightly guarded civilian (or even military) locations for initial exfiltration to the evacuation point. —A quick and powerful military strike to be used in the event the situation suddenly deteriorates or hostages are being killed.
