September 1953–December 1954
801
could be the first target and consideration might be given to the neces-
sity of suppression for some time to come on the same principle that a
broken leg is placed in a cast to prevent harmful movement until the
fracture has been healthily rejoined. The notion that communism feeds
on suppression may be accepted to be communist inspired. The docu-
ments of communist parties abound in revealing their fears of firm po-
lice action and above all of illegality.”4
The Judiciary
There is a law promulgated by Reza Shah which makes the advo-
cacy of communism a criminal offense. This law is still in force and
could easily be made into a spearhead of an anti-communist program.5
Arrangements could be made to have the law interpreted so as to
render culpable “front” groups, as well as the underground communist
party itself. If in prosecution the law is found to be weak, corrections
could be made—if necessary even through legislation.
In countries under the shadow of the Soviet Union, tolerance of a
communist party can be suicidal. It is elementary that communist
parties or communist controlled parties be prohibited by law. Unfortu-
nately this fact has been understood in the United States only during
recent years. When governments of the countries of Eastern Europe be-
fore the second World War tried to save themselves by outlawing com-
munist parties, they were almost unanimously condemned by the
United States public press as “fascist.” Similarly after the war, public
sentiment in the United States appeared to favor tolerance of commu-
nist parties in Eastern Europe, China, etc. Fortunately the western
world is becoming enlightened in this respect. For this reason an anti-
communist law, properly worded, is essential. Consideration might be
given to the possibility of passing a new law rather than dependence on
the present one. A new law might contain certain provisions which
would make it more effective than existing legislation and, more im-
portant, it should not include provisions relating to agitation against
the monarchial form of government, etc. These provisions could re-
main in existing legislation.
Security Measures
A centralized agency should be formed to deal solely and exclu-
sively with this problem. As it is now there are several agencies dealing
with it, at times at cross purposes—the G–2, the Shah’s office, the police
4 Embassy Despatch 132, August 31, 1953, entitled “Estimate of Tudeh Party Nu-
merical Strength”, pp. 5–6. [Footnote is in the original. Despatch 132 from Tehran is in
National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/8–3153.]
5 Text of law attached. [Footnote is in the original. Not printed.]
