366 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I great and on so many issues, the practitioners of foreign policy today require communications and political skills which yesterday were less critical. This may be an overlooked reason for the growing role of the White House in foreign affairs. It is not a power grab away from the State Department but an effort to provide “technical assistance.” A Vision for a Complex World We live in an age of “all-at-once-ness”—in time and place. Good or bad news that used to take days or even months to travel now bombard our nervous systems incessantly and simultaneously. There is no recovery time in our body politic; no time for recuperation and regeneration; no time to absorb and reflect on what has occurred and how we reacted before new, unanticipated events propel us to divert attention from one crisis to another. The pace, the crazy rhythm of events, magnified by their immediate impact, deprive us all of even the luxury of pause and reflection. When, we might ask, have the contemporary George Kennans got time for thoughtful meditation to fuse a profound understanding of history with a professional ability at prediction? There is one feature of the international system from which we can derive both hope and concern. It is what one might almost call the homeostasis of world diplomacy. Homeostasis, in case you have forgotten, is the almost miraculous self-adjusting property of a system to maintain its stability by a coordinated response of its parts to any stimuli that tend to disturb it. In simple words, our international system may have become so complex, so interrelated, and so unfathomable that its very complexity seems to keep it out of harm’s way and leaves in total confusion and ignorance not only those who attempt to reform it but, fortunately, those too who would try to do it in. On the other hand, the system is hardly without defects, and its plastic character make it difficult to undertake reform. Precisely because the enterprise is so difficult, only a collective effort can succeed—which means a more vigorous and engaged diplomacy. In this effort, words remain the sharpest tool of attack and, when in trouble, the last line of defense. But American diplomats have no monopoly on the definition of words; and the impact of words is so much greater and more unpredictable in our age of participatory diplomacy. We are all vulnerable to the dictionary guerrillas who do not necessarily battle for the clarity of thought. Rather, they twist and bend the meaning of terms to fit and serve their self-serving interpretation, their particular cause. Hence, the struggle in debate here, in international conferences abroad, and in negotiations about such terms as “human rights,” “basic human needs,” “the new international economic order,” and a host of other currently
