International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 133. Memorandum From the Head of the Delegation to the Multilateral Trade Negotiations (McDonald) to the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss)1 Geneva, June 2, 1978 SUBJECT Assuring U.S. Trade Success and Tokyo Round Approval In looking ahead to the task of obtaining approval for the Tokyo Round results, we should begin thinking how these fit into an overall U.S. trade program that could significantly expand our political and public base of support. In my view, this means complementing the Tokyo Round results, which are predominantly “offensive” toward trade liberalization, with a comprehensive and aggressive “defensive package” aimed at assuring increasingly fair trade now and for the future. Such a program would call for a major reorientation and reinforcement of U.S. trade practices which should have wide appeal even to many interest groups opposing the liberalization moves. Thus, with such an enlarged effort we could shift focus appropriately from the more distasteful liberalizing moves to encompass a broader constituency who must favor a reinforcing and upgrading of the system and the U.S. role in assuring fair trade. For example, this approach might well elicit the support of Senators like Heinz and Danforth, who consider U.S. present practices as too weak and ineffective, as well as those key industries who need a long-term, aggressive U.S. posture to preserve and build their positions in international trade (e.g., chemicals,2 electrical machinery, capital goods producers). The remainder of this memorandum lays out some initial ideas for the defensive elements in such a program, leaving aside for the moment the offensive aspects of trade policy (e.g., tariff reductions, freer flow of agricultural products, lowering of trade barriers, opening or expanding accesses to markets). Obviously, these ideas need a lot of elaboration and refinement but we must begin that process shortly if we are 1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Assistant to the President and
