1980  821
and Washington, D.C., 192 circuits. The initial implementation plan 
uses the DOD developed CY–104 systems which bulk encrypts in 24 
channel increments. Contract awards on the procurements are planned 
to begin the second quarter of 1980. Since September 1979, GSA has 
been using 19 of 24 bulk protected voice channels of the DOD satellite 
system between Hawaii and California. In addition to the protection, 
this sharing reduces costs for the circuits by approximately sixty thou-
sand dollars a year. With the cooperation of various international carri-
ers GSA moved 12 circuits normally routed over unprotected satellites 
between Hawaii and Puerto Rico to the U.S. Mainland to less vulnera-
ble cable routes. (C)
—BRIEFING PROGRAM—Telecommunications carriers and gov-
ernment contractors were to be briefed on the nature of the threat. The 
National Security Agency has thus far briefed a total of 33 Defense con-
tractors on the domestic intercept threat—­sixteen briefings were done 
in 1979 with additional ones planned for the January–March 1980 time 
frame. The NTIA conducted a series of unclassified briefings with 12 of 
the major common carriers. (C)
—SOVIET TARGETING OF U.S. CITIZENS—The 1979 Threat 
Assessment contained no evidence to suggest that private citizens have 
become targets. (S)
—REAL ESTATE ACQUISITION BY COMMUNIST COUN-
TRIES—The Real Property Committee, an interagency group chaired 
by State was established by PD–24 to review and if necessary deny 
Soviet and communist bloc property acquisitions that present a seri-
ous potential threat to U.S. telecommunications security. The commit-
tee met seven times; initially in February with Ambassador Leonard of 
the USUN to ensure that he was fully cognizant of the technical and 
political background concerning the Soviet interests in New York prop-
erty acquisitions. On the advice of the FBI and NSA, the Committee 
interposed no objection to a possible Bulgarian purchase of property 
for a chancery at the International Center on Connecticut Avenue and 
Van Ness Street. Since 1973 the State Department had been encourag-
ing the PRC to acquire properties in the open marketplace without a 
requirement for prior Department approval. On May 10 the Committee 
discussed a building which the FBI had learned that the PRC planned 
to acquire, and considered again the question of requiring the PRC to 
obtain State Department approval before buying.8 The Committee con-
cluded that it was insufficiently instructed to make decisions on either 
the specific building in question or on its future role in the broader ques-
tion of bringing PRC property acquisitions under U.S. control. Based on 
this circumstance the PRC Embassy in Washington was advised that 
8 No minutes of the meeting were found.
