Chapter 7, January–May 1991 1009 accept on the big three if it wants START. If we can’t or won’t, then there won’t be a START treaty, at least not any time soon. Rick’s idea, of course, is to put maximum pressure on us to say “yes” by confronting us (and ultimately the President) with the stark choice. Rick’s hope and objective is to get Baker to carry his water directly to the President, making the case that if we fail to pay the price now, a START treaty will slip beyond our grasp for a long time, perhaps forever. You also can plan to read about it in the press. If I read Rick correctly, the price of START may be high, particularly on downloading/new types. In particular, stand by for a proposal (which ironically parallels the JCS approach) to allow downloading of up to 2000 RVs (including the SS–N–18). Even if that is the proposal and it is bargainable, in the end we are likely to face the question of how much downloading we are prepared to allow (1500 RVs? 1000 RVs?) to get START now. Nothing says that you and the other elephants have to say “yes” to whatever deal Rick brings back to Washington. More to the point, sending us to Geneva is unlikely to affect whether Rick gets on the plane in the midst of the Obukov meetings to come back here for his last hurrah. Baker is probably the key. If he believes that now is not the time to try to wrap up START, because of the price, because of CFE, because of the state of US-Soviet relations, because of the increasingly complicated situation in the Gulf, etc., then Rick rides off into the sunset and we persevere on START. If Baker believes and tries to persuade the President that now is the time to seize the opportunity on START, then the President gets to make a tough call by choosing among a set of bad alternatives. We are drafting a memo from you to the President bringing him up to date on the big three issues. You can use it to review the broader political issues with him, and/or with Baker. —Arnie3 3 Printed from a copy bearing Kanter’s typed signature.
