146 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I eral approach toward Europe and the European Community, noting that some of Carter’s predecessors “seemed to fear that a united Europe” might rise as a competitor to the United States and impact U.S. economic and political interests. Pierre asked if Carter held similar views. Carter responded: “No. I think within 100 hours of my becoming President, the Vice President had begun consultations with the leaders of many nations in Europe. I have already met with Prime Minister Callaghan, with the leaders of Portugal, with the European Community, NATO. I will meet with the other leaders within the next 2 weeks. And this will likely be the only trip I shall take outside our country this year. I have no other plans at this time. “I think all these items describe my deep concern about good relationships with Europe. I see no way that we can have a successful resolution of East-West problems without the full comprehension, understanding, participation with our allies and friends in Europe. “We have, in addition to that, demonstrated, I think, in my own budget proposals to the Congress, an increasing emphasis on military capability within NATO. And I intend to stay over after the conference with the heads of state, to meet with the NATO leaders as well. “The people of our country, regardless of who happens to be President, have a natural sense that our historical ties and our future are intimately related with the European countries. “The other part of your question is that I strongly favor, perhaps more than my predecessors, a close interrelationship among the nations of Europe, the European Community, in particular. “We have a legitimate reticence about trying to interfere, but I will do everything within the bounds of propriety to strengthen those natural ties—economically, politically, militarily—that do exist now among the countries of Europe and to strengthen them in the future. And when the nations involved consider it appropriate, I would certainly welcome the absorption within the European Community of Portugal and Spain. “So, I think that already I have both come to realize and also have begun to act on the premise of a strong Europe as essential to our own good future and have recognized the importance of the bilateral relationships with the nations involved.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pages 776–777) The full text of the interview transcript is ibid., pages 775–783.
