Arms Control and Disarmament 1319 United States postpone our present Pacific tests while we were working together to see if we could reach a nuclear agreement. This postpone­ ment would, of course, be limited to a reasonable period—it could not be expected to last indefinitely. 8. A nuclear agreement between the nuclear powers would be of vast importance in the world and would greatly lessen existing world tensions. In addition, it would make further meeting between us on other world problems much easier to accomplish. As a matter of fact, our diplomatic representatives could begin to discuss preparation for such a meeting at the same time. I see no reason why they could not go ahead in this field with discussions which we have already urged be started this month. Meanwhile we could also go ahead with the Nuclear Conference I have proposed. 310. Record of Telephone Conversation Between Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles1 April 8, 1958, 10:48 a.m. The Sec. said one of the questions he may get at his press confer­ ence was would we be willing to have technical studies about inspection required for a suspension of testing without also having technical studies of the cut-­off supervision? The President said this was not an easy one. The Pres. said we had tried hopefully to put something in our reply. The Sec. read this portion from the letter to Khrushchev. The Pres. said the Sec. could say we would be quite ready to participate in any study—that is technically to find out what can be done. This would bring about a closer understanding and better knowledge. The Pres. said to say we are always ready to study the technical thing. The Sec. said he would try to duck it a little. If we started supervision and control in any field, that is a step forward. The Pres. said that was what he was trying to say. The President mentioned they might jump him on the word “appreciable”. He said it doesn’t mean “material” but “unnoticeable”. They discussed the definition of the word. The Pres. said he could not let McElroy go to NATO because of the hearings the Pres. had coming up. If Kilday would agree to a 1 Source: Possible press questions on suspension of nuclear testing. No classification marking. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations.
