March 1952–February 1953
413
28. During 1953 the dispute with the UK will gradually become
less effective as an instrument for rallying popular support behind the
government. As the economic effects of the loss of oil revenues become
more noticeable, the government will be under greater pressure from
large property owners to restore oil income. Tudeh and the more rad-
ical elements in the National Front will increase their demands for so-
cial and economic improvements. In response, the National Front gov-
ernment will probably attempt a more vigorous enforcement of
agrarian and labor legislation. Enforcement will be haphazard and will
require increased use of force. The agrarian program will be bitterly op-
posed by some landlords, and clashes between peasants and landlords
are likely to increase.
29. The illegal Tudeh Party will continue to profit from the gradual
economic deterioration that will take place during 1953 and from the
haphazard enforcement of the government’s program for social and
economic improvements. The party will continue its efforts to weaken
and divide the National Front, will attempt to instigate riots and dis-
orders by peasants and urban workers, and will intensify its propa-
ganda against the US and the Shah. It will probably make some further
progress in infiltrating the National Front and some government
agencies. However, the government has the capability to take effective
repressive action to check mob violence and Tudeh agitation. It has re-
cently outlawed strikes and will probably continue to act against spe-
cific Tudeh challenges to its authority as they arise. We believe that
Tudeh will not be granted legal status during 1953 and that it will not
develop sufficient strength to gain control of the government by parlia-
mentary means or by force. There is serious continuing danger of
Tudeh infiltration of the National Front and the government bureau-
cracy, but we believe that Tudeh will not be able to gain control of the
government by this means during 1953.
30. To maintain itself in power, the government will rely increas-
ingly on the security forces. As stated above, the government can and
probably will avoid substantial reductions in the military budget. Re-
cent changes in the high command are not believed to have signifi-
cantly reduced the morale and effectiveness of the security forces.
These will probably remain loyal to the government and if given ex-
plicit orders will probably be capable of maintaining order except in the
unlikely event of simultaneous nation-wide riots and disturbances. We
do not believe that the Tudeh Party will develop sufficient strength
during 1953 to instigate disturbances beyond the capability of the secu-
rity forces to control.
31. Mossadeq will probably continue to benefit from the inability
of the opposition to unite or exert effective power. In the past, Mos-
sadeq has shown great skill in isolating his opponents and attacking
