640
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
carry out a commercial sale can give offense to a friendly foreign gov-
ernment and may result in a sale of comparable items by some alterna-
tive supplier.
Under the present regulations, a U.S. firm has the option of seeking
our advice before it begins an effort to market its product in a given
country or of proceeding without consultation in the hope that the ex-
pressed desires of the purchasing country will help to secure the re-
quired U.S. approval.
Proposed Controls
The new regulation we are considering would require the Depart-
ment of State’s approval before a proposal, recommendation or presen-
tation is made which is designed to induce a decision to purchase sig-
nificant combat equipment valued at $7 million or more. The regulation
would describe the kinds of activity that would require such approval.
(The items which constitute significant combat equipment are identi-
fied in the present regulations.) A similar prior approval requirement
would be established for proposed agreements to produce, assemble
or maintain significant combat equipment in a foreign country. This
would formalize and make mandatory the informal consultation that
now precedes many, but by no means all, major arms sales promotion
initiatives.
Procedures
A preliminary draft of the proposed regulation was circulated to
the directly affected companies and to industry associations in De-
cember. The text has been substantially revised to take into account the
initial industry reactions. The next step in the rulemaking procedure
would be to publish the revised draft in the Federal Register with an in-
vitation for public comment. The published notice would also an-
nounce a public meeting, following a thirty-day period for written
comments, at which members of the public could express their views
orally to the responsible officials of the Departments of State and
Defense.
In light of the comments received from the public, we could adopt
the regulation, with or without change; we could begin again with a
new text if it appeared substantial revision was required; or we could
abandon the proposal.
A notice of proposed rulemaking has been prepared for publica-
tion in the Federal Register. A copy is attached.2 I favor proceeding
with this proposal because it could provide a valuable tool for the en-
forcement of policies developed to restrain the further proliferation of
2 Attached but not printed.
