National Security Policy 729 expressed himself as in close agreement with Secretary Anderson’s suggestions as to what to do about the problem. There were, however, still other things that might be done, notably, to increase our own U.S. exports. He added that the State Department was working hard on this objective and had experienced a real measure of success as the pub­ lished figures would ultimately show. In support of this point, Secretary Dillon cited examples of agreements by foreign countries to permit an increase in the quotas of U.S. exports to these countries. Thus we were getting rid of some of the examples of discrimination against the dollar and Secretary Dillon believed that the effort should continue to have priority status. Secondly, continued Secretary Dillon, if it was necessary to go still further to solve our problem, we must consider amending our current policy on world-­wide procurement, as Secretary Anderson had said. We should perhaps furnish goods rather than dollars because when we furnish dollars to other countries they often use these dollars to pur­ chase goods in Europe rather than to purchase them from the U.S. Lastly, Secretary Dillon pointed to the problem of U.S. investment in Europe. He believed that some sort of action, other than trade restric­ tions, might have to be taken to cut down U.S. capital investment in industrialized foreign countries, although not in the underdeveloped countries. These several possible remedies all recommended them­ selves to Secretary Dillon as being better than resort to further restric­ tions on the U.S. imports from foreign countries. Secretary Anderson commented that Secretary Dillon’s statements seemed to him to be very fair. Secretary Strauss stated that in the study that is being made, he agreed on the need for an overall policy review and in that respect the Department of Commerce did not hold views at variance with the views of Secretaries Anderson and Dillon. On the other hand, an over­ all review could not ignore separate and individual cases, problems, and situations. For example, a certain industry might actually con­ stitute the sole support and living for an entire U.S. community. One could not ignore either the political or the sociological considerations relating to such communities. They are factors to be weighed in looking at individual instances of appeals for restrictions in the import of spe­ cific commodities. The President then referred to the National Security Amendment designations in the Trade Agreements Act. He was sure that in this con­ nection there was one consideration which, while it could not be accu­ rately weighed, was nevertheless of very great importance. This was the consideration of our national defense and the effect of restrictions under the NSA designations on the vitality of our military alliances. In illustration of his point, the President cited what he described as the
