National Security Policy 397 118. Briefing Note for the 391st NSC Meeting1 Washington, December 16, 1958 PRESENTATION OF MILITARY MOBILIZATION BASE 1. In March, 1957, the Department of Defense presented to the Council a new Military Planning Concept to Govern Planning and Development of the Mobilization Base. 2. That concept was reflected in our 1957 and 1958 Basic National Security Policy statements. The significant new features of this concept were: (1) Meeting the requirements of only those forces which would be mobilized by M-/6 months (instead of M-/36 months). (2) Taking account of the possibility of substantial bomb damage to the U.S. (3) Covering the eventualities of cold war, military conflict short of general war, and general war. (4) Positioning pre-D-Day stocks overseas sufficient to insure rea­ sonable effectiveness of forces there surviving enemy nuclear attack. 3. Defense was then requested to prepare at the earliest prac­ ticable date an outline—­using this now concept—­of the Military Mobilization Base Program, force strcture, and annual costs in order of magnitude. 4. Last May, the PB and the Council received a progress report. The report, however, was more a listing of difficulties encountered and assumptions made in working on the military mobilization base pro­ gram, and did not fulfill Action 1680–­b with respect to “an outline of the military mobilization base program, force structure, and annual costs in order of magnitude”. Neither did it show what OCDM needs for its work: how we stand item-­by-­item with respect to a military mobiliza­ tion plan. 5. In the military status report there was a brief statement of the actions taken by Defense up to June 30 to develop the military mobili­ zation base program, using the new concept. 6. Today we are expecting to hear from Defense about its proposed military mobilization base program. 1 Source: Military mobilization base, July 1, 1961; fallout shelters; Top Secret; Confidential attachment. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File.
