Human Rights —The International Security Assistance and Arms Export Control Act of 19765 states that the US should not provide security assistance “to any country the government of which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights” and that whatever security assistance is provided should “promote and advance human rights and avoid identification” of the United States with governments that deny their people human rights. The Act calls on the Secretary of State to provide “full and complete” reports on the human rights practices in each country receiving security assistance. Checklist for Guidance Judgments about human rights are necessarily difficult. The Department cannot provide one set of definitive guidelines for all cases. We think it necessary, however, that our personnel at least ask the same questions and proceed as consistently as possible on the basis of comparable data and standards. To that end, Department officers—whether preparing reports in the field or making findings in Washington—should proceed with the following sequential checklist of questions: 1. What information is available? Embassy investigative reporting, while essential, is not enough. Department officers should seek out evidence provided by the intelligence community, non-governmental organizations, multilateral organizations and Congressional hearings and weigh carefully the reliability of these varied sources. Such data should provide the basis for answering the questions in the following paragraphs. 2. Are there violations of “internationally recognized” human rights? The prime point of reference for this determination, in the view of the Department and the Congress, is the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The main focus for purposes of both field reporting and Department decision-making should be on crimes against the person as described in Articles III, V, VIII, IX, X, and XI of the Universal Declaration. (See attachment.)6 3. If there are such violations of “internationally recognized human rights,” were those violations “gross” in nature? Present legislation makes clear that primary attention centers on governmentperpetrated or tolerated torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
