Human Rights
3
—The International Security Assistance and Arms Export Control
Act of 19765 states that the US should not provide security assistance
“to any country the government of which engages in a consistent pat-
tern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights”
and that whatever security assistance is provided should “promote and
advance human rights and avoid identification” of the United States
with governments that deny their people human rights. The Act calls
on the Secretary of State to provide “full and complete” reports on the
human rights practices in each country receiving security assistance.
Checklist for Guidance
Judgments about human rights are necessarily difficult. The De-
partment cannot provide one set of definitive guidelines for all cases.
We think it necessary, however, that our personnel at least ask the same
questions and proceed as consistently as possible on the basis of com-
parable data and standards.
To that end, Department officers—whether preparing reports in
the field or making findings in Washington—should proceed with the
following sequential checklist of questions:
1. What information is available? Embassy investigative reporting,
while essential, is not enough. Department officers should seek out evi-
dence provided by the intelligence community, non-governmental or-
ganizations, multilateral organizations and Congressional hearings
and weigh carefully the reliability of these varied sources. Such data
should provide the basis for answering the questions in the following
paragraphs.
2. Are there violations of “internationally recognized” human rights?
The prime point of reference for this determination, in the view of the
Department and the Congress, is the UN Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. The main focus for purposes of both field reporting and
Department decision-making should be on crimes against the person as
described in Articles III, V, VIII, IX, X, and XI of the Universal Declara-
tion. (See attachment.)6
3. If there are such violations of “internationally recognized
human rights,” were those violations “gross” in nature? Present legisla-
tion makes clear that primary attention centers on government-
perpetrated or tolerated torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
5 Signed into law by Ford on June 30, 1976, the International Security Assistance
and Arms Export Control Act (P.L. 94–329; 90 Stat. 729) amended the Foreign Assistance
Act of 1961 (P.L. 87–195; 75 Stat. 424), specified that a principal goal of U.S. foreign policy
was to promote observance of human rights, prohibited the extension of security assist-
ance to nations that violated human rights except under extraordinary circumstances,
and established the position of Coordinator for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs
within the Department of State. (Congress and the Nation, Volume IV, 1973–1976, pp.
874–877) The position of Coordinator for Humanitarian Affairs had been established in
1975. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume E–3, Documents on Global Issues,
1973–1976, Document 250.
6 Not found attached.
