1978  283
Force. But for the moment, the assumption in the CG is that we will 
carry out this important and ambitious program.
Similar reallocations in the Fiscal Guidance have been made for 
two other programs to improve our NATO capability. The first is to 
add 9 new heavy battalions17 over the period FY80–FY82 to increase 
the capability of our active heavy divisions. Armored and mechanized 
strength is particularly important in Europe, and this is a way of adding 
to our real combat power without having to add the overhead involved 
in creating new divisions.
The other change in the Fiscal Guidance is to fund the conversion 
of the 9th Division from infantry to mechanized. This is still a tentative 
program, and we have delayed the start until FY81 to give us time to 
finish a study before we commit ourselves to the conversion. The issue 
is the proper balance between heavy and light divisions, and a major 
factor in that balance is what sorts of forces we need for non-NATO 
contingencies—­the subject of the study. At present, the active force 
(including the Marines) consists of 8 light and 11 heavy divisions. The 
light divisions are preferred for jungle or mountainous terrain, and for 
fighting in cities. They are also more easily transported, but are some-
what less mobile on their own. Arguments for conversion of the 9th 
to a heavy division are that a larger number of heavy divisions would 
help us not only in NATO, but probably also in the Middle East or the 
Persian Gulf area, which are likely areas for heavy armored warfare, 
and in Korea where, even if the terrain is mostly mountainous, the ROK 
forces are likely to need armored or mechanized reinforcement more 
than infantry. However, I will reserve judgment on mechanizing the 
9th Division. If we should decide against it, I will, of course, return the 
funds now set aside for it to the Navy and Air Force.
A major thrust in our NATO planning is our emphasis on early 
combat capability. As the CG says, “Our near-­term objective is to assure 
that NATO could not be overwhelmed in the first few weeks of a blitz-
krieg war, and we will invest and spend our resources preferentially 
to that end. When that assurance is reasonably in hand, we will turn 
our attention to whatever additional capability NATO might need to be 
able to fight for at least as long as the Warsaw Pact”.
That policy has important ramifications. Our emphasis on prepo-
sitioning is one such, but there are many others. We do not plan to buy 
ammunition to sustain our capability to fight in Europe well after our 
NATO allies will have run out.18 Much of our antisubmarine warfare 
17 Carter underlined “add 9 new heavy battalions,” and drew an arrow in the left 
margin pointing to it.
18 Carter underlined “We do not plan,” “ammunition to sustain our capability,” and 
“after our NATO allies will have run out” in this sentence, and drew an arrow in the left 
margin pointing to it.
