1050  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
cooperation at this critical phase in reform and critical passage in our 
process of change is important. (S)
The President: When Primakov and Yavlinskiy return to Moscow, I 
am sure they will communicate the results of their meetings. (S)
President Gorbachev: Yes, George, I very much hope we will cooper-
ate at this very important phase in our reform process. (S)
The President: We will discuss with Primakov not only broad issues, 
but also in particular the credit issue. We are leaning forward and are 
not stepping away from you. We want to strengthen the general rela-
tionship and I do really want to come to Moscow. (S)
President Gorbachev: George, I think we must both be pragmatic 
and practical and take a long-­term view. This is a unique chance which 
we must not miss. If we do, then I think we will miss quite a lot. (S)
The President: I appreciate your meeting with our agricultural team. 
I will be talking with them. Brent Scowcroft has talked to them briefly. 
They have some good ideas you and I could pursue together. (S)
President Gorbachev: They had a good visit and good discussions 
here. They have some facts and material to analyze and certain con-
clusions that were interesting for me to hear. I can see you have sent 
competent and constructive people. Therefore our discussion was 
meaningful. (S)
The President: Well, I am glad they had a good visit with you. You 
know, Mikhail, as far as credits in general, there are some limits. When 
it comes to grain in particular, the Soviets will always be good for it. 
We’ll do whatever is possible to get over the limits. (S)
President Gorbachev: Mr. President, yes I am also hopeful. I am 
pleased to hear what you have just said. You don’t know how happy 
that makes me, especially that last line. (At this point, Gorbachev said 
but his interpreter did not translate: Can I quote you as having said 
that?) (S)
The President: We wish you all well. I hope we meet soon in Moscow 
and have a long discussion because there is a lot to talk about. (S)
President Gorbachev: Yes, I think both of us feel the summit is 
possible and what is most important, is necessary. I would like to wish 
you and your family, especially Barbara, the best. Please tell that to 
Barbara. (U)
The President: Please send my greetings to Raisa and your family. 
We want to support the relationship. We have to talk again soon and 
keep up contacts often. I want to say that here I am not playing games. 
We will do everything we can to support you. (S)
President Gorbachev: I very much appreciate what you have just said 
and I could repeat the same words and say that to you. Goodbye. (U)
