1006  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
You are aware of the harsh Soviet military and conservative criti-
cism of Shevardnadze (and increasingly Gorbachev) for making arms 
control concessions that undermine Soviet security and superpower 
status. That backlash is a major reason for the unacceptable Soviet rein-
terpretation of their CFE obligations you addressed in your recent letter 
to Gorbachev,3 and for their inability to implement the chemical weap-
ons destruction agreement you and Gorbachev signed at last year’s 
Washington summit. That same backlash would account for the com-
plaints the Soviets are now making about the remaining START issues:
—Requirements for information exchange that are needed to ver-
ify START, but that the Soviet military resent and resist.
—Provisions that require the elimination of strategic weapons 
such as submarines and ICBMs that the hard-­pressed Soviet military-­
industrial complex may not be able to replace in the future.
—Provisions that constrain ballistic missiles in ways that make 
already vulnerable Soviet leaders worry about how they will be 
exploited by their internal political opponents.
None of these substantive issues is new. In fact, in many ways 
they are what START is all about: achieving substantial reductions in 
the strategic arsenals of both sides, concentrating reductions on bal-
listic missiles because they are more destabilizing, and ensuring that 
the treaty’s provisions are verifiable. Thus, START would require both 
sides to provide information for verification that each would just as 
soon keep secret, and to destroy weapons that would be expensive or 
impossible to replace. These are the price of enhancing strategic stabil-
ity and international security. Moreover, we have accepted extensive, 
even onerous, constraints on our bombers in an effort to persuade the 
Soviets to accept analogous limits on ballistic missiles.
What has changed is the political line-­up in Moscow, symbolized 
by Shevardnadze’s resignation and the increasingly explicit and harsh 
criticism of policies—­including START—­with which he has been asso-
ciated. Many of those who did not and do not want a START treaty on 
any terms except their own are growing in influence. Many who had 
previously argued for Soviet flexibility in order to reach agreement no 
longer are willing to speak out or are being overruled.
It is possible, but not likely, that last week’s stalemate in Geneva 
will send enough of a shock through the senior Soviet leadership to 
get the Soviets back to meaningful negotiations. Much more likely is a 
3 In telegram 46712 to Moscow, February 13, the Department transmitted the text 
of Bush’s February 9 letter to Gorbachev expressing concern about the Soviet position 
that ground force equipment held by naval infantry, coastal defense, and strategic rocket 
forces were not subject to the limits of the CFE Treaty. (Department of State, Central 
Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, N910001–0531)
