Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX proval for any positions he wants to recommend. He speaks of returning by mid-next week, with Begin if necessary. By contrast, Khalil says that Sadat will only come to a summit to sign an agreement, not to negotiate. My impression thus far is that both sides do want to reach an agreement, and are worried about the regional situation. But each feels that the other side should make [the] most of the remaining concessions. The Egyptians are quite anxious to maintain the appearance of a common position with us, while Dayan is particularly interested in negotiating U.S.-Israeli bilateral agreements on aid and assurances that we might provide in the event the Egyptians do not honor the treaty. This leaves us with a large and difficult agenda ahead and the good feelings of the first day will come under considerable strain if we get down to specific cases. It would be a serious mistake to ease up the pressure on either side at this point, and if there must be a break in the negotiations, it should be as short as possible and should be followed by a summit immediately. We do have a chance to bring these talks to a successful conclusion, but it will be a close thing. Tomorrow we will put forward a good draft on the West Bank- Gaza negotiations and the so-called linkage problem. We have some ideas of possible alternatives to introduce into the negotiations at a later date, but we want to hold back some of these ideas in the first round. 181. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, February 22, 1979 SUBJECT Second Day of Camp David Talks (U) As Dayan and Khalil turned their attention to specific issues in the negotiations today, there was a noticeable backsliding in comparison to yesterday’s relatively positive atmosphere. Dayan stuck to a narrow 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
