Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
107
he shared, was that the test suspension went into effect on the same
date as the treaty as a whole, that is, upon exchange of instruments of
ratification, and expired on a date certain, July 1, 1980. Under this inter-
pretation, the test suspension might last only one or two months, he
said. Williams confirmed this interpretation of the text standing alone
and asked Terekhov what the minority interpretation of the test sus-
pension period was. Terekhov was unable to explain satisfactorily.
4. On “hostile acts” exclusion: Mayorskiy told Bradburn that the
Soviet side feels strongly that a “hostile acts” exclusion is needed be-
cause the Soviet side is concerned with the activities carried out by
states against each other by use of space objects, and not just with the
objects as such. He said it is the actions, not the objects, which need to
be considered in an agreement.
5. Mayorskiy told Bond that if Article 51 of UN Charter were con-
sidered to be exclusive rationale for action against satellites, then the
proposed ASAT agreement was not needed. He said that various cir-
cumstances not involving the right of self defense could be foreseen
where it might be necessary to act against a satellite, such as “when a
satellite was consuming all your oxygen” or when a satellite was flying
“40 KMs above your territory”. Under those circumstances, resort to
peaceful settlement of disputes might well be too late. If phrase “hostile
acts” not acceptable, some other formulation could do, such as an ex-
ception for “gross violation of state sovereignty”, but that it was abso-
lutely necessary to obtain exception for those circumstances not in-
volving an armed attack when action against satellites might be called
for. Mayorskiy said that Soviet position on action against DBS satellites
had been misconstrued, the Soviets had not said that they would de-
stroy unauthorized DBS satellites. He could not imagine this hap-
pening, although it might occur in some unforeseen scenario. But the
Soviet Union did maintain its freedom to take other actions against
DBS satellites, such as blocking its transmissions or moving it to an-
other position without destroying it. Mayorskiy rejected analogies be-
tween Law of the Sea and Law of Outer Space, saying that the two were
different.
6. On scope of coverage: Khlestov told Bradburn that the Soviets
do not agree with the idea of protecting all space objects regardless of
ownership, because the Soviets do not want the protection to be appli-
cable to Chinese space objects.
7. On shuttle: Pisarev spoke with Darbyshire at length about the
shuttle, repeating most of what he had said on subject at SovDel recep-
tion in Bern.3 He additionally stated that he knew of many planned co-
operative space activities involving shuttle but that shuttle never-
3 Not found.
