Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX was more for internationalization. For us this meant internationalization of both the Israeli and the Arab sides of Jerusalem. Jordan has been consistently in favor of Palestinian selfdetermination. Before Camp David we sent President Carter and President Sadat a letter outlining our position.5 We had assurances from Cairo that this was also the Egyptian position and we thought a total solution and a comprehensive settlement was also their goal. Throughout the many months of the past we talked about nothing other than a comprehensive solution, and we argued with others in the area when they said Egypt would go its own way (for a separate peace). Previous to that, we were all working for a unified Arab delegation to Geneva. With the Sadat initiative6 everything changed, but Egypt said they were pursuing a comprehensive settlement even just before they left for Camp David. We very much appreciate U.S. efforts in pursuing a solution to the Middle East problem. And we have carefully read the two documents coming from the Camp David meeting. These documents suggest that they provide a framework for a settlement. We hope this is the case and have many questions. One: Do these documents in fact provide a framework for a comprehensive and final settlement? Two: There is a question of the five-year transition period. In our mind, are Israeli attitudes that prevail in the last eleven years going to continue to prevail during this five-year period? Three: There is the question of the Israeli military presence and the withdrawal to specified locations for security purposes. What specified locations? What security purposes? Four: What are the details of the transition arrangements including the Jordanian role for the maintenance of security. Whose security and in what way? Against what threats? We have already positioned troops along our border with Israel for many years to prevent hostile infiltrations from attacking Israel. How would this new situation differ? Five: During the five-year transition period Palestinians are supposed to participate. In what and from where? What freedoms will they enjoy? What rights will they enjoy and to what degree? Six: Is the West Bank/Gaza formulation supposed to be a total solution to the Palestinian problem? Who are the Palestinians who have the right to join in the negotiations? Seven: There is discussion of a Jordanian/Israeli peace treaty. On what basis? 5 See Document 17.
