764 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement here that unless President recovers quickly Haiti may sink back to politically unstable morass such as followed overturn Magloire. Prospect of Cabinet rule as called for by Constitution in event incapacity President is unpromising, especially if head of Secret Police, irrespective his personal qualities, is locus real power. Knowledge abroad of Barbot’s exercising authority would also contribute to further bad public relations for Haiti which has been a continually adverse factor in trying to normalize relations that country. Presumably Cabinet would have power to appoint Barbot to some official position but this is internal Haitian matter. Your view on this requested. Also, should President die, do you think there would be immediate contest for power not withstanding constitutional provision that head Supreme Court assume Presidency? Request your views urgently regarding personal qualities Nicoleau of leadership and whether he could be expected to hold on to Presidency. In view above, U.S. should try assume effective guiding role at this critical juncture in Haitian affairs. Believe all responsible Haitian should be urged to lay aside personal ambitions and permit orderly constitutional processes to be carried out should this become necessary. They should understand clearly (and you authorized use this line in talking with members of Government and others in your discretion) that ability of United States to continue its programs of assistance to Haiti will repeat will depend on their joining forces to provide orderly and peaceful transition of power if such unfortunately becomes necessary. As you know, Mutual Security legislation is now under active debate in U.S. Congress and before U.S. public. Our programs for Haiti, including special assistance and the Marine Corps Training Mission, have been the subject of repeated informal discussion and review before the Senate Foreign Relations Sub-Committee on Latin America and the House Foreign Affairs Sub-Committee on Latin America. These programs have been presented to the Congress and to the U.S. public as “calculated risks”. It would be regrettable if Haiti were now to show itself incapable of maintaining orderly processes of government. Should political instability ensue, Department’s position in support of above-­mentioned programs would be in grave jeopardy. Murphy
