764  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
here that unless President recovers quickly Haiti may sink back to polit-
ically unstable morass such as followed overturn Magloire. Prospect of 
Cabinet rule as called for by Constitution in event incapacity President 
is unpromising, especially if head of Secret Police, irrespective his per-
sonal qualities, is locus real power. Knowledge abroad of Barbot’s exer-
cising authority would also contribute to further bad public relations 
for Haiti which has been a continually adverse factor in trying to nor-
malize relations that country. Presumably Cabinet would have power 
to appoint Barbot to some official position but this is internal Haitian 
matter. Your view on this requested. Also, should President die, do you 
think there would be immediate contest for power not withstanding 
constitutional provision that head Supreme Court assume Presidency? 
Request your views urgently regarding personal qualities Nicoleau of 
leadership and whether he could be expected to hold on to Presidency.
In view above, U.S. should try assume effective guiding role at this 
critical juncture in Haitian affairs. Believe all responsible Haitian should 
be urged to lay aside personal ambitions and permit orderly constitu-
tional processes to be carried out should this become necessary. They 
should understand clearly (and you authorized use this line in talking 
with members of Government and others in your discretion) that abil-
ity of United States to continue its programs of assistance to Haiti will 
repeat will depend on their joining forces to provide orderly and peace-
ful transition of power if such unfortunately becomes necessary.
As you know, Mutual Security legislation is now under active 
debate in U.S. Congress and before U.S. public. Our programs for Haiti, 
including special assistance and the Marine Corps Training Mission, 
have been the subject of repeated informal discussion and review 
before the Senate Foreign Relations Sub-Committee on Latin America 
and the House Foreign Affairs Sub-Committee on Latin America. These 
programs have been presented to the Congress and to the U.S. pub-
lic as “calculated risks”. It would be regrettable if Haiti were now to 
show itself incapable of maintaining orderly processes of government. 
Should political instability ensue, Department’s position in support of 
above-­mentioned programs would be in grave jeopardy.
Murphy
