1074
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
We believe Mali can be set aside for the present as inconsequential.
Our development aid of $16 million is an integral part of the multi-
country Sahel recovery program. Mali’s pro-Soviet tendencies don’t
seem likely to be contagious in Africa or troublesome in international
organizations. (C)
India has deplored the taking of US hostages in Iran, but the in-
terim government has not been as outspoken and active as we wished
in working for their release. Both that government and candidate
Gandhi have criticized Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan.5
After first being quoted in an Indian newspaper as seeing some merit in
Moscow’s excuses for its action, Mrs. Gandhi made a forthright state-
ment of criticism of Soviet aggression yesterday: “There is no excuse for
Soviet troops to go into Afghanistan . . .” (C)
As you know, India is a unique case: practitioner of a peculiar
brand of non-alignment that sometimes is biased toward Soviet in-
terests (such as in Kampuchea), the central theater in the war on hunger
(along with Bangladesh and Pakistan), and increasingly effective in ag-
ricultural development. (U)
India’s positions on the current crises and its longer-term political
posture do not, in our judgment, warrant a punitive reduction of pres-
ently programmed aid. (S)
That aid consists of a constant program of PL–480 Title-II food
grants for voluntary agency feeding projects and a rising program of
AID development loans, primarily to support food production through
fertilizer imports. (U)
In the reprogramming caused by Congressional cuts in the overall
AID appropriations, our FY 1980 AID program in India has been re-
duced from $135 to $112 million (compared to $90 million in FY 1979).
For FY 1981 if the entire AID appropriation requested were granted,
India would receive $170 million—high in absolute terms but among
the lowest (30 cents) in per capita terms among AID recipients. As in FY
1980, a substantial reduction in this figure will occur in the reprogram-
ming that will follow Congressional cuts. (We can take account of what
India does between now and then in reprogramming, without the dis-
advantages cited below that would attend a change now.) (C)
Our current efforts to build resistance to Soviet-sponsored destabi-
lization of Pakistan would be greatly aided by India’s cooperation,
even if tacit. Conversely, heightened Indian hostility toward Pakistan
could undermine our efforts. India’s sensitivity to the resumption of US
5 Charan Singh was the Indian Prime Minister from July 28, 1979, until January 14,
1980. Indira Gandhi was the Congress Party candidate for Prime Minister in the January
election.
