808  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
million in new research. He mentioned that he received a memo­
randum from General Goodpaster on this subject and was putting 
together his own comments on the individual programs for submis­
sion to the President.
*    *    *
Dr. Kistiakowsky then gave his briefing, which is appended hereto.
The President had the following comments to make with regard to 
this briefing:
a. He approved the idea of a single global military communi­
cations system, as recommended by Dr. Baker. He took note of Dr. 
Kistiakowsky’s statement that close coordination with Dr. York will 
suffice to convince the Secretary of Defense of the necessity to develop 
only one new ambitious system of this type.
b. With regard to ICBM bases, the President agreed with Dr. 
Kistiakowsky that it is possible that our philosophy of high reliabil­
ity of missiles is not right. He felt it would perhaps be better to pro­
duce cheaper missiles and cheaper dispersed and hidden bases with 
a much lower level of reliability than we now demand. Conceivably, 
one group could handle one missile; and each missile could have its 
target predetermined. In this connection, Dr. Kistiakowsky pointed 
out that the inspection conducted by General Betts will probably 
not save much money on the ATLAS and TITAN programs since the 
15 squadrons of these are already programmed for long lead-­time 
items. He feels, however, that his inspection of MINUTEMAN would 
save a lot of gold plating in that vast program. If the MINUTEMAN 
becomes as complicated as the ATLAS and TITAN systems, its value 
is lost.
c. With regard to test talks at Geneva, the President recognized that 
our problems are getting more complex all the time.
d. As a general comment, the President cautioned against a situ­
ation whereby we tend to take the sum total of everybody’s optimum 
requirements and thereby break ourselves. He hopes that the studies on 
targeting which are being conducted will be helpful in this regard. He 
also expressed satisfaction at Dr. Kistiakowsky’s ferreting out of these 
trouble areas.
John S.D. Eisenhower
