First Responses
87
Comment
I do not believe the hostages are in imminent danger of their lives.
A U.S. escalation therefore carries the danger of casualties which could
have been avoided by a more cautious approach. Strategy I could
possibly succeed in getting back many, even most, of the hostages over
time. However, some of the hostages would almost certainly remain
in Iran as “convicted spies” for a long period of time—if only to deter a
U.S. military intervention. We will have to be prepared to live with that.
Strategy II should be adopted soon in some form. We must begin
to make decisions about successors we would be willing to support.
The Soviets will certainly have their candidates, and we cannot afford
to leave it all to chance.
If the chances of getting 75% of the remaining hostages by a rescue
operation are higher than 50%, I strongly recommend Strategy III. I
understand the absolute necessity for compartmentalization, but you
should be aware of the importance at some point of relating any direct
action to a fine-grained awareness of the political and internal develop-
ments. You will be the best judge of whether an independent evaluation
is desirable at some point, but I urge that any such operation not be
left entirely in the hands of the JCS. You know where to find me.
38.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[document number not declassified]
Washington, November 19, 1979
Iranian-US Economic Sanctions:
Impact and Reactions [portion marking not declassified]
Iran’s revolutionary leaders appear determined to continue their
head-on conflict with the United States. The Ayatollah Khomeini and
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81M00919R: Executive Registry Subject Files (1976–1979), Box 14. Top Secret; [handling
restriction not declassified]. A cover page and table of contents are not printed. Three
annexes, titled “Iran: Import Patterns and Vulnerabilities,” “Major Developed Countries:
Responses to US Economic Countermeasures Against Iran,” and “Iran’s Transportation
Network: Capabilities and Vulnerabilities,” are attached but not printed. The CIA pre-
pared a similar December 4 paper [document number not declassified] titled “The Iranian
Crisis: International Economic Fallout,” which Turner sent to Carter, Mondale, Vance,
Brzezinski, Brown, Miller, and Duncan under separate December 5 covering memoranda.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran
December 5–9, 1979)
