1506  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
other things, positive assurances gained through agreed inspection 
procedures that the agreement will be maintained by all parties.
Sincerely yours,
John A. McCone
Chairman
Attachment
Memorandum From AEC General Manager to McCone
Washington, December 5, 1958
SUBJECT
Instructions of the Commission Relative to Test Cessation Issues
1. The following paragraphs summarize my understanding of the 
Commission conclusions reached after a series of Commission and staff 
deliberations. The information within parentheses is to be used only in 
discussions among the principals.
2. Link to Disarmament. The Commission believes that a decision 
as to whether or not the linkage with disarmament progress should 
be dropped is not a matter of Commission responsibility. Rather, this 
is a matter lying within the purview of the State Department. The 
Commission would point out, however, that cessation without a link 
to disarmament would mean the continuation of the armament race 
with an attendant evolutionary development of weapons which could 
not be fully effective without nuclear testing. It would hope that, if the 
link were not expressed in an action article of the treaty, the President’s 
objective in this regard as contained in his announcement of August 22 
would be incorporated in the treaty preamble. The answer to be made 
to the British in regard to this issue is a matter also for State to decide. 
Again, however, the Commission would hope that a way could be 
found to secure support for incorporation in the preamble.
3. The Period of Suspension. An indefinite period of suspension in 
place of the year-­to-­year provision would be satisfactory provided:
(a) Suspension is definitely linked to the detection system, and
(b) Any party to the Treaty can withdraw if the detection system is 
not properly installed and satisfactorily operating in the opinion of the 
complaining party.
Note: The Commission is concerned about engaging in a Treaty in 
a new area of this type without adequate privileges for reconsideration 
should basic conditions change. However, this is in the province of the 
Department of State.
