Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1077
3. Ambassador Smith noted that both Argentine President Videla
and Foreign Minister Montes had informed the President and the Sec-
retary of Argentina’s intention to ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco.3 The
November 21 bilateral communique´ noted this intention as well as the
United States intention to ratify Protocol I of the treaty. During the Sec-
retary’s visit,4 the U.S. had also agreed to assist Argentina in its re-
search reactor exports to Peru by facilitating fuel transfers, and we had
agreed to supply heavy water. Argentina was to move concurrently on
full-scope safeguards. The U.S. had also explained the difficulties in-
volved in the transfer of heavy water technology, which would entail a
deferral of reprocessing. Argentina too had explained the difficulties it
would face in deferring reprocessing, noting that it would be possible
only in the context of regional equilibrium.
4. Ambassador Smith continued that we were surprised when the
Argentine Atomic Energy Commission’s (CNEA) legal adviser, Mar-
tinez, told Congressman Moorehead, in the presence of Foreign Min-
istry Official Matas, that Argentina will not ratify Tlatelolco until the
U.S. commits itself to the transfer of heavy water technology. Martinez’
statements were contrary to what Argentine officials told our Presi-
dent, the Secretary and Deputy Secretary, and contrary to the heart of
the November 21 communique´.
5. Ambassador Aja Espil explained that there are different opin-
ions within the Argentine Government and that the Nationalists op-
pose all compromise, including Tlatelolco. Aja Espil reiterated the in-
tention of both President Videla and the other members of the Junta to
ratify the treaty. As of December, the Ambassador indicated, the For-
eign Ministry was preparing a document on the steps required for Ar-
gentina to complete ratification. Aja Espil again played down Martinez’
views, and said that he (Aja Espil) knew Videla’s views. The Ambas-
sador suggested that we discuss this subject again with Admiral Castro
Madero, who should be visiting Washington on February 17, on his
way back from Canada and enroute to the IAEA Board of Governor’s
meeting in Vienna. Dr. Nye expressed the hope to see Castro here while
Ambassador Smith looked forward to a meeting in Vienna.
6. Dr. Nye again outlined the three stages of our nuclear coopera-
tion. In stage one, both the U.S. and Argentina will work to ratify Pro-
tocol I and the treaty, respectively. Stage two involves the supply of
heavy water and fuel for a second research reactor to be sold to Peru.
The latter will require an amendment of our bilateral agreement for co-
operation. Full-scope safeguards will be necessary. Under stage 3, the
transfer of heavy water production technology might be envisioned
3 See Document 420.
4 See Documents 426 and 427.
