1977  117
Dr. Brzezinski felt that a serious issue in the future is the likeli-
hood of our access to foreign bases. He said this might mean we need 
a larger air transport and naval capability then we have at present. 
Secretary Brown stated that such capability was included in the light 
intervention capability of the PRM–10 report. Dr. Brzezinski proposed 
that these capabilities be explicitly mentioned in the guidance, because 
this is an important issue over the long-­term. Dr. Brown proposed the 
phrase “strategic mobility independent of overseas base support.” This 
language was accepted.
Mr. Gelb asked again whether we wanted to buy extra forces for 
the purposes of local wars. Dr. Brzezinski thought that we did; and he 
proposed that the Second Division might be used for this purpose.
On NATO, Dr. Brzezinski suggested that the group agree on points 
IV B1 and B2.
Secretary Brown raised an issue with regard to paragraph IV B4. 
He pointed out that present planning guidance called for 180 days of 
stock. He felt that such numbers as 90 days or 180 days were meaning-
less unless you also specified the consumption rates. He proposed that 
the first sentence of paragraph 4 be left vague; “in order for the US to 
sustain a worldwide conventional war against the Soviet Union and 
its Allies, the planning guidance will be reviewed following . . .” This 
proposal was accepted.
Discussion then moved to Section V, Further Studies. Secretary 
Brown wondered why all of the further studies must be military stud-
ies, when the PRM–10 report covered political, economic and other 
aspects as well. He felt that the whole section should be eliminated. 
Dr. Brzezinski proposed that the section simply read “further studies 
would be carried out under NSC direction.” Secretary Brown agreed. 
Secretary Brown pointed out that many of the studies would occur in 
any event since the Departments would want to undertake them. Dr. 
Brzezinski said that he took that as a given, but that the NSC may want 
to guide the studies. Secretary Brown felt that the studies should be 
listed in order of priority. He said that his Department was choking 
already on work. Dr. Brzezinski indicated that a working group would 
be convened later to discuss the matter.
In closing the meeting, Dr. Brzezinski stated that he believed it had 
accomplished a great deal.
