Afghanistan 419 be an obstacle;” Pakistan needs to know precisely what America proposes to do to help Pakistan.5 9. I described for him in some detail the tough measures in Soviet- U.S. relations Pres Carter announced 4 January citing them as concrete evidences of seriousness with which USG views Soviet actions in Afghanistan. I described for him meetings which have been taking place in Washington and my expectation that I would shortly have the kind of information he sought. I also told him of our conversations, in Delhi and in Washington, with Indian officials in which we told them flatly we do not accept Indian views on the subject of arms for Pakistan. 10. Zia said he is looking forward to visit to Islamabad of Lord Carrington on 14th and has been encouraged by what he has seen and heard of response from other friendly countries in Europe and Asia.6 I briefed him on Christopher conversations in London and at NATO HQ.7 He also expressed hope that proposed meeting of Islamic Conference would condemn Afghanistan and possibly aid in easing Iran- U.S. dispute. I stressed to him our view—as already expressed to Pak FonAdvisor and FonSec—that Khomeini policy was providing opportunity for Soviets to meddle. Shahi chimed in to say he had made this point to both Gotabzadeh and members of the Revolutionary Council, including Khomeini, but was not sure what effect he had had. 11. Zia reverted to his original point, after a brief discussion of various theories to explain Soviet actions in Afghanistan. He said he hoped to hear from Washington “very soon.” He said he did not wish “to create the impression that we are scared or going down the drain” . . . but there is an urgent need to “know who is standing by us.” We need “clear-cut assurances and an idea specifically what will be provided. If taken literally, President Carter’s statement could mean everything,” he said; “we need to know for sure.” 12. I said I would convey his message immediately to Washington and expressed the hope that my instructions would not be long in coming. 5 In his Oval Office address, January 4, Carter laid out the actions his administration was taking in response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. He pledged: “Along with other countries, we will provide military equipment, food, and other assistance to help Pakistan defend its independence and national security against the seriously increased threat it now faces from the North.” For the text of his address, see Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 21–24. It is also printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. I, Foundations of Foreign Policy, Document 136. 6 The Embassy reviewed Lord Carrington’s visit, January 14–15, in telegram 379 from Islamabad, January 16. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800027–0342) 7 See footnote 2, Document 107.
