322
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ested in having join the treaty (e.g., India, Israel, Pakistan, Argentina,
Brazil). Joining in a CTB that banned PNEs for all parties is probably
the most promising way to head off a second Indian explosion.5
(c) if not limited to nuclear-weapon states, undermine the non-
proliferation benefits of the CTB, create an intractable problem of de-
vising criteria and verification schemes and negotiating them with all
parties involved, and discriminate against parties to the NPT (who
have foresworn such explosions) in favor of non-parties.
Leon Sloss
Acting
5 India conducted its first nuclear explosion on May 18, 1974.
146.
Paper Prepared by the Special Coordination Committee
Working Group on Nuclear Testing1
Washington, undated
[Omitted here are a cover page and table of contents.]
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I. Introduction
PRM–16 of January 25 directed that the Special Coordination Com-
mittee undertake a preliminary review of the major issues involved in
the termination of all nuclear testing.2 Included were to be an analysis
of the problem of verifying a complete prohibition of weapons tests
and peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs), an analysis of the effects of
such a prohibition on the US and Soviet nuclear weapons programs,
and a discussion of the various scenarios which might be utilized in
moving toward this goal, including both moratoria and more perma-
nent types of agreement. A discussion of the pros and cons of moving
ahead with ratification of the Threshold Test Ban (TTBT) and Peaceful
Nuclear Explosion (PNET) Treaties currently before the Senate was
also to be included. The attached report was prepared by an SCC
Working Group in response to PRM–16.
1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–80–0017, Box
63, A–400.112 Test Ban (Jan–July) 1977. Secret. Attached to a February 16 covering memo-
randum from NSC Acting Staff Secretary Michael Hornblow to Mondale, Vance, and
Brown. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 141.
