March 27–December 31, 1979
929
—For Zone B, an Egyptian-Israeli-U.S. joint commission should be
established consisting of one representative of each country. The Amer-
ican member could be from the Embassy staff and should preferably be
a civilian or, if military, should not be in uniform. The joint commission
would be on call to conduct inspections in Zone B at the request of any
party.
—In the buffer zone, Egypt and Israel agreed in general that there
should be observer posts, either with U.S. participation or manned by
the two parties. There would also be a requirement for checkpoints, ei-
ther with U.S. participation or bilateral, at points of entry into the buffer
zone. The U.S. should supervise the Israeli technical installations in the
buffer zone.
13. Egypt made clear that it prefers U.S. participation in all the ar-
rangements. These arrangements would continue during the interim
period until final withdrawal or until a multi-national force is
established.
14. PriMin Begin and President Sadat agreed to meet again but did
not specify a time. President Sadat feels it will not be soon because of
PriMin Begin’s health.
15. Finally, Israel agreed to withdraw from Santa Katerina a few
days before November 19, and President Sadat agreed that tourist visits
there could continue from the time of Israeli withdrawal. End message.
16. Comment: El Baz dictated the foregoing from a sheaf of notes in
Arabic. When he reached his notes on the Sinai supervision arrange-
ments, he found they were not clear, and he and I at that point spoke to
General Ali on the phone to seek clarification. That portion of the oral
message on dealing with this subject was then reconstructed from our
conversation with Ali. It is still not entirely clear how many of the de-
tails of the Sinai arrangements have been agreed with the Israelis and
how many represent Egyptian preferences. For example, in saying that
U.S. supervision of Zone A could be carried out by more frequent aerial
surveillance, General Ali said, “If the Israelis agree.”
17. I reminded both Ali and El Baz that, on instructions, I had in-
formed the Vice President that we were opposed to a U.S. role in po-
licing the Sinai (State 231510).3 They both acknowledged that Mubarak
had told them this but thought the arrangements they were now pro-
posing might not be a problem for us since they did not involve full-
time U.S. involvement in joint patrols on the ground. Of going more
than half way to meet Israeli concerns on bilateral issues, has given up
Egypt’s former strong insistence on a continuing UN role in the Sinai
3 Telegram 231510 to Cairo, September 2. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, P840163–0475)
