178
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
to Dayan’s idea of an ultimate fallback position for Camp David cen-
tered on agreement with regard to the West Bank and Gaza procedures
and prospects. In this connection, he stressed that the difficult language
of general applicability is intended to apply ultimately to peace treaties,
and there are no peace treaties anticipated for the West Bank and Gaza
until the five years have elapsed. He therefore believes it would be sad
to hang up over general language for this area when agreement on the
actual procedures may be within reach.
With regard to joint patrolling with Egyptians and Jordanians,
Dayan said again that he would not rule out joint Egyptian-Israeli pa-
trols on the narrow 3-mile international border between the Gaza Strip
and Sinai. He very strongly rejected any possibility of involvement by
Egyptian police or military with the Gaza police, but would accept Jor-
danian police advisers in Gaza, if needed. He was negative about joint
coastal patrolling of the Gaza Strip, but did not absolutely rule it out.
What came through most clearly was Israeli determination not to have
Egyptian military involvement inside Gaza ever again. Jordanian in-
volvement would be acceptable, and would be consistent with the Is-
raeli desire to join the Gaza to the West Bank for future administrative
purposes.
Dayan talked at some length during our conversation about
Sadat’s recently reported rejection of UN forces along the buffer zone
between Israel and the Sinai. He said that, contrary to what they had
understood about Sadat’s views earlier, they now were told that Egyp-
tian civilians would have to man the air bases at Sharm, Etzion, and
Etam. He said he could not see any way in which this would be accept-
able, while on the other hand a UN force could perhaps operate or
administer all three airports for civilian use, if the US continued unable
[or] unwilling to take over Etam. Etzion, for example, would be a very
useful civilian airport for Eilat, assuming freedom of movement back
and forth across the border between Eilat and Etzion; but this arrange-
ment would only be feasible if it were under UN control and not avail-
able overnight for Egyptian military to re-occupy it, as would be the
case if Egyptian civilians were administering it or the other airports.
The same reasoning ran to the use of the port facilities at Sharm.
(Defense Minister Weizman had made some of the same points to
Secretary Vance on September 113 with regard to the airfields, although
he had stressed the great desirability of retraining Etzion for a much
longer period for Israeli military use. If it had to be given up for mili-
tary purposes, he said it would be vital for Israel to obtain a promise in
the agreement to use the air space over the buffer zone along the fron-
3 See Document 43.
