National Security Policy  1137
why the possibility of an intercept capability raised serious doubts as 
to the feasibility of putting weapons in orbit. However, SAMOS could 
take millions of pictures in one or two passes. Therefore, it was difficult 
to know whether the Russians would consider it economical to knock 
it down. MIDAS, on the other hand, had to remain for a long time in 
the same orbit. It therefore might turn out to be economical to intercept 
MIDAS satellites. However, such intercepts would themselves consti­
tute warning of possible attack.
Mr. Gray observed that when the President had requested this pre­
sentation, he had been concerned about the possibility that space pro­
grams were being undertaken without adequate review. Mr. Gray felt 
that the monitoring of these programs depended upon the mechanism 
which the President had approved, especially upon Dr. York’s office. 
His office provided a means by which ideas could be reviewed before 
they became programs. So long as Dr. York and Dr. Glennan were on 
top of the situation, we would avoid the possibility that a gleam in 
someone’s eye might becomes a program before anyone realized that 
had happened. The President said that he was delighted with the mech­
anism that he been created. Secretary Gates noted in this connection 
that the six or eight committees described by Mr. Rubel took the place 
of eighteen to twenty older coordinating groups. Moreover, this new 
mechanism had adequate authority behind it.
In connection with a brief discussion that followed of planned 
space shots which would occur within the next few days, Secretary 
Gates observed that the miniaturization of equipment which had been 
accomplished in connection with these various programs was one of the 
most astounding technical achievements in the history of mankind. It 
compared favorably with the Russian ability to launch larger payloads.
The National Security Council:
a. Discussed the subject, on the basis of an oral presentation by 
John H. Rubel, Acting Directory, Defense Research and Engineering, 
prepared pursuant to NSC Action No. 2245.
b. Noted the President’s request that the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration present to the National Security Council at an 
early date a report on the outer space programs now being conducted 
under the auspices of NASA, and on the level of effort the United States 
should devote to non-military outer space activities in the future.
NOTE: the action in b above, as approved by the President, subse­
quently transmitted to the Administrator, NASA, for appropriate action.
Robert H. Johnson
