National Security Policy  1135
adequate power supply. Present systems for recharging batteries by 
sunlight did not provide an adequately reliable power source. We also 
did not know enough about the space environment in this connec­
tion. Bombardment by particles in space reduced the life of satellites. 
Another problem derived from the fact that we continue to have to use 
some tubes in these satellites and these have filaments which burn out. 
The large number of parts in a satellite limit its reliability. The failure 
of one part could eliminate the capability of a satellite to accomplish its 
mission. The sequential operation of mechanical elements in the satel­
lites provide opportunities for failure. Finally, we still know relatively 
little about the effects of the space environment on various materials 
involved in the satellites such as plastics.
Secretary Anderson next referred to the statement by Mr. Rubel in 
his presentation that communications are being bounced off the moon. 
He wondered whether we could not use the existing planets as a means 
of relaying communications instead of putting up artificial satellites. In 
response Mr. Rubel said that this was not feasible, partly because we 
did not have receivers of sufficient sensitivity to receive messages over 
such long distances and partly because of the large volume of power 
that was involved in such transmission.
Secretary Anderson next asked whether there was any agree­
ment on a law of space. In the discussion which followed, Dr. Glennan 
pointed out that while many articles have been written and much dis­
cussion of this subject had occurred, there was no definitive statement 
on the matter.
The President noted that Mr. Rubel had stated in his presentation 
that navigational satellites would permit the fixing of the position of a 
ship within a quarter of a mile. He wondered how this compared with 
the accuracy of ordinary celestial navigation. In the discussion which 
followed, Dr. Kistiakowsky said that, while it could be done better, on 
a typical vessel celestial navigation would give a fix of within one to 
two miles of the actual position. He also noted that in bad weather, 
it was impossible use to celestial navigation. The President wondered 
whether the gain in accuracy that was obtained through such naviga­
tional satellites warranted the cost that was involved. Secretary Gates 
expressed the view that the President’s point was well taken—that it 
was easy to spend a lot of money to obtain a ten per cent improve­
ment in accuracy. There was then some discussion of the accuracy of 
inertial navigational systems in the course of which it was pointed out 
by Dr. Kistiakowsky that really precise inertial systems cost millions 
of dollars. The President observed that this cost would not be as great 
as the cost every year of maintaining a navigational satellite system in 
being. Dr. Kistiakowsky agreed that this was true. He stated that he was 
not arguing for or against the TRANSIT system, but it would provide a 
means by which every merchant vessel, without expensive equipment,
