642
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
adopted a course leading to more nuclear energy, and we expect the
most of nuclear energy as an oil alternative. With the U.S., Canada and
France we have developed and are moving forward on technical coop-
eration arrangements. Safety is of cardinal importance. We should be
thorough in insuring safety. We should especially emphasize the posi-
tive need to go ahead with peaceful nuclear energy. Our efforts are be-
hind schedule. We have much catching-up to do on the peaceful pur-
suit of nuclear energy. On nuclear energy, I hope for the further
understanding and support of the other countries here.
GISCARD: The Summit is an Economic Summit. Countries are in-
vited here because of the role they play in solving the economic
problems of the globe. In the past the press has speculated on the utility
of these sorts of meetings and it has become somewhat critical. The
Bonn Summit was useful and the follow-up to Bonn was positive. I am
sure it is the hope of all that the Tokyo Summit will also be useful.
The main economic problem is the energy problem: oil supplies,
and the securing of these supplies in the short, medium and long term.
We must show that we have proposals on these time scales. Europe has
prepared for the Tokyo Summit in the European Community. We have
taken decisions and published a text.4 But our Declaration only makes
sense if it goes hand in hand with decisions of our major partners. We
hope these decisions will emerge in Tokyo. Our meeting will only be
successful if we agree on quantified, specific targets to reduce imports
immediately and lastingly. If not this will be a disappointing meeting.
Also we must address prices on the spot market. Our experts
should draw up recommendations and we should take concrete actions
on the basis of these recommendations.
Regarding alternate sources, the main ones are nuclear energy and
coal. Other alternatives are not yet available. On coal and nuclear en-
ergy, we should express a determination to speed up production. We
are all clearly concerned about safety, but this should not be a priori
condition to further new energy development, because if it is it will
delay energy development.
We should be factual and credible in our statements on LDCs. En-
ergy has hit hard the non-oil LDCs. This is not our responsibility and
was not caused by us. The cost to our economies of the oil problem
means it is more difficult for us to give more aid. We should have no
fine statements but simply say we are prepared to do what is in our
power to do, but that we cannot compensate for the effects of steep
prices.
4 Reference is to the published conclusions of the EC Council meeting in Strasbourg
June 21–22.
