December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
661
dent Carter tomorrow will be one that clearly states the negative Israeli
position without in any way making President Carter appear to be prej-
udiced. He will then reply that he had decided to go to the U.S., de-
parting Tuesday, March 6, and arriving in Washington on the fol-
lowing day.5 Sadat noted that he will go even if uninvited. I assured
him that President Carter would be happy to have him come at any
time.
— (C) In the U.S., Sadat’s theme will be the following: he had as-
sured the Congress and the American public that he will never let them
down. His purpose in coming is not to discuss anything with Begin,
since he has nothing to discuss with the Israeli PriMin. Instead, his pur-
pose will be to hold discussions with President Carter, to whom he had
given major concessions, and to brief the House and the Senate on the
“more dangerous situation” that currently exists in the area following
the Iranian collapse. At a later point in our discussion, Sadat said that
he did not wish to exclude a tripartite summit, but reiterated that he
has nothing to discuss with Begin. He left it entirely up to President
Carter as to whether to ask Begin to remain in the U.S. for a few more
days. He emphasized that Begin should not rpt not be told at today’s
session of his proposed announcement tomorrow or upcoming trip to
U.S. The Arab/Israeli problem, Sadat repeatedly insisted, is merely a
small part of the major area problem, but charged that Begin is unable
to see this.
— (D) He will plan to be frank with the American public. Before
leaving, he will release his letter of November 78 to President Carter (78
Cairo 25990),6 as well as his letter to Begin of November 78 (78 Cairo
26045)7 and Begin’s reply (78 Tel Aviv 18708).8 He hopes that these
letters will show that he has done everything humanly possible to meet
the legitimate Israeli concerns. Sadat commented that, as we knew, he
has long been convinced that there is no hope of concluding a peace
treaty as long as Begin is in office. Begin is not capable of accepting
peace because it is against the Israeli PriMin’s fundamental principles.
He thought President Carter and he should now try to manage situa-
tion so that Begin “either bends or breaks.”
5 Brzezinski recalled in his memoirs that the “decision for Carter to go to the Middle
East was precipitated” by Sadat’s proposal to come to Washington. Brzezinski continued:
“We all felt that Sadat’s initiative was not exactly a constructive one, for its immediate ef-
fect would be to underline the degree to which the Camp David Accords had come un-
stuck.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, p. 281)
6 See Document 145.
7 Telegram 26045 from Cairo, November 30, 1978. (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, P850067–1710; P850067–1779) The text of Sadat’s letter to Begin is
printed as Document 146.
8 See Document 150.
