188 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI — A verification regime based on large Deployment Areas would not require dispersals outside these areas for survivability and thus would not detract from the stability advantages of mobile deployments. — Because of the more difficult verification problems posed by rail mobile systems, we should leave open the possibility for further studies directed at developing other types of limits on rail mobiles. Others note that all of these issues were considered in great detail by the Reagan Administration. They believe the current approach allows for the operational flexibility necessary to ensure survivability in the future while also providing a necessary degree of predictability and force transparency. The Peacekeeper concept requires that the missiles be able to deploy onto the full commercial rail network and blend into the larger commercial train population, forcing the Soviets to barrage the entire network or search the entire network in the hope of employing selective targeting. Arguments in favor of retaining the current U.S. position include: — The U.S. and the Soviets have essentially agreed on the basic elements of the rail-­mobile verification regime which includes no geographic restrictions. Thus, altering the agreed position could entail a negotiating cost, a consideration the President has specifically directed be taken into account. — The current garrison approach requires a strict correlation between missiles and their bases and notification of all routine movements. Some believe this is a strong deterrent to the mixing of legal and illegal systems during exercises. They also believe this segregation makes an illegal force much more vulnerable to discovery. — Notification of movements outside the garrison in the current approach enhances the predictability of normal operations and provides a mechanism to clearly convey national intentions with regard to operational dispersals. — Restricting rail mobiles to Deployment Areas would limit the total mileage of rail lines available and would ease the Soviet search and targeting task. — In the case of a dedicated rail network, such a basing system is fiscally infeasible. — Some believe the Deployment Area concept would degrade day-­ to-­day surveillance of Soviet rail mobiles unless we also propose either strict restrictions on the number and types of trains and support infrastructure allowed in the Deployment Area, or pervasive inspections. — Some believe that because of likely political and operational restrictions on rail mobile Peacekeeper, they will not patrol in peacetime and, thus, the U.S. could not take advantage of the benefits of unrestricted movement within a Deployment Area. Options—Rail Mobile Basing Mode. Three options exist: — Option 1—Retain the existing position allowing rail-­mobile ICBMs to depart the rail garrison for training, maintenance, and testing
