Afghanistan
591
absolute security along its borders. But I am no longer as convinced
as I have been in the past. They may be looking for a way out. (S)
The odds are, also, that initiatives by the Sri Lankans, Indians, etc.,
are not going to get off the ground. None of these countries has a very
good track record for effective diplomatic work. The Indo-Pakistani
rivalry is also a barrier. But neither of these considerations is absolute.
India and the other regional states may just be sufficiently disturbed
that they could put something together. (S)
RECOMMENDATION
Even if the well is probably dry, I think we should put the bucket
down. It won’t cost much, and we could just possibly find something
there. Specifically:
—We should have an intelligence assessment of how much the
Soviets are paying for their action and what the chances are that they
would settle for some sort of alternative outcome. We should evaluate
the Soviet feelers that have been put out.
—We should seriously assess the possibility that the Indians (or
somebody else) might be able to play an effective intermediary role.
And we should develop an idea of what that role might be and how
we should stimulate or otherwise relate to it. (E.g., might the President
urge Mrs. Gandhi to take leadership; if so, what would we be willing
to concede?)
—We should consider what kind of alternate arrangements would
be acceptable to us and staff them out carefully. (E.g., the idea of a
Muslim peace-keeping force has its virtues, but it is not likely to be
attractive to India—which is inevitably going to be a principal actor.) (S)
I suggest that you bring this complex of questions up at the Tuesday
SCC and ask that a working group of State, CIA, NSC and, if necessary,
DOD, be established to come up with answers on an urgent basis.3 (C)
Alternatively, I could draft a tasking memo, but I think it is better
to get the matter discussed in the SCC and launched from there. (C)
I am attaching a cable from Moscow, quoting the Pakistani ambas-
sador, that you should read.4 (S)
3 No record of a February 19 SCC meeting was found. The SCC did meet on February
22. The summary of conclusions of the meeting is in the Carter Library, National Security
Council Institutional Files, Box 109, SCC 277, 2/22/80, Security Framework for the
Persian Gulf. See also Document 214.
4 Attached; printed as Document 210.
