1344 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX public until we have agreement on dates for the meeting. Ambassador Evron agreed, and there was agreement that the two sides would be in touch to set a date. The Secretary said he would like to end the meeting on a light note. Prime Minister Begin had said he was “astonished” by my abstention in the Security Council. Tell the Prime Minister I am never astonished by what he says. On second thought, the Secretary said that it would be better not to do so. 402. Summary of a Telephone Conversation Among the President’s Special Representative for Middle East Peace Negotiations (Linowitz), Vice President Mondale, and President Carter1 Washington, September 3, 1980, 9:25–9:30 a.m. SUBJECT Summary of Telephone Conversation with Ambassador Sol Linowitz in Cairo PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Vice President Walter Mondale Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Personal Representative of the President for Middle East Peace Negotiations Ambassador Linowitz said he had just left President Sadat.2 They had met with the press and had read a statement which made three points (text attached):3 1. Both parties reiterated their commitment to the Camp David process as the only viable path to a comprehensive peace in the Middle East, and they intend to see the process through. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Trips/Visits File, Box 119, 8/29/80–9/5/80 Linowitz Trip to Middle East: 8–9/80. Secret; Sensitive. Carter and Mondale were in the Oval Office; Linowitz was in Cairo. 2 Linowitz met with Sadat in Alexandria on September 3, near the end of his Middle East trip which began on August 29. On the meeting, Linowitz recounted for Carter in a cabled summary that Sadat’s “principal concern was to make certain that he was not being asked to agree to an immediate resumption of the negotiations.” Moreover, Linowitz reported, “it is also clear that Sadat’s desire to be helpful to you was an important factor” in his decision.” (Telegram 5 from USDEL AMVIP, September 4; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 20, Egypt: 9–10/80) 3 The text of the statement is attached but not printed.
