1978 261 actually deployed. Other alternatives such as placing a bigger missile with a larger number of RVs in current Minuteman silos; developing defensive measures for Minuteman; or shifting more of our strategic deterrent to the SLBM and cruise missile forces also need to be thoroughly examined. Nevertheless, there may be growing urgency in reaching a decision on ICBM modernization as a result of recent flight tests by the Soviets of new SS–18 and 19 RVs which appear to have significantly improved accuracy. The degree of improvement in these new systems is uncertain since analysis of data has not been completed; however, it seems clear that Minuteman may be seriously threatened on an earlier timescale than projected in our report. As a result, I plan to reconvene my Panel in the near future to examine Minuteman vulnerability in light of these developments and to consider alternatives for ICBM modernization.4 4 Carter wrote “good” in the right margin next to this sentence. 61. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, May 5, 1978 A number of events this week suggest that public attitudes toward our defense situation, as well as our foreign policy, are changing. It also seems to me that these issues may play a larger part than usual in an off-­ year Congressional election, although I continue to believe that domestic economic issues, particularly inflation, will be the most important. Three votes on the budget resolution in the House on Wednesday2 are worth considering. A proposal to shift $4.8B from Defense to other purposes lost by more than 3 to 1 (313–98). A proposal to add $2.4B to the budget, earmarked for Defense, lost by slightly under 2 to 1 (262– 142). Most significant, Congresswoman Holt’s proposal to cut all the budget except Defense by 2% came within 6 votes of carrying (202–197). 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, ­Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 87, Defense Budget: 1–8/78. Confidential. ­Carter wrote in the upper right corner of the memorandum: “Harold, OK—I agree. J.” ­Brzezinski sent Brown a copy of the memorandum with Carter’s comment under a May 9 covering memorandum. (Ibid.) 2 May 3.
