January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1185
Prime Minister Begin said: “handsome I was not born!” (laughter)
The President said that he understands that the two delegations had
a discussion before the meeting on the Continuing Committee.3 He
asked Ambassador Linowitz if that were correct.
Ambassador Linowitz said: yes sir.
The President asked Minister Burg if he would care to comment on
the meeting.
Minister Burg said he had not been there.
The President called on Ambassador Linowitz.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we had framed this paragraph (see
attachment)4 to codify the sense of the group on the Continuing Com-
mittee. We should read it, and then think about it. (He then read the at-
tached statement).
Minister Kubersky said that this statement raised several questions.
Maybe we should write it in general terms, and give examples. Good
examples are water and economic cooperation; and Ambassador Li-
nowitz agrees. His question is mainly on the last sentence: what will
happen until there is agreement? When the Self-Governing Authority
is elected and established in office, some spheres may not be defined—
according to the original draft: “Pending agreement, existing condi-
tions will continue.” What does “existing conditions” mean? It needs
definition.
The President asked: where?
Minister Kubersky said it was now out (of the draft, where it had
been the final sentence of the original U.S. draft).
Prime Minister Begin asked whether two deletions had been agreed
upon.
Minister Kubersky said yes. But the problem of the (missing) last
sentence is still a problem, along with “source of authority” and re-
sidual powers. Ambassador Linowitz had written: “Pending agree-
ment, existing conditions will continue.” And the Continuing Com-
mittee may change its character. According to Camp David, the
Continuing Committee is for discussions, not operations.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we have not described that it would
“have certain authority.” If there is understanding on the source of au-
thority and residual powers, maybe it would be easier.
The President said that to have a concept, in general terms, is all
right now. He can’t speak for Egypt. The powers to be transferred to the
Self-Governing Authority and retained for Israel are not in (this paper);
3 No memorandum of conversation for this meeting has been found.
4 Not attached and not found.
