December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
707
Prime Minister Begin: You asked us to have confidence in Egypt.
But it is a very bitter pill for us to read these attacks on the Jewish
people. I ask your ambassador to call this to their attention. This is the
atmosphere in the official Egyptian press. Now I am asked in two days
to sign a peace agreement with Egypt. I place this complaint before
you. As we read these passages, we must be careful. Now we will turn
to paragraph 2 of Article 6.
President Carter: Do you have a counterproposal?
Prime Minister Begin: No, sir. We stand by our previous position.
We may think and we may discuss later and will consult. The previous
draft of Article 6–2 was adopted by the U.S. delegation. The Cabinet ap-
proved it. The additional words on the comprehensive peace are not
completely unacceptable. We will consider them. But I have an amend-
ment to make. It should be stated that the treaty between Egypt and Is-
rael is the first step toward a comprehensive peace. It makes it clear that
it is not a condition of the Egyptian-Israel treaty to have a comprehen-
sive peace. We are not talking about a separate peace treaty. I will sug-
gest that we accept these words with this amendment. But the main
problem is the use of the words “not inconsistent”. We stand by “does
not derogate from”. This would mean that the first part would prevail,
not the second, if we accepted the Egyptian change. This is my first re-
sponse. After the break, I’ll consult with my colleagues and we’ll de-
cide on any amendment to your addition to Article 6–2. We have the
same opinion on the language “does not derogate from”. May I hear
your further proposals?
President Carter: Would you consider “does not contradict”?
Prime Minister Begin: It’s the same. Let us consult. Remember the
talks we had in Washington. We’ll break our brains. We stand by “does
not derogate from”.
President Carter: What does “derogate” mean to you?
Prime Minister Begin: We state something in the first part that is
very dangerous for Israel. But then we say it does not derogate from the
terms of the treaty and that brings back the original meaning. So it does
not do any harm to the treaty. It is a wonderful expression, it is strong
and proper.
President Carter: Is there some way of saying the same thing?
Secretary Vance: Let’s turn to the draft7 on the West Bank and Gaza.
President Carter: This deals with the self-governing authority. It is
the result of months of tedious negotiations. This is the best that we can
do.
7 Not found.
