764
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
286.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Vest) and the Assistant Secretary of
State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to
Secretary of State Muskie1
Washington, June 7, 1980
SUBJECT
A Political Solution for Afghanistan: Next Steps
SUMMARY
There are a number of proposals being floated for a political solu-
tion to the Afghan problem. While the Soviets do not seem seriously
interested now, we think it worthwhile to keep alive proposals which
are broadly consistent with our own views. Tactically, we recommend
that in the weeks immediately ahead we focus attention on the Islamic
Conference initiative and encourage the Europeans to do likewise. The
purpose of this memorandum is to obtain your approval for a positive
approach to the Islamic Conference Committee and your guidance
on the posture we should take with our allies as we prepare for the
Venice Summit.
ISSUES FOR DECISION
1. Your approval of the attached cable informing members of the
Islamic Committee other than Ghotbzadeh of the approach contained
in your letter to Gromyko, expressing interest in the Islamic Conference
initiative, and suggesting that you would be prepared to meet with
the Pakistani Foreign Minister if he comes to New York. (The approach
would also be conveyed to the Indians and Chinese.)2
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Records of Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs David Newsom, Lot 81D154, folder 2. Secret; Sensitive. Sent through Christopher.
Drafted by Coon; concurred in by Shulman, Kreisberg, and Barry. A typed notation in
the top right corner of the memorandum reads: “DepSec took action for Secretary. 6/13/
80.” Below that, an unknown hand wrote to Newsom: “DDN—Urgent. See Secretary’s
decision on p. 4.” An unknown hand circled and crossed out both notations.
2 The Islamic Conference Standing Committee (ICSC) was established by a resolu-
tion of the Conference of Islamic Foreign Ministers in May; see footnote 4, Document
270. The cable was not attached, but was found in the National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P870094–0887, as telegram 155761 to Jidda, Islamabad, New Delhi,
and Beijing, June 12. The telegram informed the posts that Department officials had
