811.0141Q/26 [Document 323] The Secretary of State to President Coolidge THE PRESIDENT: I have the honor to invite attention to the anomalous status of Swain’s Island (otherwise known as Quiros, Gente Hermosa, Olosega, or Jennings Island), an isolated atoll in the Pacific Ocean, lying in Latitude 11° 3′ South, Longitude 170° 55′ West, approximately 200 miles east southeast from Apia, Samoa, and to suggest that, if you approve, the case be brought to the attention of Congress with the recommendation that the sovereignty of the United States be extended over the island and that it be placed under the jurisdiction of the government established in American Samoa. The following statement will indicate this Government’s relation to the island for more than half a century: It appears that in 1856, Captain Turnbull, a British subject, the alleged discoverer of Swain’s Island, gave the island to Eli Jennings, who is reported to have always held himself out as an American citizen. Jennings married a native woman of Upolou, Samoa, and resided on the island until his death in 1878, at which time, under his will, the island became the property of his wife, Maria Jennings. The marriage certificate and will of Eli Jennings were recorded in the American Consulate at Apia. By the will of the widow, Maria Jennings, the island became, at her death in 1891, the property of her son, Eli Hutchinson Jennings. In September, 1909, the Resident Commissioner in the Gilbert Islands visited Swain’s Island and collected approximately eighty-five dollars in taxes from Eli Hutchinson Jennings for the British Government. In response to an inquiry from the American Consul at Apia, this Department on November 9, 1910, instructed the Consul that Mr. Jennings should file a diplomatic claim against the British Government for recovery of the amount paid as taxes, but added “From the facts before the Department, it is not clear whether Swain’s Island was ever in fact discovered and occupied with the sanction of the United States and whether the United States has ever actually exercised jurisdiction over the island. In the absence of further evidence on these points, it is an unsettled question whether this Government could well maintain a claim to sovereignty over this island, based on the mere occupation thereof by a private citizen.” However, before the Department’s instruction was received by the Consul, the Assistant High Commissioner of the British Government for the Western Pacific informed the Consul that the British Government considered Swain’s Island to be American territory and that the taxes collected from Mr. Jennings would be returned to him.47 During the summer of 1917 certain natives, former residents of Swain’s Island, appeared before the native court of Western Samoa and filed charges of cruelty against
