into consideration, the plebiscitary activities now under way, including registration, should not be held in abeyance, pursuant to suggestion of the Secretary of State, during the negotiations. As such suspension was not imposed by the offer of good offices and by its acceptance, it is clear that registration should proceed until some definite agreement is reached on the matter. The Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs has met with difficulty in reconciling Chilean public opinion to an immediate suspension of plebiscitary proceedings; but I am hopeful that this problem, which, after all is only incidental to main object with which all of us are concerned, will be solved within a few days to satisfaction of everyone. In meantime, you will please impress upon President Leguía and the Peruvian Minister for Foreign Affairs importance of taking no measures which could aggravate the situation and be of embarrassment to me in my efforts to bring about complete agreement regarding suspension. The direction the Peruvian Government gave to its member of the Commission to agree to suspension was, to that extent, a gratifying compliance with suggestion I made; but I am informed that Mr. Freyre has, in addition, ordered Peruvian members on the registration boards to withdraw and has refused to take part in registration proceedings. I presume that this action was taken on mistaken idea that offer of good offices and the acceptance imposed suspension of registration; in reality, as I have pointed out, a suspension can be effected only by agreement of the parties registered by Commission itself. Until agreement to that end is reached and a suspension can be authoritatively provided for, Peru’s refusal to participate in the registration interjects a new complication, seriousness of which I trust you will be able to obtain President Leguía’s cooperation, and that of Minister for Foreign Affairs, to minimize as far as possible. Latest information from Chile is that I cannot expect a decision in matter before March 31, although Chilean Government has already authorized its Ambassador here to represent it in negotiations, contemplated by exercise of good offices. Peru has not yet definitely taken same step, although I note that she is disposed similarly to designate her Ambassador.
