Chapter 5, May–June 1990  775
Karpov: We are proposing a version to you. It could be a statement 
with some editorial changes. The commitments may remain as formu-
lated in that document.
Bartholomew: How do you do the naval freeze?
Karpov: Of course if the freeze idea is accepted, we can reflect it.
Bartholomew: I’m being very specific.
Karpov: All your ideas do not go beyond your position.
Burt: Let us assume you accept the idea of a freeze we have written 
in. The issue between us then is 250 versus 400.
Karpov: As to 400, we confirm that.
Bartholomew: 400 fits the total size of your force. We don’t want a 
recipe for a build-­up, we want a recipe for an assurance.
Karpov: I am responding to the numbers and language you have 
produced. I can only confirm my statement. I can take something from 
you, your paper, but as to the main contents we stick to the position in 
our letter.
We are proposing additional assurances with regard to a Soviet 
medium bomber which is not a strategic bomber. We have proposed 
a statement by the Soviet side, as a gesture of good will. We reflect in 
the text that this is a medium bomber, not a strategic bomber; we will 
not give it intercontinental capability, including refueling; and we will 
have a phrase about numerical limits. Finally, we would indicate that 
this aircraft is the subject of discussion in Vienna and can be considered 
in negotiations on naval forces.
Bartholomew: If we cannot solve this issue along the lines we pro-
pose, we will be missing an important opportunity and this will have a 
negative impact on this meeting of our leaders.
Bartholomew: Let us continue on the path of trying to be the engine 
for progress, and turn to heavy ICBMs. This too is an issue the US high-
est authorities believe we should settle at this summit. We are going to 
offer you a proposal that would solve all of the heavy ICBM issues. We 
can give you something on flight testing and on phasing of reductions, 
which is still outstanding.
First, we listened carefully to the considerations, particularly Gen. 
Omelitchev’s considerations, you put forward on testing, training, 
and maintaining the Soviet heavy ICBM force. As I understood it, the 
problem is that requirements for testing may vary from year to year. 
From time to time problems come up requiring testing that hasn’t been 
planned for. What we could do to meet this is instead of an agreed 
number of tests each year there could be a limit of 7 tests over each 3 
year period. This gives you both one more test over three years com-
pared to 2 tests per year, and perhaps more important more flexibility.
