Haiti 747 be achieved at some cost in civil liberties; if this is accepted as a realistic working assumption, the objective of the U.S. should be limited to achieving a gradual amelioration of the situation. Our ability to use our influence to this end would be enhanced by the presence of a Marine training mission. The present status of U.S.-Haitian relations calls for a positive gesture on the part of the United States to effect the reverse practice of the Duvalier government to the participation of American citizens in the July 29 attempt and the fact that it was launched from U.S. soil. A few days after that even, President Duvalier sent his Foreign Minister on an urgent mission to Washington to deliver a letter to President Eisenhower requesting U.S. military assistance for Haiti. The arrival of a Marine training mission would be a timely, positive response to this plan for help. Further, this reassurance of our good intentions might render Duvalier more amenable to our influence in bringing about an improved domestic political climate. Conclusions: 1. We may be criticized for “supporting a dictator” if we send a Marine mission to Haiti, but it appears that Duvalier in fact has considerable popular support and the ability to hold power regardless of whether we send the mission. By sending a mission we may be able to influence Duvalier away from dictatorial methods. The Mission might be viewed by U.S.S.R. propagandists as evidence of U.S. intervention in Haiti but this charge can bee offset by the fact that President Duvalier has requested the mission. We should seek prior agreement that Duvalier will take steps to allay the political tension and that no advice or training will be given to the police. 2. The secret police have brought Duvalier into disrepute but they are his chief reliance in keeping power and it would be unrealistic to expect him to abolish them at this time. We should encourage Duvalier to bring the police under control but we should make it clear that we will not become involved in police training. 3. Haiti’s greatest need is a period of political stability and we can contribute to this by using a Marine training mission to influence the Haitian Army constructively. The Haitian army has been the ultimate and practically the only source of stability in the past year and a half although seriously weakened by purges. 4. The present status of our relations with Haiti calls for a positive gesture to offset the adverse reaction of Haitian officials to the participation of Americans in the July 29 attempted coup and the fact that it was launched from U.S. soil.
