National Security Policy  811
negotiated for the cessation of atmospheric and outer space nuclear 
tests, with a complete Geneva monitoring system, except for on-­site 
inspections. There is to be also a joint test program to study seismic 
monitoring, including tests in big holes. Pending the outcome of such 
study, the parties to the treaty retain freedom of weapons development 
by means of underground nuclear tests.
A point to note is that purely theoretical considerations about tests 
in outer space and underground indicate that in both instances evasion 
could be achieved by the use of elaborate and costly procedures. The 
plan which proposes a monitored ban on space tests but postpones a 
ban on underground tests in therefore technically not self-­consistent. 
The plan calls for a billion dollar monitoring organization, which could 
not be technically justified for monitoring atmospheric tests, and which 
provides no complete protection against outer space tests. Moreover, 
it does not prevent weapons development because of uncontrolled 
underground tests.
The proposal to undertake jointly with the Soviets the study of 
seismic monitoring and of means to control evasion involving shots in 
big holes suffers from another technical weakness. It is impossible to 
predict how long the investigation will take. Intuitively it seems proba­
ble that a sort of a race will develop between improved means of detec­
tion and of evasion, and so the operation may drag on for years without 
conclusive results.
One alternative to the State Department plan is to propose cessa­
tion of atmospheric tests, but of no others. Since this measure would 
involve virtually no aspects of arms limitation, and the monitoring of 
atmospheric tests can be done from outside USSR, technical arguments 
for a monitoring organization inside USSR would be weak. We might 
thus lose the advantages of an organization within the USSR and of a 
beginning toward arms limitation measures.
Another alternative might be to continue with negotiations for a 
treaty based on the original Geneva monitoring system, insisting on a 
sufficiently large on-­site inspection quota that an adequate deterrent 
against invasion by underground tests would result, except by the use 
of the big holes.
Judging by the past Soviet reaction, they are not likely to accept a 
hundred or so on-­site inspections, and hence the result of such a move 
might be a suspension of negotiations due to their unwillingness to 
accept reasonably effective monitoring.
However, they might accept. The question as to whether a treaty 
which may then result would safeguard our security, cannot be 
answered on a technical basis, although some technical factors have an 
important bearing on the over-­all conclusion.
