3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1978 385 quite interesting and “spicy.” They would make quite an exhibit, for which a large hall would be required. As for the two individuals they had discussed, much would depend on the turn of events that this case would take. He noted the Secretary’s statement to the effect that after the trial he would be in a position to see what could be done. The Soviet side would therefore wait and see, and then decide what response might be appropriate. The Secretary told Gromyko that we did not want to engage in an intelligence war with the Soviet Union. We were, however, concerned over the case of the two individuals referred to, particularly since they had worked for the U.N. Secretariat. In addition, there was serious concern over the recent case involving our Chancery in Moscow, a case the Secretary had brought to Gromyko’s attention.3 Our investigation of the circumstances there was continuing, and a matter of particular concern to us was the Soviet tunnel which crossed our property for 20 feet or more. This represented a gross intrusion upon the property of our Chancery, and we were continuing to look into that matter. As he had already indicated, he would be in touch with Gromyko about the two individuals after their trial. Gromyko said he would wait and see. As for the incident mentioned by the Secretary, he had already informed him that according to the information Gromyko had received, things appeared in quite a different light. Indeed, what the Secretary had described appeared to distort the facts of the matter. He would ask the Secretary to have someone on the U.S. side take an objective look at these things. After all, neither side was interested in distorting that kind of information. The purposes of the things to which the Secretary had referred were totally different—he would describe them as having a protective nature, among other things aimed at fire prevention. No spying of any kind had been involved there. It would have been primitive indeed in this day and age of electronic equipment to try and dig a tunnel for intelligence purposes. Modern technology simply made such things unnecessary. This was not the immediate post-war period of 1945/47 when the Soviets had discovered a western tunnel on the territory of East Berlin, which had been dug for intelligence purposes. Gromyko concluded this subject on the note of saying he would be in touch with the Secretary and would see what happened. Soviet-American Relations Now Gromyko wanted to ask the Secretary a question that went far beyond the framework of the issues they had just finished discussing. Those issues were minor indeed in terms of their importance, 3 See Document 117.
