3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
385
quite interesting and “spicy.” They would make quite an exhibit, for
which a large hall would be required. As for the two individuals they
had discussed, much would depend on the turn of events that this case
would take. He noted the Secretary’s statement to the effect that after
the trial he would be in a position to see what could be done. The Soviet
side would therefore wait and see, and then decide what response
might be appropriate.
The Secretary told Gromyko that we did not want to engage in an
intelligence war with the Soviet Union. We were, however, concerned
over the case of the two individuals referred to, particularly since they
had worked for the U.N. Secretariat. In addition, there was serious con-
cern over the recent case involving our Chancery in Moscow, a case the
Secretary had brought to Gromyko’s attention.3 Our investigation of
the circumstances there was continuing, and a matter of particular con-
cern to us was the Soviet tunnel which crossed our property for 20 feet
or more. This represented a gross intrusion upon the property of our
Chancery, and we were continuing to look into that matter. As he had
already indicated, he would be in touch with Gromyko about the two
individuals after their trial.
Gromyko said he would wait and see. As for the incident men-
tioned by the Secretary, he had already informed him that according to
the information Gromyko had received, things appeared in quite a dif-
ferent light. Indeed, what the Secretary had described appeared to dis-
tort the facts of the matter. He would ask the Secretary to have someone
on the U.S. side take an objective look at these things. After all, neither
side was interested in distorting that kind of information. The purposes
of the things to which the Secretary had referred were totally dif-
ferent—he would describe them as having a protective nature, among
other things aimed at fire prevention. No spying of any kind had been
involved there. It would have been primitive indeed in this day and age
of electronic equipment to try and dig a tunnel for intelligence pur-
poses. Modern technology simply made such things unnecessary. This
was not the immediate post-war period of 1945/47 when the Soviets
had discovered a western tunnel on the territory of East Berlin, which
had been dug for intelligence purposes. Gromyko concluded this sub-
ject on the note of saying he would be in touch with the Secretary and
would see what happened.
Soviet-American Relations
Now Gromyko wanted to ask the Secretary a question that went
far beyond the framework of the issues they had just finished dis-
cussing. Those issues were minor indeed in terms of their importance,
3 See Document 117.
