Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
303
objectives in the world are very different from ours. It is also important
to recognize, however, that there are specific matters on which our in-
terests are not in conflict—not least, in the avoidance of nuclear war.
In the cause of peace and of our own interest, we have engaged the
Soviet Union on a wide range of concrete matters intended in the first
instance to stabilize the military competition and to regulate the polit-
ical competition. These are our first objectives, because they go to the
heart of the issue of war and peace.
Beyond these objectives, we seek to enlarge areas of common un-
derstanding and common action on a range of international issues, in-
cluding human rights; cooperation on matters affecting the lives of
people everywhere, such as disease, food supply, pollution of the envi-
ronment, and the application of science and technology.
Progress in these fields is uneven and may take a long time, but we
draw patience and a long-term perspective from our realization of how
far we have come from the intense and dangerous cold war spirit that
prevailed only a few decades ago.
The alternative to this active dialogue with the Soviets implies a re-
turn to the tensions and mutual isolation of the cold war. Many of you
and the leadership of this Administration remember what that period
was like. In good conscience, we cannot recommend that we lead the
country back to the troubles and fear of that era.
Middle East
Tomorrow I leave for Jerusalem to assist at an event that we all
would have regarded as impossible just a few short months ago.5 The
Foreign Ministers of Egypt and Israel will sit down together, around a
conference table, to start the detailed negotiation of peace between Is-
rael and the Arab states. After three decades of estrangement and hos-
tility, the process of reconciliation has begun.
I am sure that you, as all Americans and peoples the world over,
have been as moved as I was by the dramatic events of the weeks just
past. President Sadat’s sudden and spectacular visit to Jerusalem cap-
tured the imagination of all of us; it was an act of vision and statesman-
ship.6 The warmth of his reception by Prime Minister Begin and the
people of Israel, surmounting the bitter memories of four wars which
5 Reference is to the opening session of the Egyptian-Israeli Political Committee
January 16–20 in Jerusalem. For documentation on the session and on Vance’s meetings
with Middle East leaders, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute,
January 1977–August 1978, Documents 194–197, 199, 201, and 203–206.
6 Sadat flew to Tel Aviv and then traveled to Jerusalem on November 19, 1977, the
first visit to Israel by an Arab head of state since Israel’s founding in 1948; see ibid., Docu-
ment 152.
