Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
229
77.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 13, 1980
SUBJECT
Expanding Radio Broadcasting
It is exactly six months today since the President approved the recom-
mendations of the 11 December 1979 SCC on expanding broadcasting
to Muslim audiences.
Not much has happened as a result. VOA has expanded some of
its broadcasts but it took the sharp attack in the Post a few weeks
ago to jolt ICA/VOA into facing up to the task of broadcasting to
Afghanistan seriously—and it will still be weeks (or months) before
Dari broadcasts are on the air. I am asking ICA/VOA for a report on
just what has been added since last December—for what they say they
are going to do and what they accomplish often involves a large gap.
The press, as you know, is increasingly focusing on this problem.
With RFE/RL the picture is much worse. Not a penny has been
allocated to expanding Muslim broadcasting staffs and no new trans-
mitters have been leased or otherwise secured. The transmitter-search
effort is still bogged down. If the purpose of Binder’s NYT article was
to cause enough commotion about this subject to stymie progress, it
has been achieved. BIB and OMB have been in league to tie the whole
issue up in bureaucratic haggling while they pursue “relocation”
(which would hardly contribute anything to increasing the radios’
effectiveness). Latest from Munich is that BIB has now ordered the
radios to prepare to relocate all the Baltic services back to the US. This
speaks poorly for Gronouski’s skill as a politician and judge of ethnic
issues—for the Balts are going to be up in arms. I find, in fact, that
Lithuanians already raised this issue in a meeting with Steve and
David2 earlier this week. A fine reward for the Balts in the 40th anniver-
sary year of their takeover by the Soviets—move RL’s Baltic services
back to the US.
I was glad to see R. Evans place the BIB maneuvers against the
radios in the context of detentists trying to maintain their position—
for there is a lot of validity to this accusation. The WSJ raised it too.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special, Box
5, Chron File: 6–7/80. Confidential. Copies were sent to Brement, Larrabee, and Odom.
2 Stephen Larrabee and David Aaron.
