454  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
force, they already have developed (but not deployed) in the mobile 
SS–16 or derivative, a model for a “truck-­mobile” system which 
should be more than adequate. However, we cannot be certain on this 
point. If they did decide to deploy MAPS, they certainly would have 
fewer problems than we relative to land availability and environmen-
tal restrictions, a factor which would ease several types of non-­silo 
basing.6
4. If the Soviet Union deploys MAPS, can we verify?
The Soviet Union is bound by the same SALT provisions as are 
we. Therefore, if the Soviets deploy a MAPS they would have to make 
adequate provisions as to its verifiability through exposure of the pro-
cess of production, assembly and deployment. Otherwise, they would 
be impeding verification by NTM (including satellite reconnaissance) 
by concealment.7 If they followed the example I have described for our 
MAPS, we could verify it with good confidence. [2 lines not declassified] 
The potential problem, of course, is that they might make provisions 
for verification that we would judge less than adequate. In that case, 
we would then have a major argument in the SALT consultative com-
mission. This is a risk of the kind we face with other SALT verification 
questions, including a variety of alternative basing concepts, and have 
been dealing with in the SCC.
5. If the Soviets deployed MAPS, could they use it to “break out” from 
SALT?
The answer is yes, but only if they are able secretly to produce 
and hide more than a thousand ICBMs. A few hundred covert ICBMs 
would not change fundamentally the nature of the threat; in fact, our 
MAPS would be designed initially to accommodate a 2:1 increase in 
Soviet RVs over present levels (achieved either by cheating or by RV 
fractionation), and could be expanded with relatively small cost to 
accommodate a 3:1 increase. Therefore, in order to pose a serious threat 
to our MAPS, their covert production and storage operation must han-
dle more than a thousand ICBMs and their forces in the field must be 
able to support twice as many launchers as the apparent, legal force. 
I believe we would detect such a massive operation. Just as import-
ant, given the nature of intelligence, they could not be confident we 
would not detect it. The Appendix8 describes our problems in counting 
their ICBM production. This is an extremely important requirement. It 
6 In the left margin next to this paragraph, Ermarth wrote: “DoD said the same thing 
about MIRV.”
7 Ermarth drew a vertical line in the right margin next to the first three sentences of 
this paragraph and wrote above it: “inadequate.”
8 Attached but not printed is an undated one-­page paper entitled “Monitoring of 
Soviet Strategic Forces.”
