166 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement President Siles had supported the program had been in vain because of this basic error. Guevara recognized that the Stabilization Program’s “failure” had also been caused by other factors, both internal and external, such as inefficiency of Comibol and the drop in the world metals market. President Siles commented parenthetically that he had received a mildly encouraging note from Foreign Minister Andrade in Washington indicating that some favorable attention was being given to the possibility of purchases of Bolivian tin through Philipp Brothers, Inc., under an agricultural barter agreement with the provision that Bolivia would receive not dollars but pound sterling. It was agreed generally that this would be most beneficial if it could be achieved. Guevara continued that he had some views to express regarding Latin American and Bolivian attitudes toward the U.S. Citing the Nixon incidents in Lima and Caracas, he thought they has been incited by a few communist organizers but declared that they reflected a basic resentment of U.S. policies, which, as in the Bolivian Stabilization Program, has denied U.S. help in promoting economic production in Latin America. He said he was deeply pleased that, in addition to establishing the DLF, the U.S. had “finally” changed its policy in this respect by supporting the creation of an Inter-American development agency. As for the local scene, Guevara declared that during the short period of his return to Bolivia he had been amazed at the number of complaints he had received against the U.S. Aid Program here. He reflected that it was ironic that U.S. programs designed to help Bolivia should be reaping more resentment than appreciation. The Ambassador stated that it was probably as difficult, if not more so to give aid as to receive it. He recalled that the IMF and both governments had held considerable hopes for the Stabilization Program as recently as last June 13, as a result of the decisions the GOB had taken on that date, but the GOB’s apparent inability to carry out those decisions had contributed heavily to the present dollar crisis and had played into the hands of forces hostile to the present Bolivian Government and to the Aid Program. He stated that during the past few months all the dollar resources of Bolivia, including U.S. and IMF contributions, had gone primarily to permit speculation and capital export because of an unrealistic exchange rate. Bolivia’s friends could not be expected to continue to support such a situation. He added that it was not to Bolivia’s interest to maintain a rate so low that dollar resources which should be used for such purposes as the progress of YPFB and the Development Corporation were siphoned off by private speculators and people with no confidence in the country’s future.
