552 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 111. Remarks by President Carter1 Atlanta, Georgia, February 20, 1979 Chairman Milton Jones, Chancellor George Simpson, Dr. Joe Pettit, Mr. Kroll,2 honored guests, fellow Tech students and alumni, ladies and gentlemen: I have always been proud that I attended Georgia Tech, and I’ve always been grateful for what I learned here. I have attended as a full-time student four different colleges in my life. Georgia Tech is by far the most difficult—[laughter]—and a number of years ago I decided that my being elected President was the only way that I would ever have a chance to get a degree from Georgia Tech. [Laughter] This has made it worthwhile. [Laughter] I remember when I first came to Tech, the entire world was at war. Our Nation was under attack on two fronts and was desperately gearing up for a total war effort that we had not known since we fought each other in the 1860’s. In 1942, 1943, it was not yet a time for victories for the United States nor for our allies, and many people feared that Western democracies might be overwhelmed. We now face a very different world from the world in which I came of age. The old empires are gone, and the maps are covered with new and developing nations with names that we had then never heard. But one thing has not changed as much as I had hoped. It’s still a world of danger, a world in which democracy and freedom are still challenged, a world in which peace must be rewon day by day. Too many people still lack the simplest necessities of life, and too many are deprived of the most basic human rights. As the events of recent days 1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, pp. 300–306. All brackets are in the original. The President spoke at a special convocation, which took place at 12:30 p.m. in Alexander Memorial Coliseum at the Georgia Institute of Technology. In his diary entry for February 20, the President commented: “I made a foreign affairs speech at Georgia Tech and got the first honorary degree they’ve ever given. They had to pass a special rule by the Board of Regents that an honorary degree could be given by a college in the university system only to an alumnus of the college who had become president of the United States.” (White House Diary, p. 295) The President had attended Georgia Tech before he received a commission to the U.S. Naval Academy. 2 Reference is to the Chairman of the Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia Milton Jones, Chancellor of the University System George Simpson, Jr., President of the Georgia Institute of Technology Joseph Pettit, and President of the Georgia Institute of Technology National Alumni Association Bernard Kroll.
