Afghanistan a very difficult position vis-a-vis Iran. Iran is a very complicated question. So long as the hostages are held, we cannot have good relations. We need Chinese support on the United Nations sanctions because if there is no vote for sanctions there will be increasing pressure on the United States to take unilateral action against Iran. That could be damaging but necessary. In that event US-Sino relations would be strained. We were grateful for Chinese cooperation in December in the United Nations Security Council and I hope this will continue. We need an affirmative Chinese vote in the UN Security Council. DENG: May I return to Pakistan? I believe it is better if US would enter direct discussions with Pakistan. Chinese policy with regard to aid to Pakistan has been consistent for the past twenty years. Regarding Chinese aid to Afghanistan resistance forces, we are supporting the refugees through Pakistan. Regarding how the US feels about giving aid to resistance forces in Afghanistan, you may wish to discuss this with the Pakistanis. There are perhaps already 400,000 Afghan refugees living in Pakistan. 151. Editorial Note The Soviet intervention in Afghanistan created a new urgency in the Carter administration to finalize a military and economic assistance program for Pakistan. This required a balancing act to satisfy several interrelated objectives of U.S. foreign policy in the region: enhance Pakistan’s defense capabilities in the event that the insurgency in Afghanistan spilled into Pakistan; bolster Pakistan’s economic capacity to manage the swelling Afghan refugee population in Pakistan as a result of the fighting; find a workaround to the Symington Amendment’s prohibition on military aid to Pakistan so long as it continued its nuclear enrichment program; and finally, provide military assistance in a way that did not further aggravate tensions with India. A series of memoranda, culminating in a memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, to President Carter, January 8, 1980, put the final touches on the assistance package. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
