Afghanistan
439
a very difficult position vis-a-vis Iran. Iran is a very complicated ques-
tion. So long as the hostages are held, we cannot have good relations.
We need Chinese support on the United Nations sanctions because if
there is no vote for sanctions there will be increasing pressure on
the United States to take unilateral action against Iran. That could be
damaging but necessary. In that event US-Sino relations would be
strained. We were grateful for Chinese cooperation in December in the
United Nations Security Council and I hope this will continue. We
need an affirmative Chinese vote in the UN Security Council.
DENG: May I return to Pakistan? I believe it is better if US would
enter direct discussions with Pakistan. Chinese policy with regard to
aid to Pakistan has been consistent for the past twenty years. Regarding
Chinese aid to Afghanistan resistance forces, we are supporting the
refugees through Pakistan. Regarding how the US feels about giving
aid to resistance forces in Afghanistan, you may wish to discuss this
with the Pakistanis. There are perhaps already 400,000 Afghan refugees
living in Pakistan.
151.
Editorial Note
The Soviet intervention in Afghanistan created a new urgency in
the Carter administration to finalize a military and economic assistance
program for Pakistan. This required a balancing act to satisfy several
interrelated objectives of U.S. foreign policy in the region: enhance
Pakistan’s defense capabilities in the event that the insurgency in
Afghanistan spilled into Pakistan; bolster Pakistan’s economic capacity
to manage the swelling Afghan refugee population in Pakistan as a
result of the fighting; find a workaround to the Symington Amend-
ment’s prohibition on military aid to Pakistan so long as it continued
its nuclear enrichment program; and finally, provide military assistance
in a way that did not further aggravate tensions with India. A series
of memoranda, culminating in a memorandum from the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, to Presi-
dent Carter, January 8, 1980, put the final touches on the assistance
package. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Office File, Meetings File, Box 78, Sensitive X: 1/80; scheduled for
publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia)
In the memorandum, Brzezinski noted to Carter that, with the
upcoming visit of Agha Shahi, “we need your guidance on a range of
issues so we speak with one voice.” He listed three items for Carter’s
