270
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Fourth, while our policies must be global in their concept, their im-
plementation must be specific to each situation. Policies must be tai-
lored to take into account the great diversities that exist among the de-
veloping countries.
For the economically stronger countries, the most appropriate
areas of cooperation are trade and access to private capital and tech-
nology. Most of Latin America is now in this position. While aid still
plays an important role in the region, its prosperity depends primarily
upon the continuing evolution of an open international financial and
trading system in which developing countries can participate ever
more fully.
For the poorer nations, including most African countries, official
development assistance—foreign aid—remains the vital source of ex-
ternal capital. Africa will benefit from the intention of the World
Bank—and of our own Agency for International Development—to
focus concessional assistance on the nations most in need.
Fifth, we accept the diverse models of economic and political de-
velopment that the less developed countries (LDC’s) have chosen to
benefit their peoples. But we also believe that certain human rights
have universal application. Human rights include not just the basic
rights of due process, together with political freedoms, but also the
right of each human being to a just share of the fruits of one’s country’s
production.
Sixth, we recognize that the economic and social issues we all
face—such as protecting the environment and the oceans—are global
problems from which Communist countries are not immune and to
which they can and should make a positive contribution. Conse-
quently, it will be our policy to encourage a constructive role by the
centrally planned economies—to increase their development assistance
generally and to join us and developing countries in a global develop-
ment effort.
Basic North-South Issues
These six principles only have meaning, of course, in terms of the
specific issues we face: liberalizing trade, insuring adequate balance-
of-payments financing, improving our foreign assistance performance
and reorienting its focus in the direction of poor people, stabilizing
commodity price fluctuations, and facilitating the flow of investment
and technology on terms fair to companies and governments. Under-
lying many of these issues, however, are at least three basic tensions.
1. We frequently face difficult choices between our short-term and
our longer term interests.
2. We sometimes confront a tension between what we consider to
be sound economic policy and, at the same time, our desire to maintain
