822
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
299.
Paper Prepared by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near
Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders)1
New York, undated
SAUNDERS TALKS WITH DAOUDI AND WALDHEIM
I spent two hours Thursday morning with Daoudi, Waldheim, and
Don McHenry and then another hour alone with Waldheim.2 Waldheim
is seriously considering submitting to the Security Council a report
from Daoudi to him on Daoudi’s recent mission in Tehran,3 and he
would appreciate our views on the pros and cons of doing this.
In the course of our long discussion with Daoudi on his mission,
he made the following points:
—Ghotbzadeh in talking with Waldheim in Belgrade had appar-
ently agreed to Daoudi’s coming in hopes that announcement of that
mission would head off European sanctions. When it did not, he was
less than enthusiastic about the mission.
—The departure of the UN Commission from Tehran at the end
of March has left a certain bitterness with Iranian officials. Both Bani-
Sadr and Ghotbzadeh have developed a mythology about the Commis-
sion’s last day there which adds up to the belief that the situation
would have been markedly better if the Commission had stayed.
—Ghotbzadeh’s main strength derives from his influence with
Khomeini, who likes him, supports him, and sees in him the image of
his lost son. Ghotbzadeh’s attitude is influenced by two factors, the
international attitudes to which he is exposed in situations ranging
from the Kreisky visit to the Islamic Conference and the Imam’s change
of attitude on the hostages.
—On this last point, Bani-Sadr and Tabatabai both say they sense
a change in the attitude of the Imam. His position has now moved
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 33, Iran Update 6/80. Secret; Sensitive.
2 June 19. McHenry’s account of the meeting with Daoudi in New York is in telegram
2443 from USUN, June 20. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under
Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Iran NODIS
Cables June 1980)
3 Daoudi was in Tehran May 25–June 16. Waldheim called Muskie on June 16 to
report on Daoudi’s mission to Tehran. (Memorandum of conversation, June 16; Depart-
ment of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, UN and Security Council) Lang’s account
of Daoudi’s mission is in his June 16 cable to the Department of State, which is attached
to the June 19 Iran Update. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Country File, Box 33, Iran Update 6/80)
