conflict with existing statute law. It was suggested that it would be best to
put in the next revenue law some general provision contemplating
reciprocal agreements to avoid double taxation.
The possible usefulness of the most-favored-nation clause in solving the
problem of double taxation was discussed. Professor Adams inquired
particularly whether provisions in recent commercial treaties might have
any relation to the problem in hand. The representatives of the Department
of State were of opinion that the most-favored-nation clause in the treaty
with Germany (December 8, 1923)32 and similar treaties subsequently
concluded, did not apply to internal taxation, and that the provisions in
Article I and Article VIII of the German treaty in regard to taxation did not
provide for most-favored-nation treatment. It is customary in treaties to
accord national rather than most-favored-nation treatment. It was further
suggested that the most-favored-nation clause would probably not be useful
in solving matters of double taxation at the present time. The practice of
various countries, so far as the imposition of double taxation is concerned,
is now so diverse as to make it of doubtful policy for a country to promise
in advance to accord to any particular country as good treatment as it may
bargain for in the future with some third country. It was thought that the
right to make special bargains on the subject, without being committed in
advance to generalize the concessions granted, would for the present,
perhaps, be the appropriate policy for this Government to follow.
Professor Adams indicated that he expected concrete results from the
forthcoming Conference and that, though at first dubious of the practical
purposes of those backing it, he was now convinced that they intended to
accomplish something, and that the countries of Europe were prepared to
come to agreements on many points, reserving other points for the
reconciliation of differences of opinion and probable agreement in the
future.
W[ALLACE] MOC[LITRE]
32 Foreign Relations, 1923, vol.  II, p. 29.
