980
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Strauss agreed, but added that that doesn’t just mean
terrorism mounted from Lebanon.
Ambassador Habib said that Eppy sees Israel’s loss of image each
time Lebanon blows up. He (Evron) worries about a rising tide of
opinion, that could even lead to anti-Semitism. Therefore Eppy is not as
negative.
Ambassador Strauss said that Eppy thinks Ambassador Habib has
great credibility.
Ambassador Habib asked what would happen if Lebanon takes the
lead—and Begin gets what he wants, which is the PLO (issue?) off his
back?
Ambassador Strauss said that he wants Begin to bless our effort, and
give us some room to maneuver. That means we must clearly be seen as
not doing 1, 2, or 3. We want Begin to applaud what we are doing, even
if it isn’t likely to succeed. Therefore we need a political structure.
Ambassador Habib said we could give assurances to Begin on the
PLO.
Ambassador Strauss said yes, since we can’t do anything with the
PLO anyway, unless the President says he doesn’t want to run for
re-election.
Ambassador Habib said that we do not want that flexibility anyway.
We can set limits within the existing framework.
Ambassador Strauss said that if we go this route, the American press
will look back, and say that Hal Saunders and the State Department
have used Lebanon to do what they have always wanted: to deal with
the PLO. Lebanon will be seen as an excuse. Therefore we would be on
the defensive. Does Hal agree?
(Assistant Secretary Saunders nodded yes.)
Secretary Vance said it was never our theory to undertake our plan
without Israel’s ok. The lead must be taken by the Lebanese.
Ambassador Strauss said that Hal Saunders is on the right track only
if what he (Ambassador Strauss) says is done.
Ambassador Habib said that we have to understand our limits with
the PLO, irrespective.
Ambassador Strauss said that these limits are not clear in the State
paper. He would restructure this effort differently—and back up. This
would improve its chances of succeeding.
Ambassador Habib said our effort should not be dramatic, but
low-key.
Secretary Vance agreed; otherwise it is doomed.
Ambassador Strauss asked why.
