896
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
1. According to a former Afghan Army officer who arrived in
Peshawar in early December 1980, and who until late November was
an active member of the Iranian-based Afghan dissident organization,
the United Islamic Alliance (UIA) (Shura-i-Etefaq), during mid-Novem-
ber the Iranian Government supplied a sizeable shipment of U.S. manu-
factured weapons to UIA insurgents in Ghazni Province. The UIA is
an alliance of Afghan Shia groups dominated by Hazaras from central
and southern Afghanistan. The leader of the UIA is Asif Mohsani, a
Shia from Qandahar, who now resides in and leads the UIA from
Qum, Iran. The UIA does not maintain a presence in Pakistan. (Source
comment: The officer said he had been told by other UIA members
that because of Mohsani’s fundamentalist Shia orientation, he has good
relations with and the support of Ayatollah Khomeini. Because of this
close relationship, Mohsani is the only Afghan dissident leader known
to be residing in Qum. In the officer’s opinion, no other Afghan dissi-
dent group is currently receiving weapons support from the Iranians.)
2. The officer stated that during mid-November the UIA headquar-
ters in Ghazni Province, located at Jaghori (approximate coordinates
33’ 10N 57’ 30E), received from Iran a shipment of 1,000 M–1 Garand
rifles, a quantity of ammunition, grenade projection adapters for the
M–1s with a quantity of both anti-tank and anti-personnel grenades,
and a quantity of unidentified U.S.-manufactured anti-tank rocket
launchers and anti-tank mines. (Source comment: Other than the num-
ber of M–1s in the shipment, the officer did not specify the quantities
of other weapons and ammunition received by the UIA. The officer
also commented that this was the only shipment of Iranian supplied
weapons and ammunition he is aware of, but he presumed the UIA
had received others.)
3. ACQ: [1½ lines not declassified]
4. [less than 1 line not declassified] Dissem: [2 lines not declassified]
