1979 543 low or the presence of an armed Soviet contingent would be sufficient to accomplish Moscow’s objectives. Indeed, a single Soviet airborne division is larger than the armies of many Third World states. 22. We believe, however, that the Soviets are unlikely to invade a Third World country. They have never mounted an airborne assault or amphibious assault operation in a distant area. Nevertheless, Soviet forces have long been capable of undertaking such an operation against the light opposition which could be expected in most areas, and the above-­projected improvements will expand this capability. But, over the next decade the Soviets will still not have built the forces capable of transporting, landing, and sustaining a large joint assault operation against substantial opposition in the Third World. Outlook 23. Policy. Although a change in the makeup of the top Soviet leadership is highly probable in the next five years and virtually certain in the next 10, we do not believe that Soviet policies or long-­term objectives toward the Third World will change substantially for this reason alone. We do not foresee the present or any likely future Soviet leadership altering these objectives to secure short-­term economic or political benefits from the West. Although future Soviet leaders will attach varying degrees of importance to detente relations with the United States and other Western powers, we believe it unlikely that Soviet leaders will be any more dissuaded from pursuing opportunities in the Third World in the future than in the recent past by concern over adverse effects on detente. Indeed, Soviet leaders will probably continue to calculate that major issues like the strategic arms limitation talks will be largely unaffected and that costs in less critical areas of US-Soviet relations will be bearable. 24. Regional Prospects. We believe the Soviets will persist in a steady course of creating and exploiting opportunities in distant areas, utilizing wherever possible their comparative advantages in military instruments of influence. They will continue to regard military means—­ principally arms sales, military assistance, and support of insurgent movements—­as the most feasible way of bringing about the changes they seek in the political structure of the Third World. 25. In Latin America, opportunities for expanding Soviet influence through military means are less favorable than in other regions of the Third World, with the exception of the continuing Soviet role in Cuba. Although Moscow has designated Latin America as an arena for Soviet-US competition and has made some economic and diplomatic inroads, prospects are still limited. There will undoubtedly be incidents of unrest and turmoil that should lend themselves to exploitation, but Soviet efforts will be hampered by prevalent anti-Communist
