Human Rights a. A clear definition of what constitutes a consistent pattern of deprivation of these rights (torture; inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment; prolonged detention without charge; flagrant denial of the Right to Life, Liberty, and the Security of Person; and providing refuge to individuals committing international acts of terrorism.) b. An established and fair procedure for ascertaining facts, for rebuttal, and for removing valid charges against a proposed borrower, all in advance of voting against a loan application. c. Adequate flexibility to protect our national interests and further our foreign policy goals. The Harkin Amendment still would have a “needy peoples” exception available for the President to use at his option. Bilateral agreements would be available. And of course in “important” or “urgent” matters, Congressional-Presidential action always is available. 3. A number of statements made in memoranda advocating opposition to the Harkin Amendment are presented as though they were unquestionable conclusions of fact. Actually, several of them are no more than arguable opinions and should be considered as such. Examples are: a. Treasury memo of April 14:4 “. . . no real economic pressure since other governments will not vote with us and most loans will be approved . . .” (except IDB FSO, which is subject to U.S.A. veto). “. . . automatic ‘no’ votes would eliminate any negotiating flexibility on our part, reducing any incentive . . . to work with us on improving human rights situations . . . sterile, ineffective position . . . isolating ourselves from other governments . . .” [But, note: Zbig refers to “our voice and vote” as a major bargaining chip.] b. Same Treasury memo: “. . . (such human rights violations considerations) are inconsistent with the IFI charter requirements that lending decisions shall be made only on the basis of economic consider- [Note: If this is accurate, then presumably the U.S.A. could never consider Human Rights violations relative to a loan application— whether our vote was mandatory or discretionary under our law.] c. Same Treasury memo: “Badillo approach . . . undesirable . . . it undermines integrity of the institutions . . . would represent unilateral amendment of the bank charters. Our major policy interest in enhancing the role of the banks would be set back severely . . .” [Note: the foregoing statement contains three “conclusions” stated as “facts”: “. . . it undermines integrity . . .”; “. . . unilateral amendment . . .”; and, “our major policy interest . . .”] Finally, the Treasury memo points out what percentage of loans in the past would not have been approved had there been such a law on the books. Its representatives pointed out that Congress would be sorely tempted to reduce appropriations to these banks if we elimi-
