820 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV the Executive Agents in a November 26, 1979 Implementation Decision Memorandum to clarify their role relationships.6 (U) MAJOR ACTIVITIES IN 1979 —PROJECT DUCKPINS—A government program to minimize Soviet interception of telephone conversation over domestic microwave radio by transferring selected U.S. government voice circuits from microwave to underground cable facilities in Washington, D.C., New York City and San Francisco. Circuits actually under this protection number 17,347 with another 1,067 on order. A third phase has been initiated by DOD which is responsive to both this program and the SCC–CI guidance of October 22, 1979.7 The National Security Agency proposed a cable fix for 22 high priority defense contractors which were designated as “Most Sensitive.” Defense plans to route all of these leased circuits, which carry information of value to an adversary, by cable in the three Protected Communications Zones (PCZs), by the end of 1980. The Agency has also been tasked to brief these high priority contractors on the domestic intercept threat, and provide the Manager, NCS, assistance in circuit identification and selection, necessary for the implementation of protective cable routing. These contractors, however, represent only a fraction of the total problem. In addition to proposing Defense Contractor protection fixes, an overall DOD plan, still in the formative stages, will be forwarded to the Special Subcommittee, for decision and will include a broader, system-­wide series of proposals which will in large part deny the Soviets the information they are targeting. (S) —EXECUTIVE SECURE VOICE NETWORK (ESVN)—The Assistant Secretary of Defense for C3I declared the ESVN fully operational. This network was subsequently renamed the Federal Secure Telephone Service; its capability and electronic cryptographic key distribution was expanded as well as additional secure voice terminals being installed. There are now 249 operational terminals as compared to 90 reported last year. (C) —GSA BULK PROTECTION PROGRAM—With the assistance and approval of the NSA the General Services Administration has: Closed bids for proposals for FTS voice service to Alaska, Seattle-­ Anchorage, 72 circuits, Seattle-Juneau, 24 circuits and San Francisco 6 Reference is to a November 26, 1979, memorandum from Science and Technology Advisor Press to Secretary of Defense Brown and Acting Secretary of Commerce Luther Hodges, copying multiple agencies, in which Press delineated lines of responsibilities between the Department of Defense and Department of Commerce in achieving policy objectives as established in PD/NSC–24. (Central Intelligence Agency Electronic Reading Room (online), Document CIA–RDP10M02313R000703930012–6) 7 Not found.
