1977  119
5. To take political, economic, diplomatic and ideological initia-
tives in cooperation with our allies to reduce Soviet influence in and 
control over other societies where that influence adversely affects US 
interests or values.
6. Within approved budgetary constraints, to direct US military 
strategy and forces to the following goals.
III. Strategic Forces
A. Objectives
US strategic forces will be designed:
1. To deter nuclear attack on the US, our forces, our allies, and oth-
ers whose security is important to the US.
2. In conjunction with general purpose and theater nuclear forces, 
to enhance deterrence of non-­nuclear aggression, particularly by the 
Soviet Union against NATO and our Asian allies.
3. To insure that the Soviet Union cannot use strategic forces for 
political leverage and coercion and that the state of the strategic balance 
will not deter the US from taking conventional military actions where 
its interests dictate.
4. To maintain essential equivalence with the Soviet Union.
5. To promote nuclear stability, especially in times of crisis.
6a. If nuclear conflict occurs, to 
control escalation, provide 
options for flexible and lim-
ited retaliatory responses, 
limit damage to the extent 
possible and consistent with 
the objectives listed above, 
and terminate the conflict 
quickly on acceptable terms.
6b. If nuclear conflict occurs, to 
control escalation, provide 
options for flexible and lim-
ited retaliatory responses, 
limit damage to the extent 
possible and consistent with 
the objectives listed above, 
and terminate the conflict 
quickly on terms which 
maximize the resultant polit-
ical, economic, and military 
power of the US relative to 
the enemy in the postwar 
period in order to preclude 
enemy domination.
B. Guidance
1. To ensure essential equivalence with the Soviet Union, the US 
will maintain nuclear force levels, within the context of any SALT 
agreement, that exceed or balance the Soviet Union in certain key indi-
ces. The balance in these indices can be achieved either by matching the 
Soviet Union in those measures or by exploiting US advantages which 
offset those enjoyed by the Soviets.
