988 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI  B–2 is an example of this rule, not an exception. In fact, today the only heavy bomber type in this category is the B–2. But we want the same rule for future bombers.  Without testing with long-­range nuclear ALCMs, we would not equip a bomber type for them. The absence of testing with long-­range nuclear ALCMs gives you the assurance you need.  We can make the points in your proposed statement if that is helpful to you.  On your proposal for what happens if B–2 is tested with non-­ nuclear ALCMs, we cannot agree that would trigger measures to show that it is technically impossible to launch nuclear ALCMs. But let me emphasize that no prudent person would assume that a system as complex as B–2 could launch one missile based on tests with an entirely different missile.  If it would help you, we could state that in the event B–2 is tested with a new non-­nuclear long-­range ALCM that had not been exhibited, we would give prior notification and prior exhibition of the non-­nuclear ALCM. That way you could confirm that the missile was indeed non-­nuclear.  If ambiguities should arise over any provision of the treaty, they can be taken up in the Joint Commission. B–1 Houston: The B–1 bomb bay bulkhead is configured so as not to permit long-­range nuclear ALCMs to be loaded.

The ALCM pylon attachment joints will be covered (except for two that serve as jacking points for the aircraft).

Unique equipment for reconfiguring the B–1 bomb bay bulkhead and for loading long-­range nuclear ALCM pylons on a B–1 will not be located at airbases for B–1 heavy bombers not equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs. Obukhov: Wants confidence that there will not be rapid and massive conversion of B–1s to ALCM carriers. Wants the necessary work to be time-­consuming and done at a factory or repair facility.

(We privately offered information on the time it would take to reverse the Houston measures (perhaps 13 days of work per aircraft) and where we would plan for it to be done (at a repair facility), if Obukhov would close the issue on that basis.)
