Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
577
this growth seems certain to be greatest in already hard-pressed urban
centers. Imagine, if you can, what current projections would indicate: a
Mexico City with 32 million people; a Sao Paulo with 26 million; Cal-
cutta, Bombay, Rio de Janeiro, Seoul, Beijing, and Shanghai each with
some 19 million in 20 years or so.
We all recognize that the developing countries themselves bear the
major burden for responding to these challenges. The industrial coun-
tries, however, can play a crucial role in assisting their efforts. Whether,
and how, we help the developing nations in pursuing their develop-
ment goals is one of the central issues of our time.
U.S. Approach
Our approach to development in the Third World is based on four
fundamental tenets.
First, we are committed to supporting strong and equitable growth
in the developing nations, as a matter of our national interest as well as
our national ideals. And we recognize that at times this requires facili-
tating adjustment in our own economy in ways which will support eco-
nomic growth in the Third World.
Second, we are committed to improving the international system in
ways which will be mutually beneficial to all, which respond to the par-
ticular needs of the developing nations, and which accord them an ap-
propriate voice in decisions that affect them. By the same token, we be-
lieve firmly that as nations develop and grow stronger, they incur
increasing responsibility to contribute to, as well as gain from, the in-
ternational economy.
Third, despite the economic pressures we and other industrial na-
tions now face, the United States remains committed to increasing
transfers of resources from the richer to the poorer nations.
Let me emphasize, however, a fourth point. As we cooperate with
developing nations in seeking useful changes in the international
system, and as we consider the level and nature of our resource flows,
we must be clear about our priorities. Alterations in the international
system and resource transfers among nations are not ends in them-
selves. They are a means to the compelling goal of development within
nations.
We cannot spend so much time and energy on our international
discussions of the roadmap that we lose sight of our destination. The
destination—the goal we share—is to find practical ways to have an ap-
preciable impact on the lives of people around the world, and espe-
cially on the lives of those for whom daily survival is an unanswered
question.
We envision an international economic system which is not rigidly
divided into northern and southern blocs. We seek a global community
