410  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
United States had perhaps been a little harsh with Trujillo and Somoza 
who were after all staunch supporters of the United States.
Costa Ricans of all walks of life expressed support for the idea of 
closer economic integration of Central America and moves towards a 
common market for the countries of that area.
The projects presented by the Costa Ricans were as follows:
Increase in Capital for Rural Farm Credit Agencies of the National Bank of 
Costa Rica:
The Costa Rican Government had requested a loan of $5 million 
from the Development Loan Fund for the purpose of increasing the 
capital of those rural credit agencies so that they could make low inter-
est loans over reasonable periods of time to small farmers who are per-
haps the principal support of the economic and social stability of the 
country. The United States Embassy was carrying out a study on this. 
The Costa Ricans hoped for favorable action on the part of United States 
on this application which would favor a broad sector of the population 
of Costa Rica and at the same time fulfill the aims which inspired the 
creation of the Development Loan Fund.
Inter-American Highway:
The Costa Rican Government intends to finish the Inter-American 
Highway before the end of the present Administration. This would 
include the stretch between San Ramon and Cartago. They feel that 
this stretch is vital as it crosses the most heavily populated area of the 
country. They would like to see the same standard applied here as else-
where on the highway, that is to say, the United States contributing 
two-­thirds and Costa Rica one-­third. They would hope to obtain their 
third through an Export-Import Bank loan. This work would not only 
favor the economic development of the country but would also in some 
measure palliate the growing unemployment problem due to the drop 
in coffee prices.
Children’s Hospital:
Through ICA the Costa Rican Government obtained a $2 million 
loan to take care of the major part of the cost of construction of the 
Children’s Hospital. Additional funds have been obtained within Costa 
Rica through gifts from private individuals and other sources but they 
are experiencing difficulty in obtaining the final amount to complete 
the work. If the loan could be increased by some $950,000 they could be 
sure of concluding the hospital and of being able to carry on its work.
Sanitary Improvement of the Metropolitan Area:
22% of the population of Costa Rica reside in the metropolitan 
area of San Jose. The city is growing with extraordinary speed, giving
