Guatemala  677
you before his departure. An appointment, subject to your approval, 
was arranged for this afternoon.
Although I pressed him for details of what he wished to discuss 
with you, Ambassador Antillón said that he had nothing special in 
mind and wished merely to exchange views with you on a variety of 
topics. I believe it likely that he may raise one or more of the following 
subjects:
1. Pending, DLF Loan Applications.
I have had a talk with Mr. William Ryan of the DLF, who recently 
returned from a study mission to Guatemala. Mr. Ryan informed me 
that Hart Perry, Deputy Managing Director for Loans of the DLF, had 
informed him that only $5 million dollars of presently appropriated 
funds could be spared for loans to Guatemala. Mr. Ryan said he was 
favorably impressed by the rubber loan application, and that he was 
prepared to recommend putting the $5 million into this. Naturally, Mr. 
Ryan’s recommendations would require approval by his superiors and 
the DLF Board. Mr. Ryan felt that possibly more could be loaned to 
Guatemala out of new appropriations for the DLF. If the Ambassador 
inquires regarding status of the loan applications, you might tell him 
what you told the Minister of Education on December 223—­that you 
were sure something would be forthcoming for Guatemala in the mat-
ter of DLF loans, but that it was as yet unfortunately impossible to say 
for what or how much.
2. Training Planes for the Guatemalan Air Force.
Sometime ago the GOG requested permission to purchase ten 
T-34 training planes for the Guatemalan Air Force.4 This request was 
approved by State and Defense, and the Guatemalans were informed 
that the price of each aircraft would be between $23 and $27 thousand 
dollars. The Ambassador has told me that these prices are far too high 
for Guatemala to pay and has presented a note formally asking for 
a reduction in the prices and special consideration for Guatemala in 
this purchase.5 In the note he alludes to the fact that we have a Mutual 
Defense Assistance Agreement with his country.6 He has told me that he 
cannot understand how we can charge such high prices for the trainers, 
3 No record of Assistant Secretary Rubottom’s conversation with the Guatemalan 
Minister of Public Education, Col. Marco Aurelio Merida Sáenz, on December 22, was 
found in Department of State files.
4 The request was made in a note from Antillón to Dulles, September 2, 1958. 
(714.5622/9–258)
5 Antillón’s note was not found in Department of State files.
6 For the text of the Agreement signed at Guatemala City, June 18, 1955, see United 
States Treaties and Other International Agreements (UST), vol. 6 (pt. 2), p. 2107.
