418 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II mation on the situation there. Decisions were also taken to keep the situations “under review” in Bolivia, Malawi, South Korea, and Ethiopia. Uruguay will be asked to provide additional information on “respect for human rights” and to provide “fullest possible explanation” re the “prospects for an early restoration of political rights” in that country. Their responses will be considered at the next HRC. While Indonesia, Korea and Ethiopia were treated more lightly than the magnitude of complaints against those countries would seem to merit, all will be kept under scrutiny and have been asked to continue their cooperation with the HRC. 4. Public resolutions were adopted on Chile, Israeli settlements in the Occupied Territories, Palestinian self-determination rights, South African apartheid policies and South African-Western “assistance.” However we believe it is fair to say that when these are considered together with the 1503 decisions the HRC clearly disavowed selective morality. 5. Specifically, the Chile resolution was shaped to accommodate U.S. conditions for co-sponsorship to the extent that the Cubans and Yugoslavs withdrew their co-sponsorship in the eleventh hour. A particular point of contention was whether or not the resolution would “take note” of the Inter-American Human Rights Commission’s most recent report on conditions in Chile. This was anathema to Cuba which regards this as an implicit expression of support for the OAS. 6. As in other multilateral fora, the Soviets raised the issue of the neutron bomb under the item concerning the impact on human rights of scientific and technological development (see septels).4 However their efforts were only rhetorical and tentative and they did not in the end press the issue via an allegedly Polish resolution (circulated informally). Indeed the Soviets responded weakly to strong UK and U.S. statements on the issue. 7. The Arab-Israeli resolutions were tough and clearly unacceptable to the U.S. but, in light of particularly strong Arab emotions at this juncture in the Middle East dispute, they could have been much worse. Part A of one resolution condemned the Israeli settlements policy and alleged torture of “prisoners of war.” Part B of the same resolution, however, was substantively unchanged from the 1977 resolution regarding applicability of the fourth Geneva Convention to the Occupied Territories, in order expressly to enable U.S. participation in a consensus. The final Arab resolution asserted a Palestinian right to selfdetermination to be pursued (implicitly) by armed struggle. It was sig- 4 Telegram 2317 from Geneva, February 15; telegram 3496 from Geneva, March 6; and telegram 3792 from Geneva, March 10. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780069–0465; D780101–0039; and D780108–0500)
