550 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and Sadat. At their urging, I will see Begin alone tomorrow morning4 to repeat the message before we meet further. They will be helpful, and all three are almost desperate not to lose the treaty. We explored some possible approaches, but the political complications within the Cabinet are serious obstacles. Vance 4 See Document 158. 158. Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department of State and the White House1 Jerusalem, December 14, 1978, 1445Z Secto 14061. State for Christopher only. White House for Brzezinski. Subject: Secretary’s Meetings With the Israelis December 14. 1. I met this morning with Begin alone for about one-half hour and conveyed the message2 you and I discussed yesterday evening. We had a very frank talk. His response was tinged with sorrow. I suggest that no statements be issued by us until I return tomorrow afternoon and have a chance to look at them. 2. Following this we joined our groups which on the Israeli side consisted of the same large group of Israeli Ministers that were present yesterday. Begin led off by saying that he would call a special Cabinet meeting tomorrow morning in order to discuss the issues that we had brought with us from Cairo. He then asked Dayan to sum up the Israeli position at this point which Dayan did in these terms: 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 55, Middle East: Peace Talks Between Egypt and Israel, 11–12/78. Secret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room. At the top of the telegram, Carter initialed “C,” indicating that he saw the document. Vance arrived in Israel on December 13. 2 The text of Carter’s message has not been found. According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter spoke with Vance on the telephone from noon to 12:11 p.m., December 13. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) On December 13, Carter wrote in his personal diary that Vance reported that the treaty text which Vance had agreed with Sadat received “a very cold and negative reaction” in Israel. (Carter, White House Diary, p. 265)
