International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
421
137.
Editorial Note
On June 19 and 20, 1978, the Special Representative for Trade Ne-
gotiations, Robert Strauss, and other U.S. officials met with repre-
sentatives from the European Communities (EC), Japan, and Canada in
Washington for a discussion of the status of the multilateral trade nego-
tiations (MTN). No memoranda of conversation of these discussions
were found. A summary of the talks, included in a weekly status report
by the Office of Economic Policy, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Af-
fairs, noted that they “were designed to clarify MTN issues before the
final three weeks of bargaining. Each side explained its position and
listed the top priorities it felt it needed for a settlement.” The partici-
pants also “confirmed that July 15 is the deadline for the MTN and
agreed on a stringent timetable for drafting and decision-making to
meet that date.” (Telegram 163753 to all East Asian and Pacific diplo-
matic posts, June 27; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780267–0486) Speaking to the press, Strauss said: “We now have
in hard and final form what the bottom line is for each of the constit-
uencies we represent.” (Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Key Nations Sup-
porting Tariff Cuts,” The New York Times, June 21, 1978, page D1)
On June 23, the Special Representative for Economic Summits,
Henry Owen, recommended, at Strauss’ request, that President Jimmy
Carter send letters to Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau and
Japanese Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda asking them to address out-
standing trade issues. (Memorandum from Owen to Carter, June 23;
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Presi-
dent’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime
Minister Takeo Fukuda, 1–12/78) In a June 26 letter to Trudeau, Carter
asserted the necessity of redressing the “imbalance between our tariff
offers on both industrial and agricultural items,” noting that the United
States “badly needs an improvement in the Canadian offer if our offer
is to stand.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Ma-
terial, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 3,
Canada: Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau, 1/77–8/78) In a June 26
letter to Fukuda, Carter stressed the need “to improve access for agri-
cultural products, reduce industrial tariffs, and reach agreement on
such issues as government procurement and a meaningful code on sub-
sidies” and called for “Japanese leadership in liberalizing trade.” In
particular, Carter asserted to Fukuda that “improvements in your ne-
gotiators’ offer in Geneva and other efforts to liberalize access to
Japan’s import market are essential, if agreement is to be reached be-
fore the Bonn meeting on the main unresolved issues in the Multilateral
Trade Negotiations.” Noting Japan’s interest in a U.S. pledge to limit oil
imports, Carter noted that his ability to offer that pledge at Bonn “de-
