Guatemala 725 not need it but it would be much stronger. The President agreed and said this would particularly be so if each country says there is external aggression. The President asked what we would do about the OAS, and the Secretary said the requests would also have to go to the OAS but the requests can be made both individually and collectively. The President said he approved in every respect. The President asked that the Secretary make a little note of the matter and send a report down to the President.5 5 Reference presumably is to the memorandum from Herter to Eisenhower November 16, see Document GT–42. GT–37. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Guatemala1 Washington, November 14, 1960, 2:47 p.m. 328. Joint State-CIA Message. 1. Confirming telephone conversation between Secretary and Ambassador this morning2 [text not declassified] 2. This message also confirms Secretary’s statement to Ambassador that U.S. prepared to consider promptly and favorably a written official Guatemalan Government request of U.S. to assist Guatemala in air and sea within limits of Guatemalan national jurisdiction to seek out and prevent any attempt at reinforcing or supplying rebel forces from outside Guatemala. We have in mind particularly Cuban and communist agents. Our opinion is that Guatemala has sovereign right to request such assistance without invoking Rio Treaty.3 U.S. suggesting to 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 714.00/11–1460. Top Secret; No Distr; Niact. Drafted by Mann and signed by Hugh S. Cumming, Jr., Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State. 2 In this telephone conversation at 9:50 a.m., Herter instructed Muccio, who was to see Ydígoras in five minutes, to try to get from Ydígoras a request under the Rio Treaty for U.S. assistance to prevent any external aggression. Muccio was to make it clear that if Ydígoras made the request, “it would not be just for surveillance but interdiction.” [text not declassified] (Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers, “Phone Calls and Miscellaneous Memos, November 1960–January 1961”) 3 Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, opened for signature at Rio de Janeiro September 2, 1947; for text, see 4 Bevans 559.
