1332 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement do is to follow the President’s “Open Skies” proposal. It was a grave situation caused by the fact that we both have the capacity for mas­ sive surprise attack. The Sec. said if we got a resolution along these lines and the Soviets vetoed it, that would permanently spike their propaganda. Lodge asked what the Sec. wanted done about the Dis­ armament Commission. The Sec. said he wouldn’t go there. The Sovi­ ets by bringing this case themselves have accepted the jurisdiction of the SC but not the jurisdiction of the Disarmament Commission. Sec. said we should have a meeting of the Disarmament Commission (they agreed any time) but not on this particular item. Lodge said he would arrange a pro forma meeting in the DC. The Sec. said he would see the President today about the proposed resolution and would like to move on this by Monday. The Sec. said we would be having consultation and would be in touch with Lodge. Lodge said they could do their business in the Security Council on Tuesday rather than Monday. It was difficult to get anyone to work over the week end. The Secretary said let us make Tuesday our target date. The Sec. said that the resolution which had been sent up was on a contingent basis. We would be working on a revised one. Sec. said he wanted to pin the Soviets down. 316. Record of Telephone Conversation Between Quarles and John Foster Dulles1 April 23, 1958, 3:31 p.m. The Sec just left the Pres. We were talking about the Soviet move in the SC. We are planning to go back at them with a proposal which in essence would say if you think this Arctic area is so dangerous why don’t you agree to establish an inspection zone as we (Def and St etc.) agreed last fall. The Sec said it did not occur to him it would require further clearance because they approved the zone but he wanted to mention it. The Sec is sure the Soviets will veto and that will put us in the position we want to be in. Q said he does not think it will pose a problem but he wants Fox et al. to study it closely and will tell the Sec at NSC. The Sec said he talked with Lodge and they want to launch it Tues and want to speak to the British and French and other friends before. 1 Source: Proposal to declare the Arctic an inspection zone. No classification mark­ ing. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations.
