Afghanistan
895
Scharaff said he hoped soon to have an intelligence officer assigned
to his staff, and that after that officer arrived he hoped he and my
officer could be in touch. I was noncommittal.
In a separate private conversation with PRC Amb Xu Yi-xin I tried
to probe him on PRC inputs to the Mujahideen. Xu acknowledged that
the PRC would like to see more support given to the freedom fighters,
but asserted that PRC support goes to the Pak Govt “in general”, and
none was specifically earmarked for the Mujahideen.2 The unspoken
implication was that the GOP makes its own decisions as to what arms
of PRC origin go to Afghans. (Comment: This does not square with
other reports that some AK–47s from the PRC are earmarked for
Mujahideen).
2 [text and 1 line not declassified] “The PRC routinely provides machine guns, small
arms, hand grenades and ammunition to the Afghan rebels. Shipments are by ship into
Pakistan ports and by air. In some instances shipments have been by Pakistani C–130
aircraft flown direct from China to airfields near the Afghan border. He stated that no
shoulder-fired SAMs had been provided because China had none. He stated that in his
opinion, SA–7s had been provided by Egypt. Source claimed not to know the dates of
the shipments but described them as routine and continuing. He claimed that PRC aid
to Afghan rebels has the full but unannounced support of the Government of Pakistan.”
(Telegram 27726 from Cairo, December 16; Department of Defense, Afghan War Collec-
tion, Box 5, PRC Support for Insurgents)
340.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
Washington, December 16, 1980
COUNTRY
Afghanistan/Iran
SUBJECT
Support by the Iranian Government for the Afghan Dissident Organization,
United Islamic Alliance [1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[3 lines not declassified]
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 2, 13 Kabul Sitreps.
Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].
