264 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement CH–23. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in Chile (Howe)1  Santiago, August 18, 1959. SUBJECT Chilean President’s Views on (1) Meeting of American Foreign Ministers, (2) U.S. credits to Chile, (3) IMF-Latin American relations. PARTICIPANTS President Jorge Alessandri of Chile Minister of Finance Roberto Vergara Secretary Herter Assistant Secretary Rubottom Ambassador Howe At the invitation of the President, Secretary Herter called on him at 5:30 Tuesday, August 18. The President opened the conversation in French, expressing his satisfaction at the way the Meeting of Foreign Ministers had come out and his great pleasure that it had been possible for Secretary Herter to attend the conference. He continued that he was pleased that the meeting had been held in Santiago as he felt it had given the Foreign Ministers of the other American Republics an opportunity to see at first hand that Chile has both a democratic and responsible government. Secretary Herter replied that he, too, was very pleased with the results of the meeting and that he wished to compliment the President on the way in which Chile, as the host country, had managed all matters relating to the conference in a way which greatly redounded to its credit and made an important contribution to the success of the Meeting. The Secretary especially wished to comment on the statesmanlike and efficient manner in which the Foreign Minister, don German Vergara, had conducted the plenary sessions of the meeting and on the contribution which he had made towards resolving a number of the more difficult situations. The President, in thanking the Secretary, said that, in truth, there had been the possibility of difficult situations created by the Cubans both in the meeting and by the non-­authorized arrival of the two planeloads of visitors. He said that he had just received reports on the arrival of the second Cuban plane with Raul Castro and that he and most of those who accompanied him would be admitted to the country although two of his companions, who were armed, were being held at the airfield. The President said, however, that neither he nor the Chilean Government would take any official cognizance of 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 363/8–1859. Confidential.
