1955  607
statement refused answer any questions on grounds had just been 
received from Peiping had no time yet to read. Assume full text avail­
able from FBIS. Statement of more than thousand words covered only 
following points:
A) U.S. failure supply list Chinese in U.S. to Indian Embassy.
B) While since August first 26 out of 40 American law breakers 
have been released, U.S. has refused inform PRC how many Chinese 
imprisoned in U.S. or list of their names.
C) No time limit can be set for release remaining Americans whose 
cases being reviewed individually and therefore “no justification for 
Americans to ask, or ask in disguised form for setting time limit to 
release American criminals” who are being released expeditiously.
D) Departure “ordinary” Americans not obstructed and in fact 
assisted where required while of 103 Chinese who U.S. admitted long 
prevented from departing 38 still not returned.
E) INS regulation requiring Chinese in U.S. obtain entry permit for 
Taiwan is threat against Chinese students unable for time being return 
which is violation letter and spirit September 10 agreement.
2. Statement closes with “The charge of the American side that 
China has not fully complied with the agreement is completely unten­
able. The Chinese Government firmly asks that the American side put 
a stop to all its acts in violation of the agreement and fully comply with 
the agreement between both sides”.
3. I am informing press for attribution my spokesman that PRC 
ascertain in statement that it has fully complied with agreed announce­
ment of September 10 and allegation that U.S. has not are completely 
contrary to fact. Any further comment would have to come from 
­Washington. For background I have pointed out to correspondents 
here lack of relation charges against U.S. to obligations under agreed 
announcement and apparent attempt to obscure CHICOM failure 
comply with September 10 announcement in cases 14 imprisoned 
Americans. Have also expressed for attribution spokesman puzzle­
ment at reference demand for time limit release Americans pointing 
out know of no public statements this regard.
Gowen
