Covert and Overt Operations 751 —A Saunders meeting with Ambassadors Brunner and/or Lang in Switzerland for their assessment and our presentation of strategy. —A meeting with Capucci, Bourguet and Villalon, and, if possible, Nobari on the same trip. —Messages to our allies or meetings with them outlining special roles for them: —For the Germans: To maintain contact with Tabatabai for improvement in the condition of the hostages; with Beheshti to develop a new relationship there; with Bazargan to encourage him to reassert his influence. —For the French and Turks: To become more active generally with the clerics to convey an “independent” European view. To work also with Bani-Sadr, Salamatian, and others with whom the Ambassadors may enjoy special access. —With the British: To concentrate on Beheshti and the other clerics on the Revolutionary Council or to solicit those clerics by other persons with better influence. —A trip by Richard Cottam for talks with as many leaders as he can arrange, especially Beheshti, whom Cottam has known for seven years. We would encourage Cottam to stay at least one week and perhaps return to Iran after consultations with us. May 11–18 —Continue foregoing actions as appropriate. —Messages to the Algerians and Syrians or Bedjaoui and Daoudi to explore the mediation effort by those countries, possibly supplemented by a role for the Swiss and French or possibly a Non-Aligned Movement initiative. The Algerians and Swiss, for example, could suggest, as protecting powers, that they constitute a contact group to hold talks with us for the Iranians in an effort to resolve specific problems in the dispute between us. —Capucci and Bourguet or Villalon return to Tehran. —Refine and expand, if possible, our six-point position paper with the idea that Lang could use this with the leadership in Tehran— without introducing any new concessions. —Messages or possible visits to EC–9 capitals to assure there is no wavering on the May 17 sanctions. After May 18 we would try to put ourselves in a position, through the appropriate intermediaries, to work out a scenario that would reflect the political dynamics in Tehran and steps that are politically feasible for us which might contribute to the decision in Tehran to release the hostages. Summary of Decisions If this general diplomatic strategy is approved, we would be moving into a phase of exploring through a number of channels the political
