September 1953–December 1954
909
During our conversation subsequent to the presentation the Shah
asked me again what the U.S. was planning to do for Iran, what kind of
report re economic and military aid had Vice President Nixon made to
the National Security Council, etc.3 The Shah, who appeared to be in a
petulant humor, commenced to complain re the state of the Iranian
budget. The available funds even with American emergency aid were
not sufficient to meet the urgent economic and security needs of the
country. What would happen after several months when emergency
aid was exhausted he did not know unless the U.S. could find some
way to supplement emergency aid at least until conclusion of the oil
agreement. Eden had expressed in a recent speech the hope that the oil
agreement would be achieved during the year 1954. That did not indi-
cate expectation on the part of the British for an early agreement. Even
if an early agreement could be obtained he could not believe that the
agreement or the oil flowing from it would provide Iran with adequate
budgetary funds for some time to come. Iran furthermore needed more
than budgetary funds. It must after the empty promises of many years
begin to do something concrete in the direction of economic devel-
opment. If not, a disillusioned population might be easy prey for
communism.
Stressing the needs of the Army the Shah said the Army budget
was so limited that it was not even able to transfer military stores from
one place to another. The funds available are barely sufficient to pay
salary, allowances, quarters, etc. There was nothing left for operations.
I remarked that perhaps with more expert management the Army
could within the framework of the present budget take care of elemen-
tary operational needs. General McClure in describing to me earlier in
the day a recent conversation which he had had with General Batman-
qilich, said Batmanqilich had declared solemnly to him that the Army
did not even possess personnel to distribute clothing and blankets
which the U.S. Government was giving to it. I said that a statement of
this kind on the part of the Chief of Staff was shocking to both General
McClure and myself. It seemed to us to denote lack of resourcefulness
and organizational ability. Shah said somewhat apologetically that he
was sure General Batmanqilich had made this statement merely in
order to impress General McClure with their military needs. Batmanqi-
lich would, of course, find means of distributing this material. He had
3 Vice President Nixon met with the Shah on December 11, 1953, in Tehran. Tele-
gram 1341 from Tehran, December 17, reported that the Shah had reiterated to the Vice
President his desire that a decision soon be made regarding “whether Iranian Army was
to be organized, equipped and trained to defend Iran in case of external attack from any
direction, or army was to be used merely for maintaining internal security.” For telegram
1341, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. X, Iran, 1951–1954, pp. 850–852 (Document
396). The Vice President reported to the NSC on his trip to the Far East, South Asia, and
Iran on December 23, 1953; see ibid., pp. 854–855 (Document 398).
