893.5045/253: Telegram
[Document 566]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 21, 1925—4 p.m.
[Received 6:30 p.m.]
492. My 467, October 28, 5 p.m.
1. I have received for confidential information a copy of Justice Johnson’s
individual report,31 the original of which was delivered yesterday to senior
minister. Report by British judge received by British Legation although I am
not yet informed of its contents. A brief summary of Justice Johnson’s report
follows.
2. The report confirms the impression gained by diplomatic commission
during its investigation at Shanghai as acted upon by Heads of Legation last
June to the effect that adequate precautions were not taken by police
authorities to prevent disorder. Report rather severely censures McEuen for
leaving his post and remaining out of the city at such a time in the following
language, “I can see no basis for his, McEuen[’s], absence from duty on that
day, without giving notice to his deputy, which can be harmonized with his
responsibility. His presence and his personal direction of his police force at
Louza station as late as 3:15 p.m. on May 30th last, might have saved the
lives of some innocent persons.”
3. The report ably reviews under the headings of the terms of reference the
facts brought out by the inquiry.
4. It is regrettable however that it does not end at this point with a few briefly
summarized conclusions. Instead Justice Johnson exceeds the terms of
reference, giving his conclusions in 17 paragraphs and his recommendations
in 3 which in the majority of cases embrace topics and offer proofs obviously
beyond the scope of the inquiry. For example, under “conclusions”: Ninth
paragraph, “That those in authority with power to act in order to lessen the
complaint of the Chinese people should as speedily as possible bring to a
close the negotiations which have been pending for some years relating to the
status of and character of the Mixed Court.” Tenth paragraph, “That the
question of participation on the part of the Chinese people in the actual
government of the city of Shanghai, so far as treaty relations will permit,
