Panama  885
be sold for some $10 million and credits to finance this operation would 
be a sound investment.
Extension of Tocumen Runway—The Panamanians had been notified 
by the Civil Aeronautics Authority and a number of U.S. airlines that 
Tocumen airport would soon begin to be used by jet transports. This 
would require an extension of the present runways there and the cost 
of this extension will approximate $530 thousand. They felt that as the 
U.S. Armed forces would have the free use of this airfield in time of 
war, that it was only fair that some share of the cost of construction be 
borne by the United States.
Point 4—The President expressed a desire for a broadening and 
enlarging of the Point 4 program. The Panamanians recognized that 
Point 4 has made a great contribution to the economic progress of the 
country and are anxious that this program be broadened in scope. There 
were many fields of endeavor where prospective profits were too small 
or too insecure to justify investment, nevertheless, many of these activ-
ities were vital to the further economic development of Panama and 
they would hope that an institution such as Point 4 would be available, 
capable both of assuming risks and making grants.
Quotas and Preferential Tariffs—Panamanians felt that with a lim-
ited economy of their type it was not unreasonable to hope they would 
be given a larger sugar quota then they had at present (3,000 tons). 
Similarly, they hoped that they might be made the beneficiaries of any 
preferential tariffs permitted by the laws of the United States.
Telecommunications—It was indicated that as a result of a study4 
conducted by Col. Grey, it appeared that the telecommunications net-
work of the Republic of Panama was nearing a total breakdown. The 
study recommended the construction of an open wire network at a cost 
of some $2 1/2 million.
The Government expressed strong support for the position 
assumed by the United States in the international arena, particularly 
insofar as the action in Lebanon5 was concerned.
CONCLUSIONS: In Panama broad requests were made for further 
financial assistance from the United States. Willingness was expressed 
to seek such assistance not only from Government credit organizations 
but also from private investors. Not only was no hostility expressed 
towards private foreign investment, but it was stated that this would 
4 Not found in Department of State files.
5 For documentation on U.S. policy with respect to the crises in Lebanon and Iraq in 
1958 including the rebellion in Lebanon in May, the revolution in Iraq in July, the dispatch 
of American troops to Lebanon, and the role of the United Nations, see 	Foreign Relations, 
1958–1960, vol. XI, Lebanon and Jordan, and Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XII, Near 
East Region; Iraq; Iran; Arabian Peninsula, Chapter 4.
