340 Foreign Relations, 1958ŌĆō1960, Volume III, Supplement forces, even in the event of surprise attack. Such preparation should: (1) Provide warning to alert the nation to impending attack; (2) counter enemy subversive and clandestine efforts; (3) prevent the threat of nuclear destruction from unduly restricting U.S. freedom of action or weakening national morale; (4) maintain adaptability to make timely changes as technology permits and as the nature of the threat changes; (5) provide appropriate measures of protection for the civil population; and (6) include appropriately organizing, protecting, and placing in a condition of readiness the resources of the country essential to national survival. B. ESTIMATED SOVIET THREAT AND CAPABILITIES. 1. Soviet capabilities for full-┬Łscale air attack or the continental United States, while still subject to limitations, have been improved by phasing-in of additional jet bombers, by continued improvement in forward and staging air base capacities, by availability of greater nuem┬Ł bers of megaton yield weapons end emergence of a limited capability for in-┬Łflight refueling. The numbers of aircraft launched against the United States in an initial attack, even under conditions where surprise was a major Soviet consideration, could range in the several hundreds. 2. In light of recent tests, it is estimated that USSR is developing and stockpiling a versatile group of nuclear weapons ranging from very low yield warheads to high yield thermonuclear weapons. 3. It is estimated that Soviets will achieve an initial limited capabil┬Ł ity for ICBM attack in 1959. 4. USSR could now have subsonic cruise-┬Łtype guided missiles with nuclear warheads suitable for launching from submarines against tar┬Ł gets in U.S. coastal areas, and have several guided missile submarines equipped to carry and launch these missiles. 5. Clandestine attack on the United States itself by sabotage, bio┬Ł logical warfare, and placement of nuclear weapons, could occur against specifically selected targets. C. SUMMARY EVALUATION OF U.S. AIR DEFENSE CAPABILITY AND PROBLEMS. The absolute capability of our forces to defend the United States against air attack has progressively increased since last report, as of 30 June 1957. This over-┬Łall increase is the result of establishment of North American Air Defense Command (NORAD); installation of additional early warning radar coverage, including seaward extensions of DEW Line, and contiguous seaward coverage; provision of more effective control of the air defense system through automation; increased cov┬Ł erage of the sea surveillance system; and availability of improved weapons systems, to include nuclear warheads. Although U.S. defense
