Paraguay  999
last July, and subsequently to reorganize itself throughout the country; 
municipal elections, with opposition participation, would be held soon; 
the electoral laws were to be liberalized; and constitutional reform 
would be carried out.
Mr. Rubottom commented that Mr. Herbert L. Matthews, editorial 
writer of The New York Times was planning to visit Paraguay for sev-
eral days in mid-October. Mr. Rubottom suggested that Mr. Matthews’ 
presence would afford an excellent opportunity for the GOP to demon-
strate its sincerity about liberalizing the regime. Mr. Rubottom pointed 
out that the press of this country is wont to describe the GOP as one 
of the three remaining dictatorships in the hemisphere. Mr. Rubottom 
said that he knew the Paraguayans would accord Mr. Matthews their 
renowned hospitableness; but he hoped the government would also 
encourage Mr. Matthews to go beyond official circles and out among 
the people of Paraguay, and even among the political opposition. The 
Minister intimated that the GOP has nothing to hide, would warmly 
welcome Mr. Matthews and would be glad to have him know, and to 
publish the truth about, Paraguay. Mr. Rubottom said he thought that 
it would be extremely important to Paraguay at this juncture for it to 
become widely known that the GOP is seriously working to eliminate 
its authoritarian character.
The Minister noted that the August 15 inauguration of President 
Stroessner for a five-­year term went off smoothly except for one dis-
cordant note which disappointed the President considerably. The 
­opposition Liberal Party directorate had been invited to participate in 
the ceremonies. Instead of graciously accepting like good Paraguayans, 
or at least sending calling cards to the Presidential Palace, they had 
transmitted a long, rude, manifesto denouncing the Stroessner govern-
ment. The Minister implied that while the government is ready to do its 
part toward establishing political harmony in the country, it cannot go 
far without the cooperation of the opposition.
Returning to economic matters, the Minister said that he wished 
to express, in behalf of President Stroessner and himself, Paraguay’s 
heartfelt gratitude for what the United States has done to assist the 
country. However, Paraguay desperately needed, and had to have, 
more help. While remarkable economic progress had been achieved 
in recent years, Paraguay was still lacking adequate roads and river 
transportation facilities to get her products on the markets of the world. 
Besides acquiring better transport, the country also needs to increase 
production, and in order to do this its people must have farm imple-
ments, machinery, fencing material, silos, warehouses. Paraguay had 
every reason to be proud of its unfaltering effort, with U.S. aid and 
guidance, to carry out a currency stabilization plan. However, stable 
currency, desirable though it may be, is meaningless to the average
