356 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX journalists could also be alleviated. In this regard, he asserted, the GDR is “generous”. It had granted accreditation to an AP correspondent in Copenhagen, and had given him a one year visa. Fischer suggested there should be reciprocal action in granting visas, which would apply first to accredited journalists. 7. Fischer concluded that there were further details and proposals in the aide memoire which he would not dwell on. In the interest of implementing CSCE there were a number of possibilities inherent in the situation that should make it possible for an expansion of relations; for its part, the GDR is prepared to do so. 8. Charge thanked Fischer for his presentation and said that careful attention and study would be given to the aide memoire. The US also favored the development of constructive relations wherever possible, and the Charge was pleased to hear the GDR desired to expand relations with the US. While we would respond later in detail to the aide memoire after we had had a chance to study it carefully, Charge said he wished to make several preliminary comments in response to the Foreign Minister’s remarks. First of all, it would be useful to know what the Foreign Minister meant when he referred to further progress in treaty or “agreement” matters. Fischer said he had in mind such things as the Fisheries Agreement, Postal Agreement, a Consular Convention, etc. 9. Charge noted that, with respect to the Consular Convention, it was our impression, as Charge had recently told Geyer (who was present), that the ball was in the GDR court. After the last round of negotiations, we had presented a counter-draft to the GDR side and had heard nothing official from them since. Conclusion of a Consular Convention would contribute significantly to the further development of our relations. 10. Fischer said, “You know our position.” We don’t feel we have to give you an answer because the US side has not responded to GDR proposals which, in the GDR’s view, represented a compromise between the positions of the two countries. However, since the US side wished to pursue the matter further, he saw no reason why responsible officials from the MFA’s Consular section could not meet with Embassy officials in the near future to see what possibilities might exist for the next round of negotiations. Charge said that while our viewpoint might be different about who owes whom a reply, we would be pleased to get together with the MFA’s Consular division. 11. Charge also noted he had suggested some time ago, in connection with our interest in a claims settlement, that a State Department lawyer would be willing to come to Berlin for the purpose of gaining a better understanding of pertinent GDR regulations and for informing GDR officials about US procedures and practices in claims matters.
