United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  95
we would find adding to the capital of the IADB a solution to our prob-
lems and the adoption of this course at this time might well make us 
unable to attempt a more considered program later. If we want to have 
a new program for Latin America, then I think a task force should be 
immediately put to the job of developing a proposition which is defen-
sible. I would think the Congress would regard as somewhat hysterical 
a proposal to add a large dimension of capital to an organization that 
has yet to spend its first penny and that in all probability could not use 
any additional capital for a long time.
ETA–36.	
Notes of Telephone Conversation between the Under 
Secretary of State (Dillon) and the Assistant Secretary of 
State for Economic Affairs (Mann)1
	
Washington, July 9, 1960, 12:50 p.m.
CDD said he wanted Mann to be sure he was clear in preparing 
the new program on Latin America. He said he had told Mr. Achilles 
that he thought Mr. Mann was the fellow who ought to take a hold of 
it. CDD said he agreed with Mr. Mann that it ought to be big enough, 
about $500,000,000, and should include Chilean reconstruction as a sep-
arate piece of the package of about $150,000,000. CDD said he didn’t 
know whether there is any other place that we can use grants - the rest 
of it is going for loans to the Inter-American Bank. He said it would 
require a bit of talking with the Bank and that we have had trouble with 
the Treasury on the size. CDD said that he was going to talk it over with 
the Secretary and that he would back him up on this thing. He said that 
because of the strong statement made by the President we have got to 
come up with something. He told Mann he hoped he could push the 
thing along. He mentioned that in the Inter-American Bank we have 
veto power. Mann asked if we are still thinking about the fund being at 
the U.S. end of this and CDD replied-­yes. Mr. Mann commented that 
then we could use the veto power and don’t have to worry about DLF. 
Mr. Mann said we should stick hard on the soft loan and CDD replied 
yes. CDD said that Mann would have to take it on and that Jack Bell 
would help him.
1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversations, Lot 64 D 
199. Limited Official Use. The conversation recorded here took place at 12:50 p.m.
