Chapter 6, June–December 1990  941
B. An acceleration profile for that flight test, including all stages 
and the self-­contained dispensing mechanism, if there is one, having 
a precision of at least one-­tenth of a meter per second squared, with a 
sample rate of no less than five times each second, with values given 
relative to an internal frame or reference in a three element Cartesian 
coordinate system.
3. The obligation to exchange tapes and information shall not 
apply to those flights where measurements are not required to be made 
or where failure precludes making or recording such measurements.
4. In the exceptional event that a side determines that disclosure of 
an anomaly during a specific flight test would create significant national 
security concerns, it would be allowed to delete from the information 
exchange those specific portions that, in its judgment, are necessary to 
protect data relating to the national security concerns. This exemption 
would be used rarely, and only in cases of genuine risk to security.
A. If a side elected to withhold information, it would notify the 
other side and provide a rationale for the deletions.
B. To prevent abuses, such withholding would be subject to a small 
annual quota.
C. If a side elected to withhold information, information on all 
telemetric channels other than those specifically exempted for security 
reasons would be exchanged.
D. In no case may information be withheld that is necessary to 
monitor missile acceleration, boost stage separation, re-­entry vehicle 
separation commands, or re-­entry vehicle releases.
Practices for transmitting telemetry including power levels
1. For five years following entry into force of the START treaty, 
unless they agree otherwise in the Joint Compliance and Inspection 
Commission, the sides will maintain their current practices with 
respect to the effective radiated power, broadcast frequency, bandwith, 
and modulation methods used for transmitting telemetry from existing 
types of ICBMs or SLBMs. Current practices means those in effect on 
December 1, 1990.
2. During this five year period, transmission practices would be 
negotiated in the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission to 
ensure that each side can receive the telemetry transmission of the other 
side. Missile and re-­entry vehicle telemetry would be included in this 
negotiation.
3. These negotiated transmission practices will ensure equal recip-
rocal rights and will apply to future types of ICBMs and SLBMs. In 
addition, they will apply to future types of telemetry transmission 
equipment used with existing types of ICBMs and SLBMs.
