and those which are of particular interest to us I have discussed already in
my preceding reports, both telegraphic and written.
Also in regard to the Final Act, if the Department will be good enough to
consult the Legation’s despatches Nos. 170 of November 9, 1927 and 171
of November 10, 1927, together with my telegram from Geneva, No. 59 of
November 7, 11 p.m.,25 it will have before it a complete outline of the
articles to which we took exception and of the failure to have these
exceptions accepted by the conference. I merely reiterate what I have before
stated, that the Final Act has no binding force, it is not signed by the
delegates as Plenipotentiaries of their Government, but is open for signature
to any person who attended the Conference. It is a compilation of
resolutions adopted by the individuals attending the conference. A signatory
state may instruct its delegate to sign the convention and protocol without
instructing him to sign the Final Act.
Relative to the convention itself, I append herewith an analysis26 in which
the convention, as finally signed, is compared article by article with the
original draft text of the convention issued by the Economic Committee. At
the same time short notes and comments are appended, together with
reference to those telegrams and despatches which deal with the particular
subject. In the preparation of this annex I am indebted in a large measure to
Dr. Lyon, the Commercial Attaché of this Legation.
Certain observations of a general nature occur to me. The convention, as the
Department will note, is of a reciprocal nature and this theory of reciprocity
has been emphasized in article 1. The benefits of the abolition of
restrictions and prohibitions accrue only to those states which sign the
convention. As a corollary to this situation there is nothing to prevent a
state signatory to the convention from increasing in any way it sees fit its
present categories of prohibitions and restrictions as against a state which is
not a signatory to the convention, so long as such action does not unduly
affect the trade of another signatory power.
There are certain faults, some obvious and some not so visible in the
convention. It is to be regretted that exceptions are permitted of any class or
kind. The convention would have been a simpler document and a much
