380  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
55.	
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the 
Soviet Union1
Washington, October 21, 1989, 0307Z
338441. Subject: Bartholomew-Dubinin Discussion on START, CW
1. Secret—Entire Text.
2. Summary. During the course of an October 20 meeting on 
another subject, Under Secretary Bartholomew and Soviet Ambassador 
Dubinin discussed the status of START and the President’s initiative on 
CW. End Summary.
3. Dubinin asked for Bartholomew’s assessment of the status 
of the START talks and when a START treaty might be completed. 
Bartholomew replied that there was a common view within the USG on 
our serious intent to move expeditiously in START and that Wyoming 
had been helpful. Moreover, the summit would focus attention on 
START. He personally felt it a tall order to finish a treaty by the summit. 
But the U.S. would be working hard at it.
4. Dubinin commented that he had the impression the U.S. delega-
tion was awaiting new instructions. Bartholomew replied that, before 
the U.S. could make changes in its position on mobile missiles, as the 
Secretary had said previously, we had to get action from Congress. This 
now was a matter of dealing with Congress, not the Geneva negotia-
tions. However, Bartholomew felt there had been some good practical 
developments between Ambassadors Burt and Nazarkin on a range of 
secondary but important issues.
5. Dubinin asked about other questions. Bartholomew observed 
that Nazarkin was pursuing the Soviet positions on ALCMs and SLCMs. 
Both sides would have to think hard on these questions. With regard to 
SLCMs, the idea of not treating them as part of the START Treaty was a 
positive step, but the sides still had some difficult differences. Looking 
out the next seven-­nine months, there was much intensive work to do. 
He expected an active period of engagement, both between the minis-
ters and negotiators.
6. Dubinin asked Bartholomew to comment on the U.S. approach 
to the CW problem. Bartholomew said the U.S. was ready to work now 
with the Soviets on reducing CW stockpiles to 20 percent of the current 
U.S. level, even before a CW convention. This was of real interest. He 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
D890912-0016. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Sent Priority for information to NST Geneva and 
Geneva. Drafted by Pifer; cleared by Tefft, Timbie, and Dobbins and in EUR/RPM, PM/
TMP, S/S, and S/S-O; approved by Bartholomew.
