988 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement The Department approved such a ceremony subject to agreement between the Governor and the Ambassador on the procedure and that all physical duties involved be carried out by U.S. personnel. (Tab B).3 Ambassador Farland on September 20 recommended that President de la Guardia be invited to raise the Panamanian flag at the ceremony, (Tab C)4 but the Department turned down that recommendation on the grounds that (a) it would be a precedent for the possible further exercise of sovereign rights in the Zone by Panama thus prejudicing our treaty position and (b) would expose us to even greater Congressional and public criticism in this country than that to which we have already been subjected. The Department did, however, authorize a ceremony, the extent of which was left to Ambassador Farland’s discretion. (Tab D).5 Notwithstanding the genesis of the decision, it appeared that the initial display of the Panamanian flag with ours in the Canal Zone as a symbol of Panama’s titular sovereignty, would require some formal ceremony were it to have the desired impact on Panamanians, for a routine raising without any note being taken of the event, could well be interpreted as an off-­hand and rather ungracious performance of an act, which was intended to have emotional impact. 3 Not attached to the source text. For a summary of the document at Tab B, telegram 142 to Panama City, September 17, see Document PM–59, footnote 3. 4 Not attached to the source text. The document at Tab C, not printed, was telegram 160 from Panama City, September 20; 719.04/9–2060. 5 Not attached to the source text. The document at Tab D, not printed, was telegram 144 to Panama City, September 20; 719.04/9–2060. PM–61. Editorial Note On October 1, 1960, Dr. Roberto Chiari, the victor in Panama’s presidential elections held on May 8, 1960, was sworn in as President of Panama for a four-­year term. In his inaugural speech President Chiari expressed gratification at the United States’ recognition of Panama’s titular sovereignty over the Panama Canal Zone, but at the same time he maintained that the United States had not complied fully with the terms of the treaties covering Canal Zone operations. He was optimistic, however, that the United States’ recognition of Panama’s titular sovereignty foreshadowed a new era of good relations that would enable the two nations to find practical solutions to existing problems. Documentation concerning President Chiari’s inauguration is in decimal file 719.11.
