1955  361
for us to do so. He had suggested that these be dealt with through UK 
Charge or Indian Embassy. I wanted point out agreed announcement 
provided for certain actions to be taken by our respective governments 
and provided for other functions to be performed by other countries. 
Those matters which according to agreed announcement concerned 
actions by our governments were an intergovernmental matter between 
us. Words of agreed announcement resolved nothing, but only imple­
mentation of these words would resolve problem with which we were 
concerned under agenda item one. Some of questions I had raised had 
also been raised by UK Charge in Peking but satisfactory replies had 
not been received by him.
13. In addition to question of 19 Americans in jail, I had raised three 
simple questions at several meetings. In accordance with his sugges­
tion I had rephrased these questions in the form of suggestions which 
he had said his government would be willing to consider. These three 
suggestions were simply: (1) I asked whether or not he could confirm 
that Americans in jail had been given text of agreed announcement in 
language they could understand. We had received no information from 
UK Charge confirming this done. It seemed very simple matter and he 
could simply answer with yes which would dispose of this question. (2) 
I asked whether or not those persons in jail could freely communicate 
with or otherwise have access to UK Charge in accordance with terms 
agreed announcement. Again very simple affirmative answer could 
dispose of this question here. (3) I asked whether or not UK Charge 
would be permitted interview persons who desired return if under 
agreed announcement US wanted facts in any such case investigated. 
Again simple affirmative answer would dispose this question here.
14. I considered these matters of implementation of announce­
ment ones which concerned both our governments. These questions 
had also been raised by UK Charge and replies satisfactory to US had 
not been received through him. I found it difficult understand why I 
could not have answers to these simple questions. Difficult understand 
why his government appeared be moving so slowly in implementing 
agreed announcement and thus delaying our talks here. Best way make 
progress would be for his government implement announcement and 
for him frankly inform me here in this regard. At last meeting he had 
assured me that his government would faithfully carry out agreed 
announcement. He told me that cases of remaining 19 Americans were 
being reviewed individually and that British Charge would be notified 
of results of these reviews. Yet, up to present time, I did not know of 
a single such case which has been reported to British Charge, despite 
fact a month had passed since issuance of agreed announcement. I 
found difficult see how this was “faithful implementation” of the 
announcement. Apparent failure his government, up to the present, to
