March 27–December 31, 1979
881
absolutely no indication that he had any receptivity to pursuing the
issue with Sadat.
7. During a lengthy discussion of the reasons for the rising opposi-
tion in U.S. public opinion to certain Israeli policies, particularly those
involving settlements and Lebanon, Begin expressed deep resentment
about what he characterized as “deliberately hostile briefing of the
press by the State Department about the air encounters with the
Syrians,” and other subjects, in recent days. He said “we are very per-
turbed about this permanent anti-Israeli briefing pattern coming out of
Washington,” and said that he had numerous reports from journalists
about what was being said by State Department officials. He particu-
larly resented the fact that the Department’s spokesman had issued a
public statement branding us as aggressors before he had even re-
ceived a report on the facts and on the Begin/Lewis meeting at which
the Secretary’s message5 was delivered and discussed. He asked Lewis
to take careful note and to make sure that Secretary Vance was in-
formed of his concern. He insisted that the Israeli actions in the air over
Lebanon were “a clear case of self-defense,” and then reiterated his po-
sition that Israeli actions in Lebanon are essential in the face of publicly
proclaimed PLO intentions to continue terrorist attacks against Israel.
8. Strauss intervened in Begin’s monologue at this point to suggest
as a personal idea that the Prime Minister should announce a morato-
rium on pre-emptive bombing for a fixed period (thirty, sixty, or ninety
days), or perhaps as an open-ended commitment, and then challenge
the PLO to halt its terrorist attacks in response. He stressed that this
would put the Israeli policy in a much more favorable light in the
United States, whether or not the PLO responded. There was lengthy
discussion of this idea, with Begin showing some interest in consid-
ering it but worried about the impact if the PLO bombings within Israel
continued after the moratorium had been proclaimed. He stressed his
overriding responsibility to try to avoid the bloodshed of his citizens.
He did not know whether he could conscientiously run the risks of
such an appeal and moratorium on Israel’s part not being heeded by
the Palestinian terrorists. (Note: Begin continues to be convinced that
Israeli bombing of PLO bases effectively stops many terrorist attacks
before they are launched.) This led to a long dissertation on the differ-
ence between “terrorists” and “liberation or freedom fighters,” with
Begin stressing the despicable nature of PLO tactics in deliberately at-
tacking innocent civilians and then “boasting about the murder of
women and children.” At the end of the conversation, Begin seemed to
be turning over in his mind Strauss’ idea. He assured Strauss he would
give it very serious consideration.
5 See footnote 2, Document 267.
