1980  929
Brown responded that the deployment of tactical nuclear weap-
ons and our force organization in Europe would make resort to their 
use almost automatic. In the Persian Gulf, where no such infrastructure 
exists and where no such threat of nuclear weapons use has been made, 
the threshold is much higher. (S)
Aaron responded that we should make it seem more likely that 
we would use them in the Persian Gulf. Six and a half divisions are 
certainly not enough to defend the region. (S)
Brown said that we have about the same force ratio against the 
Soviets with that many divisions in Iran as we had for a long time in 
Europe. (S)
The President said that he would make a point entirely for the pri-
vacy of this meeting. It is hopeless to believe that we can match the 
Soviets with conventional forces in Iran. We simply cannot do it. We 
cannot defend them without the use of nuclear weapons. (S)
Brown argued that short of the use of nuclear weapons we might 
stabilize a conflict in Iran with limited conventional forces. We get oil 
from Saudi Arabia which might not necessarily be invaded. We could 
escalate either vertically or horizontally. (S)
The President agreed that we should be prepared for both hori-
zontal and vertical escalation as well as economic sanctions. We must 
convince the Soviets that we will do more on all fronts, that they will 
face a worldwide response, that they cannot narrow the conflict to the 
military front in Iran. (S)
Brown said that the more conventional forces we deploy there, the 
more credible that worldwide response will be to the Soviets. The Pres-
ident responded by saying that he hates to consider the conventional 
defense of Iran. He recalled the military options which were planned 
against Iran last winter—­how much air power it took and the opera-
tional difficulties [less than 1 line not declassified]—­the more familiar he 
became with the military operational difficulties and realities, the more 
he became convinced that a conventional defense there is beyond our 
capabilities even if we expanded our forces considerably. (S)
General Jones reviewed for the President briefly a recent JCS dis-
cussion of5 [14 lines not declassified]
General Jones continued that one of the most helpful things we 
could do would be to have NATO look into an operational buildup in 
East Turkey. If NATO provides the umbrella for this effort, it might pos-
sibly succeed. The President asked if the Turks would permit this. Jones 
answered that with NATO behind the effort, the Turks are more likely 
to agree to it. The Turks need the confidence that all of NATO is with 
5 No minutes of this meeting were found.
