1102
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
bilateral relations would be slight or nonexistent (and perhaps positive
with a few key industrial countries). The domestic political impact
would be nil, or perhaps even positive (the US refused unreasonable
demands by the Third World).” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of
the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State for Eco-
nomic Affairs, Richard Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot 81 D 134, Box 7, E—
Memoranda of Conversations, Jan. 1980–June 1980)
In his September 16 Evening Report to Carter, Muskie wrote: “As
you know, the UNGA Special Session ended yesterday with informal
agreement on a new International Development Strategy, but without
agreement on procedures for Global Negotiations. The Special Session
will report to the upcoming General Assembly that all delegations ex-
cept three (the UK, West Germany, and the US) agreed with the earlier
version of the procedural text that the G–77 had accepted. It is expected
the Second Committee of the UNGA will reopen discussions in early
November.” Carter wrote in the margin next to this paragraph: “Hold
firm.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Subject File, Box 23, Evening Reports (State): 9/80)
Attempts over the ensuing months to devise a text acceptable to all
parties came to naught. (Cooper discussed one such attempt in a No-
vember 21 memorandum to Muskie that is in the National Archives,
RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of
State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot 81D134,
Box 7, E—Memoranda of Conversations, Jan. 1980–June 1980.) In his
December 16 Evening Report to Carter, Muskie wrote: “Efforts in the
UNGA to launch the global negotiations were suspended today
without agreement. The U.S. delegation continued to have problems
with the UNGA Chairman’s latest procedural text, which we felt did
not adequately protect the independence of the specialized agencies.
The EC, on the other hand, could have accepted the procedural text, but
was insisting on a fuller treatment of energy price issues in the agenda.
As the G–77 also had serious problems with the Chairman’s draft
agenda, both the industrialized countries and the G–77 appear to have
agreed to end efforts to close the gaps at the current UNGA and resume
the negotiations in the new year.” Carter initialed Muskie’s memo-
randum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
rial, Subject File, Box 24, Evening Reports (State): 12/80)
