March 1952–February 1953
353
fully planned program to increase his popularity and prestige. The
Shah would be told that it is our hope that by increasing his influence
he will be able, by constitutional means, to offset the dangerous influ-
ence of such extremists as Kashani and thereby not only increase the
Government’s stability but also strengthen the Pahlevi dynasty.
(b) The program to increase the Shah’s popularity and prestige
should be conducted in such a way as to convince the Iranian public
that the Shah is as strongly motivated with respect to reform, oil nation-
alization, and the elimination of British influence as any Iranian polit-
ical leader. The objective would be to condition the Iranian public in
such a way that in the event of a crisis the public would be as willing to
accept the leadership of the Shah as to accept the leadership of Mos-
sadeq, Kashani, or any other leader.
(c) The program would require the following action by the Shah:
(1) A greatly increased number of public appearances and public
statements.
(2) Unreserved identification with nationalist aims.
(3) Widely publicized visits to the oil areas, factories, villages, ex-
perimental farms, tribal groups, etc.
(4) Determined action to obtain cooperation from other members
of royal family in the program and to curb all activity by them im-
pairing the prestige of the dynasty.
(5) While fully supporting Mossadeq (at least initially), deter-
mined efforts to cultivate conservative religious, and moderate polit-
ical, leaders and to strengthen his ties with the Army.
(6) Insofar as possible, avoidance of actions which would give rise
to charges of political meddling. However, he should not be intimi-
dated by such charges into abandoning any of the above-listed main
features of the program.
7. Covert Support for the Shah’s Program:
(a) The foregoing program conducted by the Shah should be sup-
plemented by a covert CIA program. Every effort should be made [1½
lines not declassified] to increase the Shah’s popularity and prestige and
to reduce the influence of such leaders as Kashani, Makki, and Mos-
sadeq. Part of this program will have to be carefully timed since it
would be dangerous to reduce influence of Mossadeq before making
fairly certain that the Shah’s program was proving successful.
(b) [2 lines not declassified]
8. Official U.S. Policy:
(a) Unless there were real prospects of an oil settlement, every ef-
fort should be made on the official level to de-emphasize the oil issue
and thus remove the international spot-light from Mossadeq. It is sug-
gested, for instance, that the U.S. and U.K. insist that any further oil dis-
cussions be held in London or Washington rather than in Teheran. At
the same time it might be advisable for Ambassador Henderson to at-
