156 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV similar a solution to the problem of maintaining the effectiveness of our bomber force as the B–1. I recommend that you ask Harold Brown, in his testimony before the House and Senate Appropriations Committees now scheduled for September 15 and 20, to state that the Administration does not wish to initiate the FB–111H program at this time even at a minimal level. He should support continued B–1 development during 1978 at the minimum level sufficient to provide an option for production.3 3 Carter checked his approval of Lance’s recommendation. In a September 20 memorandum Brzezinski wrote Brown: “Last week OMB sent a memo to the President suggesting that you should oppose any efforts by the Congress to begin a development program for the FB–111H. Since this memo would not have gotten to the President in advance of your testimony before the Congress last Thursday, I asked David Aaron to pass on OMB’s as well as my own concerns over this issue. The President has since seen the OMB memo and has indicated that if an FB–111H program is started, ‘it should be kept at a minimum.’” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 4, Defense Department: 8–9/77) 36. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Secretary Brown’s Response to Questions on Our Nuclear War Procedures and Doctrine In the spring, in connection with a review of our “crisis management” procedures for the event of nuclear war, you asked Harold Brown to provide answers to questions about (1) procedures for the conduct of a limited nuclear war, (2) the survivability of our command and control under nuclear attack, and (3) the concept of “limited nuclear options” (LNOs). He has responded with a memorandum (Tab A), a report on our “Current Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy” (Tab B). I delayed 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 47, Nuclear War Doctrine: Limited Nuclear Options (LNO) and Regional Nuclear Options (RNO): 3/77–1/80. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Drafted by Odom, who sent the memorandum to Brzezinski under a September 9 covering memorandum. (Ibid.) An unknown hand wrote on the first page of Odom’s memorandum: “Hand Carried to the President 9/16/77.” Carter wrote in the upper right corner of Brzezinski’s memorandum: “Zbig—See margin notes.”
