1126 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement America next year and we must mobilize various different approaches. ICA can provide technical study. We are thinking of requesting additional funds for Latin America for this sort of thing, although it is too late for the coming fiscal year since requests must be made by November or December for the following fiscal year. Mr. Dillon thought Congress would be receptive if we could show ways the funds would be used. We must therefore show specific needs, e.g. land reform in Peru and Colombia and reconstruction in Chile. Mr. Dillon said the immediate problem in Peru seemed to be one of finding funds in the next three or four months, and that the DLF and the Export Import Bank to be the only sources for these funds. He referred again to the IBRD’s interest, adding that study should be made of the possibility that it supply funds for both local currency as well as foreign exchange needs. Mr. Dillon then said there was a general feeling in U.S. Government circles that we should use DLF funds for local currency needs in conjunction with the Export-Import Bank, rather than with the IBRD, for foreign exchange requirements, as we had our own foreign exchange problem and preferred to finance our own exports. Other foreign exporters should provide their own financing. Mr. Dillon suggested that Prime Minister Beltran bear in mind in his talks with Mr. Brand and others that our preference in financing given projects is thus for the DLF to do the whole thing or in conjunction with the Export-Import Bank. Mr. Dillon felt that Sr. Beltran would find a receptive attitude in the DLF toward an increased flow of funds to Latin America for such fields as land reform and housing, and that this reflected not only the attitude of Mr. Brand and his staff but also of those agencies which make up its Board of Directors, including Treasury, State, ICA and the Export- Import Bank. Mr. Dillon also pointed up the problem of worldwide priorities, saying that we took great satisfaction in helping Governments which do a conscientious job of helping themselves. He pointed to Peru’s record, which is hard to equal anywhere in the world, and stated that this gave Peru extra priority. Reverting to the question of housing, Mr. Dillon said we wanted to help in this field, for example, through savings and loan associations. These seem to provide the right pattern, as we could of course provide only partial financing. We are giving study to further assistance through home loan agencies in different parts of the world, particularly in Latin America. For example, we are trying to work out some way of creating a joint agency to encourage and channel the investment of private capital in home loan agencies abroad. Mr. Dillon suggested that Sr. Beltran talk to Mr. Brand about this. Sr. Beltran said he had seen Mr. Brand this morning and that the latter was planning to come to Lima. He had also seen Mr. Anderson of the Treasury, who called in Mr. Upton. He said Mr. Anderson and Mr.
