434
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
do this in Afghanistan today, the likelihood is that they can do it to
Pakistan, or some other country, tomorrow—the first targets would be
Iran and Pakistan. While Afghanistan is the first country, the Soviet
Union mainly has its eyes on Asia, and the action poses a threat to
South Asia and the Gulf area as well. It occurred at a time the US
experienced a tense situation vis-a-vis Iran.6
—The Soviet Union may gain something temporarily, but in the
longer term they will gain the opposite of what they set out to do.
Now a new situation has been created. All the Muslim countries and
peace-loving countries have risen up in opposition to Soviet hege-
monism. Even Iran has registered its protest to the Soviet Union over
its invasion. And these factors may help to bring an early resolution
to the crisis between the US and Iran. It seems to me to a large extent
we should talk to other countries about the matter and do a good job
of it.
[Omission is in the original.]
6 A memorandum from Holbrooke to Vance, January 31, included the following
expanded exchange on Afghanistan between Brown and Geng: “Secretary Brown: I
believe we must take action to provide political and material support to the insurgent
forces in Afghanistan. And in this regard, I have a couple of questions for you: What
support is China currently providing the Afghan insurgents? Do you have plans to
expand that support? Vice Premier Geng: We are very pleased to hear the US Government
has made the decision to provide assistance to the anti-government forces in Afghanistan
and to Pakistan. You know that we have been giving aid to the Pakistanis and they are
satisfied with what we have done. As to Afghanistan, we plan to give assistance to
various organizations, groups, and peoples in Afghanistan in resistance to the Soviet
invasion. We plan to give them assistance via Pakistan. However, our assistance has to
be in limited quantity. While Afghanistan is the first country, the Soviet Union mainly
has its eyes on Asia, and the action poses a threat to South Asia and the Gulf area as
well. It occurred at a time the US experienced a tense situation vis-à-vis Iran.” (Briefing
Memorandum, January 31; Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and
Super Sensitive File, 1979–1983, Lot 96D262, Box 3, 1980 Super Sensitive I, Jan, Feb,
Mar–1980)
