Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI Tab A Memorandum From the President’s Assistant (Schlesinger) to President Carter3 Washington, March 31, 1977 SUBJECT Problems Raised by P.D. No. 8 In accordance with your suggestion,4 I outline below the four problems that I see created by the precise wording of P.D. No. 8. 1. The all-inclusive constraint on non-nuclear weapons states. The P.D. imposes a definitive barrier between the nuclear weapons and nonnuclear weapons states in terms of the handling of nuclear power technologies. Some non-nuclear weapons states, notably Germany and Japan, will regard this barrier as highly discriminatory. Both at the time they were urged to ratify the NPT and in bilateral negotiations both countries were assured that they would not be subjected to discrimination by remaining in the status of non-nuclear weapons states. (It has been the continuing desire of the United States Government to avoid creating any incentive to become a nuclear weapons state.) Reprocessing facilities in Germany, Japan, and also Belgium and Italy were established under these understandings. These nations must be persuaded to join with the United States in the effort directed toward the control of weapons-useable material. But they will not accept being treated as in the same category as Pakistan, Iran, or Brazil. To avoid unproductive controversy and to provide the proper incentives for collaboration, the line of distinction will have to be drawn someplace other than the non-nuclear weapons states.5 2. Termination of nuclear cooperation. The difficulty in the phrase “demonstrably acquires a nuclear explosive device” [2½ lines not declassified] The political difficulties are obvious. Consequently, you may desire to put more flexibility in your policy position before going public.6 3. The U.S. breeder program. If the phrase “emphasize alternative designs to the plutonium breeder” implies that new money and the high growth rates will go to alternative designs, that is readily accom- 3 Secret. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote “Zbig— Comment. J.” 4 Not found. 5 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “I agree.” 6 Carter underlined the words “before going public” and wrote “not going public with this” in the right-hand margin next to this paragraph.
