Romania
577
U.S. interest in human rights affairs in no way signifies a lessening of
U.S. support for Romanian independence and territorial integrity.
Ceausescu’s approach to global issues in his talks with the President
must be seen against the backdrop of uncertainty during the mid-
1970’s. During that period, Ceausescu’s perception of drift in U.S. policy
and the Chinese succession crisis led him, as insurance, to seek a mini-
reconciliation with the USSR in 1976, at what he saw as the low point
of U.S. and Chinese resolve. With new Administrations in place in
China and the U.S., Ceausescu has again distanced himself from the
Soviets on key issues, including the Middle East, CSCE and Eurocom-
munism. In his talks with the President, he will be looking for a firm
U.S. commitment to play a major stabilizing role in global affairs on
both political and economic issues and to develop vigorous relation-
ships with countries like Romania.
Similarly, Ceausescu’s approach to bilateral issues will be colored
by the current stage of U.S.-Romanian relations. These have entered a
period in which both countries are paying more attention to practical
problem-solving than exciting new initiatives. Some of the early enthu-
siasm has been dissipated. New tangible evidence we can give of our
interest in Romania is limited. Our increased attention to other Eastern
European countries, especially Poland and Hungary, has diminished
in Ceausescu’s eyes Romania’s special relationship with the U.S. While
the visit itself will serve to reassure Ceausescu, he will press for eco-
nomic advantages to which the Romanians attribute political signifi-
cance. These will include most-favored-nation tariff status (MFN) on
a long-term basis, credit on favorable terms, easing of export controls,
and increased U.S. Government support for U.S.-Romanian industrial
cooperation, including projects in third countries.
In this setting, we believe the best way for the President to set the
stage for the talks is to begin by taking Ceausescu into his confidence
on the U.S. approach to major global issues. These would include our
world-wide support for human rights, U.S.-Soviet and U.S.-Chinese
relations, SALT, and MBFR, our approach to Eastern and Western
Europe and the CSCE process, North-South relations, nuclear nonpro-
liferation, Africa and the Middle East. Ceausescu may also wish to
discuss the role of the nonaligned and, since he is planning a trip to
Korea, he may have some ideas here as well. In its policies toward
the Middle East and many aspects of the Belgrade CSCE conference,
Romania has acted constructively and stood apart from the Warsaw
Pact consensus. It is in our interest to reinforce such Romanian actions
on their own merits. But cultivating Ceausescu’s desire to play an
important and moderate role on international issues has another bene-
fit. It makes it easier for us to influence Ceausescu favorably on issues,
such as human rights, where he sees us as the demandeur.
