territory, subsequently explaining and defending this action on the grounds
of expediency and the absence of any anti-foreign sentiment among the
Chinese troops concerned. On the other hand, faithfully carrying out the
agreement above alluded to, at one moment a small American picket was
confronted with an entire Division of Chinese troops seeking a short-cut in
pursuit of Li Ching-lin’s defeated Fengtien forces. Fortunately, the Chinese
officer commanding the advance guard of the Division assented to the
request of our picket and turned aside. This incident, one of many during
two days, was of extreme delicacy and danger. A clash was narrowly
averted, which, had it occurred, might have had far-reaching results. This
serves to illustrate the difficulty that has developed from the fact that
Commandants at Tientsin, other than the American, felt justified in
departing from the combined defense plan, and considered themselves safe
in the inviolability of their concessions as a point for ultimate retirement,
while the Americans, without a concession and compelled by elementary
military reasons, were forced thereby to an issue of great danger in order to
preserve the integrity of their base. (See page seven of mail despatch from
the American Consul-General, Tientsin, dated December 28th last, on the
subject of conditions in the Tientsin area.48 ) Upon learning of the above
incident, I called a conference here with General Connor49 and the
American Consul-General at Tientsin, as soon as the disturbed conditions
permitted. It was agreed at this conference that in view of the present
irrational state of mind of the Chinese, it would be utterly impracticable to
take up the matter with the Chinese Government with a view to obtaining
its cooperation in adjusting the position of the American Command at
Tientsin to the new situation created by the breakdown of the combined
defense plan. After careful consideration it was decided that, as a first step
toward this adjustment, General Connor should confer with his colleagues
and present the facts frankly to them and seek an equally candid statement
of exactly what he could expect his position to be in the future vis-à-vis
these Commandants as regards the carrying out of the defense plan. This
conference between General Connor and his fellow-Commandants at
Tientsin, although amicable, brought forth no proposal such as he requested
for the purpose of relieving his position.
General Connor stated to me, as his considered judgment, that the position
of his command at Tientsin, by reason of the failure of the foreign
