Guatemala  671
I submit we should look at the whole question as those in the other 
country do. If they feel they are really getting something because they 
must bargain for it—­then let us bargain. The Russians apparently don’t 
make the mistake of free-­handed gifts in Asia—­they attach some condi-
tion and are thereby respected. We in much of the area are looked on as 
easy marks, often with contempt.
Here in Guatemala, and, as I understand it, from persons with 
whom I have spoken in other similar countries, it is recognized that 
we have engendered a very substantial feeling that we should sup-
port Guatemala out of some sort of undefined duty to the people and 
that if we do not do so, political blackmail will result. This I submit 
is not the purpose for which the aid was started. It is a very unhappy 
result.
To counter this situation, there are two remedies. First, we need 
to forget our charity a little and adopt a pragmatic attitude, and, sec-
ond, we should get away from grant aid and emphasize loans. The 
size of the loans, the freedom with which they are given and the rate 
of interest would appear less important than in having the purposes 
understood. Fostering the idea of some self help, some local pulling 
of the boot straps, some honesty and responsibility are important. 
Getting acceptance of the concept of the United States as a helper 
or partner is important—­getting away from the idea of Uncle Sam 
as someone to work as an easy mark is equally so. The latter sparks 
no effort at all to work against Communism—­it just lays us open to 
propaganda attack.
If U.S. policy towards the underdeveloped countries were reduced 
to its bare bones, it could be defined as preventing the entrance of or 
to reduce the presence of Communism. As soon as we try to make that 
frame carry other burdens, or obscure its simple design by soft-­hearted 
accretions, we start to lose. Let’s keep it simple and direct; let’s work for 
our survival and not our conscience.
The announcement of a possible Inter-American Development 
Institution may be the way out of our present approach in Latin America. 
It is to be hoped it can be framed in partnership and not paternalism.
L. D. Mallory
