August 8–September 17, 1978
71
than is Dayan. Dayan is more concerned with security. Dayan is also
less concerned with words than is Begin. Dayan is the element of conti-
nuity with previous negotiations. He is also personally pessimistic
about getting any agreement with Jordan. Weizman is more instinctual
and less intellectual, but he is basically pragmatic and is very deter-
mined not to miss the chance for peace. He is more convinced of Sadat’s
sincerity than the others. The former Attorney General, Barak, is a very
creative lawyer who will try to help solve problems. Begin has confi-
dence in him. Barak should be included in any talks when four Israelis
are present. The Vice President noted that Sadat does not seem to trust
Dayan and that he prefers Weizman. Ambassador Eilts confirmed that
this is the case.
Admiral Turner was then asked to brief on the regional conse-
quences of a possible failure at Camp David. If the United States re-
mains involved in working for a peace settlement, a failure at Camp
David would not necessarily lead to dramatic consequences. The
Saudis see themselves in a “no lose situation”. If there is a success, they
can live with it. If there is a failure, Saudi Arabia will work to bring
Sadat back into the Arab fold. Saudi Arabia does not attribute the
highest priority now to the Arab-Israeli conflict. They care more about
cohesion of moderate Arab states, and they are concerned with the situ-
ation in South Yemen.3 They do not believe peace is possible with Israel
under Begin’s leadership. They also believe that the long-term trends in
the area favor the Arab side. They assume that eventually the United
States will use leverage over Israel. They already tend to discount
Camp David however it comes out. They will try to consolidate the
moderate forces in the Arab world. If Saudi Arabia concludes that we
will never use our leverage with Israel, however, the Saudis may move
toward a more anti-American posture. But the Saudis are not inclined
to play a major geopolitical role. They are more interested in self-
preservation than in peace.
Secretary Vance asked how the Saudis want us to apply leverage.
Do they mean that we should cut military and economic aid to Israel?
Admiral Turner replied that the Saudis may not have a clear definition
in mind but they do believe we have leverage. They think of the 1968
experience in Sinai. The other moderate Arab states will go along with
Saudi Arabia. If the summit fails, this will confirm Hussein in his be-
liefs. The rejectionists will make noise, and will wait and see. The PLO
will see a failure as a success. Sadat’s own reaction will be to shift
tactics, but he will not give up. He will be pressed to reconcile himself
3 Documentation on the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen (South Yemen), is
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region;
Arabian Peninsula.
