National Security Policy 505 role in Bloc affairs is probably based to a large extent on the absence of any practical alternative. In Soviet eyes, any heavy pressure on Peiping, such as threats to reduce economic or military aid, would almost certainly put an undesirable strain on Sino-Soviet ties. Therefore, despite anxiety, and probable subtle attempts to insure Peiping’s basic conformity and to minimize its growing influence and assertiveness, the Soviet leaders will probably accept Peiping’s increased stature with outward grace. Khrushchev has already admitted that Peiping too can be a fount of Communist wisdom. For its part, Peiping will probably continue to acknowledge publicly the USSR’s leadership of the camp and its dependence on Soviet assis­ tance and advice. 185. Though new points of friction will probably arise in the course of the next several years, differences will almost certainly be minor when compared to the basic points of agreement. In addition to ideo­ logical bonds, the USSR and Communist China share hostility to the US and are linked by the belief that concerted political and economic activ­ ities are mutually advantageous. Further, Communist China’s man­ power and strategic location and the USSR’s military, industrial, and technical capabilities have served to create an interdependence fully appreciated in both capitals. VI. TRENDS IN SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY The Soviet View of the World Situation 186. In none of the many changes that have taken place since the death of Stalin has there been any suggestion that the USSR is aban­ doning its basic attitudes and aims. The outlook of the present Soviet leaders remains fundamentally conditioned by their concept of irrecon­ cilable conflict between the Communist and non-Communist worlds. They have shown no diminution of vigor in their search for ultimate victory, though their views as to the best policies and tactics for win­ ning it have undergone important change. 187. In looking at the world situation from this viewpoint of con­ flict, the Soviet leaders display much confidence in the prospects of the Communist side. They show pride in the USSR’s achievements over the last four decades and appear convinced of the over-­all strength of their present position in the world. Despite their setbacks in Eastern Europe, and the manifold internal problems which beset them, the new leaders seem confident of their ability to cope with these problems and to continue the growth of Soviet strength and the expansion of Soviet influence.
