Yugoslavia 759 Tito: The question of assistance to the LDCs is important; unfortunately, the progress is slow. V.P.: We are increasing our assistance from $2.4 billion to $8 billion over three years. Mr. President, some of the demands of the poorer countries we don’t find possible to accept. Tito: I feel the greatest obstacle is that of the international companies which contribute to fluctuations in prices—copper and other raw materials. V.P.: It is terrible. Tito: I think a great responsibility lies with the international companies. Minic: We have studied the positions taken at London carefully. Some are positive, but still the positions of the group of 19 and the group of 8 at Paris are far apart. It is difficult to know whether the Paris conference will be successful. We shall try to do whatever we can in order to achieve at least partial results. You know the group of 19 has to be careful so as not to be denounced by the group of 77— which is actually 110 nations. If the group of 8 comes closer to the group of 19, success will be achieved in raw materials, investment and financial matters. V.P.: On another issue, Mr. President, I am aware of the fact that we have had an irritating delay with regard to the Krsko reactor. Our Nuclear Regulatory Commission has now approved the license, and I hope you will find this a helpful step. Tito: We are satisfied with this solution. It would have been unpleasant for a small country like Yugoslavia to have invested so much and not to have it work out. V.P.: Absolutely. I hope that this will be a symbol of cooperation between our countries across the whole range of issues. Tito: As far as bilateral relations are concerned, we had some agreements with Ford and Kissinger, certain agreements on some kinds of arms. Now military purchases have stopped. I must tell you openly and frankly that the discussion about the TOW missile did not please us. There was a great fuss about this, propaganda and the suggestion that Yugoslavia was being armed by the U.S. We produce 85 percent of our own arms. We want to avoid a big fuss. We aren’t asking for sophisticated weapons, but we don’t want obsolete equipment. I would hope we could avoid misunderstandings. V.P.: I know Admiral Holloway has just visited and met with your military leaders.8 We will look into this aspect of our relations. 8 See footnote 6, Document 235.
