1074
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Vice President Mubarak said the Egyptians were all praying for the
President’s success in the coming elections. They say to each other what
would happen if President Carter were not there.
The President said to tell President Sadat that we understand his
economic and military needs. In the President’s judgment this was not
the time to propose the F–15. He realized how much the Egyptians
wanted it. He will direct Secretary Brown to expedite delivery of the
F–4s and F–16s and will consult with Congress immediately about the
delivery of additional grain under PL–480.
Vice President Mubarak said that the F–15 would give satisfaction to
the Egyptian armed forces. If it can be given to Israel and Saudi Arabia,
why not to them? It is being raised so strongly by the Egyptian military.
The President said he understood.
331.
Editorial Note
Speaking to a conference of Jewish-American reporters in Jeru-
salem on January 18, 1980, Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin
stated that the Egyptian delegation to the Palestinian autonomy negoti-
ations had attempted to “distort the Camp David accords” with its pro-
posals for Palestinian self-rule. The Prime Minister called for a new tri-
partite summit to address the issue. “If President Carter will ask for a
three-day summit to discuss matters of autonomy, Israel will go along
with it,” Begin stated. (“Begin Raps Egypt, Suggests U.S. Convene New
Summit,” Los Angeles Times, January 18, 1980, page A2)
Specifically, Begin’s criticisms were prompted by a deadlock over
the specific powers and responsibilities to be accorded a Palestinian ad-
ministrative council, as the Egyptian and Israeli delegations had re-
jected each other’s proposals. A verbatim transcript of the January 16
morning session of the Egyptian-Israeli-U.S. working group meeting
on the powers and responsibilities of the autonomy committee, held at
Mena House in Cairo, at which Egypt rejected the Israeli draft pro-
posal, is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Middle East, Trips/Visits File, Box 116, 1/25/80–2/2/80 Linowitz Trip
to the Middle East: 1/80.
