1979 695 a plan of action for announcing the decision. We believe—­and Lloyd Cutler agrees—­that you should make a short announcement yourself, and Harold and others should provide more detailed backup. We are therefore preparing a draft statement as well as other backup material. We will also provide a list of people you should call in advance of any public announcement. (C) 153. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, September 4, 1979 SUBJECT NSC Meeting on MX Basing (C) The purpose of this NSC meeting is to review and decide upon the MX basing mode Secretary Brown described and recommended in the memo he sent you last week.2 If at all possible the meeting should result in your final decision on a basing mode—­an inconclusive meeting would probably have an adverse affect upon SALT. (S) I suggest you consider the basing issue in terms of two separate questions—­should we proceed with the recommended basing mode? and how should any decision to proceed be implemented? To begin discussion of the first question Secretary Brown is prepared to give a quick summary of the major features of his recommendations—­the summary will assume that all present have read the backup memo. The issues of potential disagreement are: Cost: Jim McIntyre (and some parts of OSD) believes the initial systems acquisition is likely to be significantly higher than the $33B or so estimated by Secretary Brown. They may be right, but in my view Secretary Brown’s arguments as to how costs can be held down sound reasonable too, and even if the costs were another $5B–10B higher, the arguments in favor of this kind of system rather than any of the alternatives, particularly a dyad, are compelling. (S) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 57, NSC– 021, 9/5/79, MX Basing. Secret. Sent for action. Carter initialed the top of the memorandum and wrote “Swamp—[illegible].” 2 See Document 150.
