3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
332
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
103.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Moscow, April 22, 1978, noon–2 p.m.
SUBJECT
Vance/Brezhnev Meeting
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
U.S.S.R.
Secretary of State Vance
General Secretary Brezhnev
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Foreign Minister Gromyko
William D. Krimer (Interpreter)
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
A.M. Aleksandrov-Agentov
V.M. Sukhodrev (Interpreter)
General Secretary Brezhnev opened by saying he had been in-
formed that Secretary Vance and Gromyko had held some hard discus-
sions. This is natural because the subject was very serious indeed—nu-
clear weapons. It was not important whether one talked of reduction or
limitation or shortening or shrinking weapons. The important thing
was that they were nuclear weapons and that in the absence of a treaty
on this matter, war was not precluded. He thought the Secretary would
understand why people throughout the world were demanding that
nuclear war be made impossible.
Brezhnev apologized for having started in this way and said first
of all he was pleased to welcome the Secretary in Moscow. Quite a few
things had happened since the Secretary’s last visit, in the life of our
two countries and throughout the world. He would speak with the
same frankness with which he had set forth his thoughts last year. The
past year had not given us any cause for joy as concerns Soviet-U.S. re-
lations. They were developing rather unevenly and, on the whole, their
present state did not correspond to the wishes of either of our countries
as they had been expressed in the past.
Digressing from his typed notes, Brezhnev recalled that when
President Nixon had first come to visit Moscow, he had come to
Brezhnev’s office directly from the airport and just the two of them,
plus one interpreter, had held their first conversation.2 President Nixon
had pointed out that both our countries had amassed so many nuclear
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 8, Vance to Moscow, 4/20–22, 1978. Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. Drafted by Krimer. The
meeting took place in Brezhnev’s office in the Kremlin.
2 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XIV, Soviet Union, October 1971–May 1972,
Document 257.
