3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
369
advice to withdraw all his personnel from Ethiopia and to settle his dis-
pute with Ethiopia by peaceful means. Quite recently, virtually several
days ago, he had admitted that his invasion of Ethiopia had been a mis-
take and had asked the Soviet Union for help.22 The Soviet Union had
given him some good advice—to withdraw all his personnel and arms
from Ethiopian territory.23 Further, Gromyko had already told Secre-
tary Vance that the Soviet Union had insistently advised the Ethio-
pians, including Mengistu, to refrain24 from having Ethiopian troops
invade Somali territory. The Soviet Union had indeed supplied
weapons to Ethiopia since Ethiopia had been a victim of aggression.
Frankly speaking, he felt the United States, too, would have been fully
justified if it had helped Ethiopia, since under the U.N. Charter a victim
of aggression is entitled to receive assistance on an individual as well as
a collective basis. That would have been up to the United States, of
course, he was just mentioning this in passing.
Gromyko expressed the hope that the President was in possession
of authentic information regarding the role of the Cubans in Ethiopia.
The Ethiopians had asked Cuba for assistance just as they had asked
the Soviet Union and other countries for assistance. It was very hard in-
deed to speak of numbers, because the numbers of Cubans involved
there, as mentioned by the President, were exaggerated at least tenfold.
He believed that the Somalis were deliberately exaggerating these
numbers and that the United States was not sufficiently critical of the
information it received from the Somalis. Incidentally, the Cubans, like
the Soviets, had advised the Ethiopians not to cross the border into So-
malia. The Soviet Union was indeed consulting with Cuba from time to
time, but to speak of some sort of coordinated Cuban-Soviet25 plan, etc.,
was absolutely wrong.26
As for Eritrea, Gromyko pointed out that the Soviet position was
that Eritrea should enjoy a broad autonomy within a united and sover-
eign Ethiopian state. The Soviets had said this many times to the Ethio-
pian leadership. This was not the same situation as had been the case
with Ogaden. Each of these issues had its own specific aspects which
were quite different from case to case. The Soviet Union had called
upon the Ethiopian leaders not to permit any bloodshed in Eritrea and
to settle the dispute there by peaceful means. The Soviet Union had ex-
22 Bartholomew added “again” after “help.”
23 Bartholomew added “and to sign peace with Ethiopia” after “Ethiopian
territory.”
24 Bartholomew added “on any account” after “refrain.”
25 Bartholomew added “master” before “plan.”
26 Bartholomew noted in parentheses following this sentence, “Gromyko said in
English, ‘Absolutely, I deny it.’”
