L  Summaries of Compilations
America posed a major threat, but they recommended continued U.S. 
warnings against the risks of economic dependence and political pen-
etration. They recommended efforts to respond to Latin American 
needs for financial assistance through existing institutions, but they 
also observed that there was strong Latin American sentiment for the 
creation of an inter-American development bank and recommended 
U.S. participation in a multilateral study of this possibility. (ETA–6)
Creation of the Inter-American Development Bank
After a visit to Brazil in early August 1958, Secretary Dulles became 
convinced that it was necessary for political reasons to take a regional 
approach to the problem of providing financial support for Latin 
American development. On August 12, Under Secretary of State for 
Economic Affairs Douglas Dillon announced that the United States 
was prepared to consider the establishment of an inter-­American 
development institution. (ETA–8) After several months of discus-
sions, a U.S. proposal was put forward for an inter-American bank. To 
ensure that the bank would be financially sound but at the same time 
fulfill the function of providing funds for economic development, it 
was determined that the bank would make both hard and soft loans 
but keep the two operations entirely separate. (ETA–8 through 15) 
Formal negotiations began in January 1959. At the outset, the United 
States proposed total initial resources of $850 million for the bank, 
while Brazil called for $5 billion, but a compromise was reached on 
$1 billion with provision for a future increase to $1.5 billion (ETA–20, 
21) An agreement establishing the Inter-American Development Bank 
was signed on April 8, 1959. (ETA–24)
Special Fund for Inter-American Social Development
By mid-1960, however, before the bank could begin operations, 
U.S. policymakers were concluding that more must be done to increase 
the flow of development capital to Latin America. (ETA–31, 32) The left-
ward trend of Fidel Castro’s government in Cuba reinforced this conclu-
sion. At an NSC meeting on June 30, President Eisenhower expressed 
concern about social unrest and instability in Latin America and urged 
consideration of possible policy changes. Assistant Secretary of State 
for Policy Planning Gerard C. Smith responded with a July 5 memo-
randum to Dillon proposing an initiative to provide funds for social 
programs in the region in order to support moderate political leaders 
and lessen adverse reaction “if we are forced to move against Castro.” 
(ETA–33) In a July 11 statement, Eisenhower affirmed U.S. sympathy 
with Latin American aspirations for social and economic progress and 
declared his intention to seek funds from Congress to assist the coun-
tries of Latin America to develop their nations and achieve better lives. 
(ETA–38)
