1008
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
sources exist within the government that are not being utilized with
anywhere near their full potential. New scientific discoveries are no-
where near as important as better application of current knowledge
and resources.
—The allocation of U.S. resources is not currently tied to any as-
sessment of real global health needs or priorities determined geograph-
ically, nor is it in terms of what the remaining major cripplers and
killers are as they affect lost human potential and compromised eco-
nomic development. Even for a given country it is often impossible to
tell which Federal agencies have programs there with no overall coor-
dination to work towards mutually agreed upon goals.
—While both you and Secretary Vance have made repeated strong
statements about the importance you attach to meeting basic human
needs, there is little or no integration of International Health into the
formulation and execution of U.S. foreign policy. This is largely due to
the lack of an organizational focus with technical expertise in health or
other basic human needs at a high level in the State Department. It is
also attributable to a traditionally held view that such human concerns
are “non-conventional diplomacy”.
—Fragmentation in the Executive Branch is compounded by over-
lapping and competing jurisdictions among different committees in the
Congress.
—The effective use of some of our greatest International Health re-
sources particularly in HEW and DOD is currently severely compro-
mised by specific and generally outdated legislative restrictions.
—There is a disproportionate focus on the development of high
technology health care in hospitals and the training of physicians rather
than upon prevention and community-based primary care programs to
reach poor and rural people. Such international research cooperation as
has occurred has overwhelmingly emphasized problems of developed
industrialized nations such as cancer and heart disease.
—The resources committed to International Health by the private
sector exceed those of the Federal Government. Academic institutions,
missionary, private voluntary organizations and other humanitarian
groups as well as business express a strong desire to coordinate their ef-
forts with the Federal Government, but believe there is no effective
mechanism for doing so.
III. Recommendations
We recommend that a program called “New Directions in Interna-
tional Health” be initiated, which could be identified as an initial fulfill-
ment of your promise to implement a global basic human needs
strategy. Consistent with your decisions in the recent memo relating to
