provided like products from other countries were taxed proportionally. As suggested in paragraph 1 of this telegram, it is important, of course, pending agreement in principle to avoid bickering over such matters. For the protection of American interests it is also important that there shall be no deals between the Chinese and powers not in the conference that under any new tariff would place American trade at an unfair disadvantage. It is difficult for the Department to instruct you further on this point until it receives further advices regarding developments. Follow this question closely and keep us fully informed. (b) Probably the question of restrictions on imports or exports will not come up. The following is, however, mentioned for your guidance: The position which the Department has taken is that such restrictions, for example licensing or prohibitions, if maintained, shall provide that with respect to commodities, valuations, and quantities the United States shall receive as favorable treatment as is given to any other country. In this connection see recent modi vivendi, such as the exchange of notes with Greece,73 printed as Treaty Series No. 706. (c) The Department has hesitated to include provisions regarding discrimination through classification of commodities in our treaties, as with the American practice of tariff-making it is doubtful whether it is practical to give assurance that our legislation would not through inadvertence contravene such provisions. It would, however, lessen the danger of discrimination by classification if a provision were included to the effect that the principles of most-favored-nation treatment shall be liberally interpreted and that neither customs rates nor classifications shall be used by either of the contracting parties as a means of discrimination against the commerce of the other. 4. The Department believes that agreement with respect to most-favorednation treatment should be reciprocal, that China should be given such treatment as well as granting it to others. 5. Telegraph to the Department for instructions if any question as to national treatment of shipping is presented. As the situation develops you will be given more specific instructions.
