793.00/78: Telegram
[Document 649]
The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
TOKYO, July 12, 1925—1 p.m.
[Received July 12—9:22 a.m.]
124. Department’s telegram 80, July 2nd, repeated [by] Peking, handed to Foreign
Office.86 Commenting on the document the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs said he
thought that the point of primary importance was complete accord between the United
States, Great Britain and Japan; that Baron Shidehara87 felt very strongly that all other
considerations were of minor importance. Japan has received the British aide-mémoire,
copy of which he gave to the Embassy, which showed, he thought, a point of view
widely different from that of the United States. He felt that the British attitude was too
stiff and that it would be unwise to offend the Chinese by practically refusing to
consider their statement. Yet Japan could not ignore the disturbances in China and
something ought to be said to make the Chinese feel that they had some responsibility
in the matter. Japanese and British had been killed without anything being done by
China to show that it felt any responsibility whatever.
So far as our instructions to Peking were concerned he felt that the Japanese were
sympathetic with paragraph 1 and with the second part of paragraph 2 dealing with
extraterritoriality. In his opinion they did not much differ from the views of MacMurray
and Shidehara as expressed in their interview in Tokyo.
With reference to the Customs Conference, he felt that it would be unwise to go beyond
the terms of the Washington Conference agreements or of existing treaties. He felt that
it would be inopportune to discuss such matters as tariff autonomy under existing
conditions.
He said that the Japanese position would be defined early this week and the Foreign
Office would then be able to discuss the matter more fully. Peking informed.
BANCROFT
86 The Legation in China had been instructed to repeat Department’s telegram No. 125,
July 1, noon, to Tokyo as telegram No. 80, with instructions to communicate it to the
Japanese Foreign Office for its information.
87 Japanese Minister of Foreign Affairs.
