Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  335
54. Nazarkin remarked that it appeared the U.S. side was finishing 
all its presentations on a negative note. Though he had already said 
what he thought of that, unfortunately now he would have to end his 
own presentation on a negative note. Nazarkin said the Soviet side was 
still concerned regarding the Thule and Fylingdales radars and felt they 
were violations of the ABM Treaty. However, these issues were being 
considered in a special forum and Nazarkin did not think the sides 
should complicate the present talks with mutual recriminations.
55. Bartholomew countered that his negative remarks had been 
uttered with a positive intention—­to ask the Soviet side to remove 
an obstacle to the sides’ common purpose. If his effort to advance 
this common objective by asking for something from the Soviet side 
as labeled “recrimination,” then there would be many more recrimi-
nations. Bartholomew said he also did not want to spend much time 
on this issue, but since the Soviet side had raised the subject of Thule 
and Fylingdales, he had to note that these radars were in existence in 
1972, and their modernization was permitted by the Treaty. This was 
an important question, Bartholomew said, and the sides would have to 
return to it—­quietly, dispassionately, but persistently—­as long as it was 
unresolved, in order to get rid of an obstacle to their common interest.
56. Regarding Bartholomew’s good intentions, Grinevskiy noted 
that the “road to hell” was paved with good intentions. Bartholomew 
countered that he had started to think the sides’ differences were more 
profound than the “road to hell.” Grinevskiy noted that of the radars 
mentioned, one continued to function. The Soviet side was not refus-
ing to discuss these complicated problems, he said; the U.S. side had 
concerns, the Soviet side had concerns, the sides would have to find 
solutions. Grinevskiy said he did not mind the fact that sharp issues 
were being raised at these talks, because they also had to be resolved. 
Summing up, Grinevskiy said the sides definitely had the opportunity 
at this ministerial to find ways to complete agreements on two major 
issues noted here. He did not exclude the possibility that other issues 
might be added after the Burt-Nazarkin meeting. The sides had oppor-
tunities to resolve issues of substance and to make progress. The work-
ing groups could do this based on assignments from the main group.
57. Bartholomew agreed with Grinevskiy’s description of the sit-
uation. He thought it was wise to accentuate the positive, and there 
had been positive elements to this discussion. It should be possible to 
do substantial business on the issues discussed. After a twenty-­minute 
break, Bartholomew suggested that an NST Subgroup Meet at 2:30 that 
afternoon. He suggested that the main group cover Chemical Weapons 
(CW) before lunch so that a subgroup could be created in the afternoon; 
the group could then turn to Nuclear Testing (NTT) issues and create 
another subgroup with AMB. Robinson. The main group could cover 
the rest of the arms control agenda and decide at the end of the day how
