864
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The Commission does not mean to imply that the United States
alone can solve the world hunger problem. All nations, including those
of the developing world, must make the conquest of hunger a common
cause. However, the Commission is persuaded that unless the United
States plays a major role by increasing its own commitment and action
toward this goal, no effective and comprehensive global program to
combat hunger is likely to be undertaken in the foreseeable future.
Moreover, once its own commitment is clear, the United States will be
in a particularly strong position to encourage others to do more. The
Commission believes that the United States is uniquely situated to in-
fluence the fate of millions who do not get enough to eat.
2. National Security
The Commission believes that promoting economic development
in general, and overcoming hunger in particular, are tasks far more crit-
ical to the U.S. national security than most policymakers acknowledge
or even believe. Since the advent of nuclear weapons most Americans
have been conditioned to equate national security with the strength of
strategic military forces. The Commission considers this prevailing be-
lief to be a simplistic illusion. Armed might represents merely the phys-
ical aspect of national security. Military force is ultimately useless in
the absence of the global security that only coordinated international
progress toward social justice can bring.
Progress with stability has always been the basic goal of U.S. for-
eign policy. As relations between the industrialized and developing na-
tions deteriorate and as political, economic, resource and environ-
mental challenges to the present order steadily mount, the Commission
is firmly convinced that a major worldwide effort to conquer hunger
and poverty, far from being a gesture of charity to be offered or with-
held according to temporary political whims, holds the key to both
global and national security.
The most potentially explosive force in the world today is the frus-
trated desire of poor people to attain a decent standard of living. The
anger, despair and often hatred that result represent real and persistent
threats to international order. The developing nations now actively in-
volved in international affairs are resolutely determined to move into
the modern world and secure its benefits for themselves. But as the as-
pirations and expectations of the developing world grow, poverty
within it remains prevalent and conspicuous—with hunger as its quin-
tessential symptom. As a result, hunger has been internationalized and
turned into a continuing global political issue, transformed from a
low-profile moral imperative into a divisive and disruptive factor in in-
ternational relations. Mutual suspicion and hostility between the
“North” and the “South” have been visible, corrosive and counter-
