El Salvador 611 dissatisfaction and resentment, and patience with him among this group is beginning to run out. Most of those we have talked to see need for social reforms, etc., but they want them to be instituted in planned context, leadership for which Lemus government has thus far been unable to provide. If it comes to alternatives, majority appears to favor Osorio and we believe this element would throw its weight in his direction. 3. Church. Prodded by Nunciature and clearly more worldly wise to revolutionary type threats, church here is far out in front in pressing for social reform and has evidenced impatience with Lemus government on this score. By its attitude it has widened breach between itself and wealthy class, thereby weakening oligarchy’s foundation. Its basic aim, however, appears to have been to spur Lemus government into action rather than to contribute to its downfall. It has made public its support of Lemus during the recent crisis and can be expected to continue supporting the constitutional government. 4. PRUD Party. As a national party PRUD can be said no longer to exist. It is rent with dissension and is a skeleton without real substance. Much of the blame for this rests with Secretary General Rubio Melhado, who with high-­handedness has made many mistakes and continues to make them, and is strongly disliked by all but a few cronies. Historically, parties here have been formed around a man. Lemus, by abdicating in favor of Rubio Melhado as party manager, sacrificed his place as leader and it is doubtful that PRUD as it is now constituted will be vary decisive factor in current crisis. 5. Osorio Clique. Ex-President Osorio still represents strongest non-Communist political force in country. He has loyal adherents in all strata and his reservoir of strength runs deep. Close friends quote him as desirous of seeing Lemus complete term despite deep differences but there is evidence that his lieutenants have been exceedingly active since the present crisis began. We doubt Osorio will step forward until called but believe his ear is cocked to catch weakest summons. Osorio as a man is better known to several now in ARA than to us here. Our impression, however, is that Osorio would have liked to have been more reformist than he was during his term. He held back mainly by more conservative wealthy elements on whose monetary support he heavily depended. We do not believe the same situation will exist again and that Osario would be inclined to be rather liberal in his outlook and policies. This view reinforced by type people considered close associates such as Jorge SOL Castellanos. We would not expect Osorio to be openly antagonistic to U.S., or West. Neither would we expect him to be as openly pro-U.S. or as amenable to suggestions from us as has been Lemus government. While not favorable to Castroism we believe he would attempt to apply some Castro-­type reform measures here.
