182
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
part of a larger US presence in the FRG. Their purpose is not propa-
ganda, but the promotion of better East-West relations. One of the
reasons that Gierek is able to steer the course he has is that the popula-
tion behind him receives Western ideas.
The Chancellor repeated that his did not like the radios operating
from his soil. German law is not applied to them, and he said he did
not know what they did. They are covered by no US-German treaty;
instead they are a relic of occupation. He said he was greatly suspicious
of them and felt they often had dealings with the German secret service.
He said that within two to three years, either the radios’ operation
should be governed by some formal agreement or should cease. He
mentioned that he had talked to the President about the radios; the
US response since then showed that “you don’t understand my situa-
tion.” The radios cooperate with the opposition parties. There are so
many negative aspects: foreign policy, internal security, domestic
politics.
[3 lines not declassified] They are supported by Congressional appro-
priations and supervised by a Board for International Broadcasting.
The Chancellor asked if technically the broadcasts do not originate
from Spain and Portugal. Dr. Brzezinski said that was true, that they
came from there as well as other locales including Germany. He noted
the radios’ strong support in Congress. New arrangements might be
possible over several years, but if the FRG took a rash action that would
touch off a major debate.
The Chancellor said he had told Henry Kissinger two years before
that the radio operations from Germany had to cease. At that point
there was less Congressional interest. He reiterated that the radios are
outside the law, their operations unknown to him. Dr. Brzezinski asked
if the US armed forces network posed a similar problem. The Chancellor
responded that it too was not controlled by German law but was less
of a problem since it broadcast in English. It might be regarded as
covered, in a general way, by the Status of Forces Agreement. But he
could not accept forever a situation in which RFE/RL work closely
with his political opponents. When Dr. Brzezinski asked how, the
Chancellor responded that the radios shared analyses—more or less
good—with his political opponents. Dr. Brzezinski said that should
not happen; the radios should not be linked to domestic politics.
Dr. Brzezinski said that if history could be replayed, perhaps the
radios should be elsewhere. But they are useful as a joint effort, to
compensate for the absence of more normal means of communicating
with the peoples of the East. The Chancellor replied that the radios
had played a subversive role in the 1968 Czechoslovakia crisis, but Dr.
Brzezinski said he was not sure; only in 1956 was he certain their
role had been as the Chancellor described. The Chancellor asked Dr.
