908 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement more towards huge ships which cannot be accommodated in the existing locks.3 [Here follows a consideration of the problem of providing additional federal office space.] 3 In memorandum dated June 4 to Roy Rubottom, the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, and to Philip J. Farley, the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Disarmament and Atomic Energy, Harry F. Stimpson, Jr., the Under Secretary of State’s Special Assistant, forwarded the following excerpt from the Record of Action of the Cabinet Meeting of May 22: “3.The Panama Canal—Problems and Alternatives ACTION: a) The President gave general approval to the Company’s short-­range plans for improving the present Canal during FY 1960–2. b) With respect to long-­range plans, and taking into consideration the President’s thought with respect to an additional canal, the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal Company, working with the Atomic Energy Commission and consulting an appropriate with the Department of State, will prepare and within a year will present to the Cabinet and the President recommendations us to the choice among the five alternatives set forth. c) There are to be no public references at this time to the methods suggested with respect to the two alternative canals.” (Presidential Cabinet Meetings, Lot 69 D 350, CP–B) PM–18. Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State to the President1 Washington, July 11, 1959. SUBJECT United States Aide Memoire to Panama On July 6 the Panamanian Foreign Minister informed our Chargé d’Affaires2 and made a public announcement that he found unacceptable an Aide Memoire which had been presented to him by our Chargé.3 The Foreign Minister maintained that the Aide Memoire did not constitute a direct reply from you in response to a letter of March 7, 1959 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 811F.061/6–1159. Drafted by Leggett on July 10 and transmitted to the President under cover of a memorandum dated July 11 from John A. Calhoun, Director of the Executive Secretariat, to Brig. Gen. Andrew J. Goodpaster, the President’s Staff Secretary. 2 John C. Shillock. 3 On June 24, the Department of State had transmitted the text of this Aide Memoire to Ambassador Harrington. (Airgram 211 to Panama City; 811F.061/3–3159)
