Nicaragua 859 country. Mr. Rubottom informed the General that he was aware of this, as well as some of the projects for which the GON had submitted loan applications to the EXIM and IBRD for economic improvements within the country. The General said his Government had plans to reduce the area planted in cotton by 30,000 to 40,000 manzanas. When asked if this area would be planted in corn and beans, he replied that it would probably be used for raising cattle. He said that owing to the drop in the water table it was difficult to get products other than cotton to grow on much of this land. Mr. Rubottom said he understood that the GON had been circumspect in its financial policies. He said that, although he could not speak for the various loan entities, he could assure the General that careful and sympathetic consideration would be given the loan applications. Future Political Plans The General than said that he wanted to mention that he and President Somoza felt that at the end of the President’s term somebody other than a Somoza should be the next President. He said that during this month the proposed amendment to change the Constitution to prohibit a President from succeeding himself or any member of his family succeeding to the Presidency would be passed through the Congress a second time and then become law. He said that he had no idea who the next President would be, but thought he would come from the Liberal Party. He based this on the observation that the majority of Nicaraguans were traditionally Liberals and for this reason he doubted if the Conservatives would poll enough votes to win the election. He stressed that the 1963 elections would be absolutely free. He said there should be a new name in the Presidency, which would give the people a chance to compare his effectiveness with that of the Somozas. He said that, speaking as a politician, this would be a sacrifice, but as a student of civics in the U.S., he felt a change would be in the best interest of the country. Interest in Engineering Battalion The General then expressed interest in the possibility of setting up, under M&P, an engineering battalion similar to that in Honduras. Mr. Rubottom said that we have set up only two such battalions on a trial basis, and that we would look into the matter. The General said an engineering battalion would be helpful in the construction of roads and would provide opportunities for some of the unemployed. Mr. Rubottom thanked the General for his visit and expressed appreciation for his frank and interesting remarks. He asked the General to give President Somoza his regards.
