218
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
problems rather than isolated projects. For it will be essential that sen-
sible and effective programs be planned and implemented.
America can fully support African development only if we meet
the kind of commitments I have outlined. I hope that every citizen with
an interest in Africa will make it clear, to the Congress and to us in the
executive branch, that he or she wants those commitments met.
Promotion of Human Rights
While we address the reality of human need in Africa, we must
also do what we can in behalf of human justice there.
We will be firm in our support of individual human rights. Our
concern is not limited to any one region of the continent.
We must understand the diversity of African social and value
systems. Gross violations of individual human dignity are no more ac-
ceptable in African terms than in ours. One of the most significant
events in modern African history—and in the international effort to
promote human rights—was the recent decision by Commonwealth
countries to condemn the “massive violation of human rights” in
Uganda.3 Many African nations took part in this decision. Their action
should be applauded.
Abuse of human rights is wrong on any grounds. It is particularly
offensive when it is on the basis of race. In southern Africa, issues of
race, of justice, and of self-determination have built to a crisis.
—The conflict in Rhodesia is growing. Rhodesian incursions into
neighboring countries exacerbate an already dangerous situation and
deserve the condemnation they have received. The choice between ne-
gotiated settlement and violent solution must be made now. The same
is true for Namibia. Many lives—black and white—hang in the balance.
—The risk of increased foreign involvement is real.
—Violence within South Africa grows. There may be more time
there than in Rhodesia and Namibia for people of goodwill to achieve a
solution. But progress must soon be made, or goodwill could be lost.
—Crisis within the region has brought pressure for stronger action
at the United Nations, and appeals to our responsibilities under its
charter.
This is the reality we face. The dangers, our interests, and our
values, as well as the desires of the Africans themselves, require our in-
volvement—and our most dedicated and practical efforts.
3 Reference is to a communique´ released during the British Commonwealth heads
of government meeting in London June 8–16 condemning Ugandan human rights abuses
and reaffirming support for majority black rule in Rhodesia. See R.W. Apple Jr., “Uganda
Condemned by Commonwealth,” The New York Times, June 16, 1977, p. 5 and Bernard D.
Nossiter, “Leaders Condemn Uganda,” The Washington Post, June 16, 1977, p. A–11.
