3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
912
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
2. Following a discussion of other matters (septel)2 with Ambas-
sador Dobrynin on December 1, Under Secretary Newsom brought up
the situation in Poland. Newsom pointed out that we were disturbed
by allegations which had appeared in Rude pravo and were now being
repeated by Soviet media to the effect that the West is attempting to
carry out counter-revolution in Poland. Such allegations are, to our
knowledge, totally without foundation and they cause us concern be-
cause they could be designed to set the stage for Soviet intervention.
Such a step would have very serious consequences for East-West rela-
tions in general as we have pointed out in the past. Senator Percy has
conveyed this same point to Soviet leaders in the past few days.
3. Newsom pointed out that recent reports of Soviet military
moves add an element of disquiet. The United States is following a
policy of great restraint and this should be apparent in Moscow.
4. In reply, Dobrynin acknowledged that the administration had
been restrained in its actions but pointed out that broadcasts of the
Voice of America and Radio Free Europe seemed designed to stir up
the situation and make it appear that Solidarity Union spokesman had
a monopoly on the truth. Concerning US warnings, Dobrynin said that
“we are mature people” and understand the various elements of the sit-
uation in Poland and their effect on our relationship. “Your message is
getting through”, he said, and it is not necessary to repeat it. Con-
cerning the substance of Newsom’s comments, Dobrynin would only
say that he too “hoped” that intervention would not take place.
5. Newsom said that he could not accept Dobrynin’s characteriza-
tion of VOA radio broadcasts which he had reason to believe were re-
sponsible and objective.
Christopher
2 In telegram 318737 to multiple posts, December 2, the Department outlined
Newsom and Dobrynin’s discussion on Syrian-Jordanian tensions. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870143–0504)
