3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
13
4.
Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to
President Carter1
February 4, 1977
Dear Mr. President,
On behalf of my colleagues in the leadership and on my own I
would like to congratulate you once again upon entering the office of
the President of the United States of America.
I have carefully studied your letter of January 262 and found it on
the whole constructive and encouraging. We received with satisfaction
the affirmation that the goal of your policy is to improve relations with
the Soviet Union and that you intend to pay personal attention to that.
It is consistent with our basic approach which I have recently once
again expounded publicly. Now I want to emphasize that we are pre-
pared to make through joint efforts a new major progress in the rela-
tions between our countries.
As I see it, a business-like and confidential dialogue is being estab-
lished between ourselves.
It is naturally important that from the very beginning of our con-
tacts there were a clear and mutual understanding on issues of
principle.
The main thing here—and the past experience convincingly con-
firms it—is the necessity to strictly observe the fundamental principles
of equality, mutual consideration of legitimate interests, mutual benefit
and non-interference in the internal affairs of the other side. Such and
only such an approach by both sides, which fully corresponds to the
Basic Principles of relations between our countries,3 signed in 1972, can
provide for an even onward development of relations between the
USSR and the US as well as for the possibility of finding mutually ac-
ceptable solutions for the issues that arise.
Indeed, the cooperation of our two countries to end the arms race
and to achieve disarmament is, due to objective reasons, the central
area of relations between the USSR and the US at the present time. Only
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 61, Soviet Exchanges: 1/77–12/78. No classification marking. Printed from an unoffi-
cial translation. Carter wrote in the upper right-hand corner, “Zbig—They were found—
J,” in response to Brzezinski’s covering memorandum, which reads, “These are copies.
The missing originals are somewhere in your residence. A search is in progress! Zbig.”
2 See Document 1.
3 For the text of the “Basic Principles of Relations Between the United States of
America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,” May 29, 1972, see Public Papers:
Nixon, 1972, pp. 633–634.
