893.74/611: Telegram
[Document 765]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 15, 1925—11 a.m.
[Received September 15—7:39 a.m.]
399. 1. Your telegram number 249, September 12, 5 p.m. appears to require immediate
and categorical answer; greatly regret to report that if I were compelled to give a final
answer at this moment it would have to be unfavorable.
2. Since early in August, I have been endeavoring, as my reports have indicated, to get
serious consideration of this matter by the Chinese Government presenting clear issue
whether or not the present administration is prepared to abide by its contractual
obligations to American citizens and to cooperate loyally with the American
Government in maintaining the principle of open door. My first conversations were
with the Minister for Foreign Affairs who apparently does not understand what is
involved and has consistently sought to put me off with meaningless assurances
amounting to what is termed in your telegram “a promise of possibility of further
negotiations.” On August 24th I saw the Chief Executive who assured me that the
contract was recognized as valid and would be put into effect but in view of “obstacles”
to which he referred would make no commitment as to when that would be done. In
notes addressed to the Foreign Office August 26th and 29th under your instructions I
urged the importance of this Government’s informing me definitely whether it would
give effect to the contract and if so when. In a supplementary note September 7th I
pointed out that my Government regards these questions as urgent; and on September
11th I again emphasized urgency of a decision. I have thus far received no reply to my
notes and no indication whatsoever from any responsible source as to what attitude this
administration may be prepared to take regarding its obligations towards our citizens
and towards our Government and its policies.
 
3. In the hope that the administration may even yet be made conscious of its
responsibilities and of its interest in this matter, I shall nevertheless continue my efforts
and trust that you may be able allow some few days longer before accepting as
definitive and conclusive the failure of the Chinese Government to deal with this matter
in good faith.
4. Copy by mail to Tokio.
