National Security Policy 197 They will continue blackmail, sabotage, espionage, guerrilla war­ fare, economic warfare, local civil insurrection, and all the other tricks that they have used in the past, including limited war by proxy, to con­ quer more countries. The threat of massive nuclear retaliation will not stop these actions in the future any more than it has in the past. Massive nuclear striking power is important, but it is not the solution to all of our problems, or even most of them. Future Policy It isn’t that we don’t need adequate retaliatory power of diverse types. We do. The difficulty is in determining how much we need. Any more than what we need is not only wasted, but it uses resources which might otherwise be made available for the more probable mil­ itary actions. Of course, we must have a safety factor in determining the amount that we need. Probably the maximum amount of retal­ iatory force the U.S. needs for a general war would not exceed twice the amount required to kill half the Russians. These retaliatory forces should be reasonably immune to a Soviet long-­range missile build up. The point is, I think, that even if we had an unlimited and overwhelm­ ing retaliatory force, there are many situations which have arisen, and similar situations will arise again, where these overwhelming forces would not provide the solution. We should not therefore imply that these forces can solve all of our military problems. It comes down to a question of emphasis, or degree, or balance. In my opinion, we have given the appearance of becoming so engrossed and absorbed in the prospects of general nuclear war that our allies, as well as the com­ munists, and I think even we ourselves, are not sufficiently alert to the prospects of other types of military action. The USSR must remain convinced that if the USSR overtly attacks any one of our allies directly, we will launch those retaliatory forces against the USSR. But at the same time, the USSR, as well as our allies, must also be convinced that we would not launch a massive retalia­ tory effort against the Soviet Union in reply to every communist effort to expansion, including overt attacks by non-Russian communists. Russia and China and other communists, and most particularly the free world, should be convinced that we will use sufficient force promptly to quell even non-Russian communist attacks and will not rely solely upon massive retaliation as punishment. The punishment must fit the crime. The world must realize that we intend to use atomic weapons when the situation may call for atomic weapons in any action, but at the same time, they must have confidence that we will use them with
