Afghanistan
135
if and when it became more visible, would be exploited by the Soviets
to justify their own deepening involvement. But this line will be taken
by the Soviets in any case to justify their own increased support for
the Teraki regime, whether or not insurgency is substantially aided by
covert action. The Soviets are already making such charges.2 Successful
covert action would however raise the costs to the Soviets of larger
and more visible increments in their role. It would inflame Moslem
opinion in many countries against the USSR, which would be seen as
suppressing a religious-motivated insurgency.
On the other hand, if the Soviet leaders are uncertain how far they
are prepared to go to rescue the Teraki regime, and are waiting to see
if smaller increments of help will suffice, then a substantial covert
action program, particularly if highly visible, could raise their stake in
the issue. It is conceivable that some Soviets could view such a height-
ened US role as enhancing the dangers and uncertainties of more
direct Soviet combat involvement, and therefore as additional cause
for caution. But it is more likely that a large US-backed covert action
operation would be seen as a challenge on their periphery, and would
induce them to intervene more directly and vigorously than otherwise
intended. While we believe the Soviets are strongly predisposed to aid
this Afghan regime—which is ideologically sympathetic, closely tied
to them, and most important, geographically contiguous—we have as
yet insufficient basis for judging in which direction they are so far
leaning on the subject of eventual combat intervention.
Alternative Options
1. Radio Broadcasts from Pakistan: The Soviets are already heavily
denouncing Pakistan and the US in their own propaganda as responsi-
ble for the Afghan insurgency, and they will probably continue to do
so, no matter what the US and Pakistan do, so long as a serious security
problem remains in Afghanistan. In the event of the Pakistan propa-
ganda counteroffensive with covert US support postulated, the Soviets
would probably escalate their rhetoric somewhat more, and would be
likely to make additional diplomatic demarches in Islamabad in protest,
citing broadcast evidence of Pakistani support for the insurgents.
Beyond this, the main potential Soviet lever in dealings with Paki-
stan is the possibility that the USSR might retaliate by inciting unrest
among Pakistan’s Baluchi tribes. So long as a major Afghan insurgency
continued, the Afghan regime might hesitate to attempt this itself
because of fear that Baluchi separatism in Pakistan might spread to
Afghanistan and compound the security problem. The Soviets, how-
2 See Documents 43 and 44.
