Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
613
LC said there were infinite possibilities of possible arrangements
for custody of the hostages.
GC said that merely having some students in the Embassy was not
so bad. It was their control which was important.
The Pres said Vance should talk to Waldheim.10
ST said we should be prepared if the Revolutionary Council gets
into the Embassy they may not find 50 hostages. British Ambassador
Graham was just back and talked to us in London. He had been in
touch with Entezam in prison who had said that the militants control
a section of the prison and there may be Americans in that section.
The Pres said it was the impression when the UN Commission was
there that some hostages had been moved back.
HJ said we should maintain flexibility. If the Iranians renege, we
should break diplomatic relations.
ZB said it is important that we reject joint control.
The Pres agreed. If the government was in control, we cannot specify
exactly what arrangement will be adopted.
LC asked if the Pres wanted a 7 a.m. meeting.
The Pres said that Jody Powell and two or three others should meet
with him at 5 a.m.
HJ said that if the news was bad, we could sleep late.
JP asked in the event of bad news, what would we implement
regarding the Iranian diplomats.
WC said we plan to call in the Chargé and give him a diplomatic
note ordering [that] the 15 diplomats here and 5 others from each of
the Consulates were being declared PNG and must leave. State will
work with Justice. We would plan loose surveillance of the diplomats
between now and April 4. There were 35 diplomats in all. Under the
diplomatic note we would be prepared to have 4 in Washington and
1 in each of the Consulates remain for an additional 5 days. We would
identify those who could remain. Justice has asked that they be
restricted to the Embassy and their homes and a 2-mile radius of the
corridor between them. This would be civilized but firm. The diplomats
could not claim to be students or have other status which would permit
them to remain. The only way they could stay would be to request
asylum.
10 After this sentence, Carter wrote: “If the transfer is made, the Commission could
return to Tehran.”
