Chapter 4, February–April 1990 625 Shevardnadze: If you agree that there should be bombers with non-­ nuclear ALCMs outside the limit, it’s a quite different situation. Akhromeyev: This we do agree on. Formally, we both have the right to have bombers outside the limit. The difference here is that we say there should only be 100 and you say 115. Shevardnadze: Let me say that if we want to reach agreement on the entire package we have to reach agreement on range. I said this in Moscow, I said this in Wyoming. As for the sub-­limit, well we have to know the issue. We have to know how range is going to come out. Baker: Bombers are going to float within the 1,600 limit. You can’t be suggesting that I ever suggested that there should be a sub-­ceiling. Let’s go on to SLCMs. Akhromeyev: Let me try to report on SLCMs. There is a common view on SLCMS on the following aspects. First, we’ll exchange politically-­binding statements on long-­range SLCMs that would be in effect for the entire duration of the START treaty. Second, each side, every year, will make a declaration on the planned numbers of SLCMs that they would have and they would include a statement on the maximum number for each in the next five years. Third, each side would give information on the specific types of ships and submarines capable of carrying long-­range SLCMs. This would be confidential information. Fourth, there would be a ban on MIRVed long-­range SLCMs. Bartholomew: Let me just say that the idea of a ban on MIRVed long-­ range SLCMS is something that we haven’t addressed. We’re not saying yes to it, we’re not saying no, we simply haven’t addressed it. Akhromeyev: Our differences are the following. The main differences that the US wants each side to determine independently and declare independently what it will deploy each year and for the succeeding five years. The Soviet side believes we should establish a certain specific number, and that should be agreed between the two sides and recorded in the records of the negotiations. If that number is agreed, each side could then declare it in its own statement. Another difference is that the Americans, while agreeing to specify the types of ships and submarines capable of carrying SLCMs, do not want to declare the numbers of SLCMs on each ship. Meaning the surface and sub-­surface types. We want that kind of a declaration. Another difference is that the Soviets believe that there should be verification of production facilities, and verification of the ships and submarines capable of carrying the SLCMs. And the US side agrees. Last night, to solve our differences we proposed the following: That the US would agree that the binding numbers of SLCMs, while the Soviet would withdraw its problem of verification, we also propose that the US understand that the range structure would be 600 for the SLCMs. And then the Soviet
