National Security Policy 645 it is a shame that none of our aircraft are on airborne alert and blamed the budget for this deplorable fact. Senator Bush had also expressed shock. When General Twining mentioned this later to General Power, he learned that Senator Symington had telephoned General Power that morning and asked how many aircraft were on airborne alert. General Power had given him the facts. As the result, General Twining has received a volume of mail, and in his answers, has cleared the record. In General Twining’s view, we have no need for an airborne alert and our capability to respond with SAC on fifteen minutes warning is adequate for our military posture. General Twining then proceeded to describe the tendency on the part of some people to discount everything but rel­ ative ICBM capabilities. He pointed out that our Air Force is four times the size of that of the Soviets and ten times as good. It does execute airborne alert exercises from time to time to keep the Soviets uncer­ tain. General Twining expressed admiration for the performance of the Secretary of Defense in his testimony before Congress. The President stated that he had spoken before about self-­ appointed military experts. He is considering another statement about neurotics—­either honest or dishonest neurotics—­who are so fearful that they advocate taking the entire SAC into the air and keeping it there. He conceded that these people realized the aircraft must come down occasionally to gas up. General Twining expressed the view that the public must realize that the USSR has a capability to hit the U.S. and to live with this realization. It is a hard fact of life. The President agreed except that he pointed out that our estimates for the last four years have included the Soviet capability to destroy the U.S. 100%. This was first based on one-­way bomber missions and is now based on the ICBM. He reiterated his stand for a reasonably adequate program. General Twining continued the discussion on enemy capabilities by stating that in his testimony before Congress he personally admitted that he had previously fought for more bombers. He had been concerned over the Soviet capability to build BISONS and BEARS. However, as it had turned out, the Soviets had not built these aircraft and now possess only 100–115 heavy bombers. He had further pointed out to Congress that mis­ siles are only as good as their launching sites. We have not as yet obtained any hard intelligence on any launching sites in the Soviet Union. The President and General Twining then reviewed the concept of a trip by the President to SAC, to a NIKE site, and to Cape Canaveral, and to issue statements at each location. General Twining stated he would open a study on what might be said at these locations. In this connection, he made mention of the successful flight of the TITAN on February third, adding that this is the first missile which had been successful on its first launching. The President observed that manu­ facturers in Denver had predicted this. * * *
