3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
737
if the Afghanistan situation has changed the Saudi view of security co-
operation with the U.S.4
6. U.S.-Turkish Security Consultations. We will review the possi-
bility of sending a mission to Ankara to consult with the Turks on the
situation resulting from the Iran and Afghanistan situations.5
7. U.S.-Indian Security Consultations. We will review the possi-
bility of sending a high-level mission to India to consult on the changed
circumstances in the region.6
B. Multilateral Actions
1. Covert Assistance to Afghan Rebels. We will raise the question
whether our European allies, in addition to the Chinese, should become
involved in support for the Afghan rebels.
2. Security Assistance Consortium. We will pursue this concept
with the allies. We might want to organize along the lines of the old
Berlin Task Force (U.S., France, UK and FRG) to implement the lines of
action agreed upon.
3. PRC. We will follow up on the Harold Brown mission.7
4. ASEAN. We will ask the ASEAN states to talk to the Indians
about the appropriate Indian role in the region.8
5. Refugee Assistance. We must examine the question of how as-
sistance to the Afghan refugees in Pakistan can meet the humanitarian
need as well as serve other objectives. Multilateral assistance provided
outside the UNHCR context (perhaps through Islamic organizations)
could allow us to further the resistance effort more effectively.9
6. Approaching our Allies. We must plan for the desire of our Eu-
ropean allies to set the Afghanistan issue aside as soon as possible so as
not to do permanent damage to European detente. Our strategy should
focus on seeking their assistance in the Persian Gulf region while defer-
ring further direct European-Soviet initiatives (e.g. Schmidt mission to
Turkey; French approach to the Iraqis).10
4 Carter wrote in the left margin, “Good.”
5 Carter underlined the word “mission,” and wrote in the left margin, “a person—
to explore Turkish attitudes first.”
6 Carter wrote in the left margin, “Goheen assess, then Clifford.” Robert Goheen
served as U.S. Ambassador to India. Clark Clifford served as the special presidential em-
issary to India.
7 Carter wrote in the left margin, “PRC (Huang Hua) should go to India.” Huang
Hua was the Chinese Foreign Minister.
8 Carter wrote in the left margin, “Good.”
9 Carter wrote in the left margin, “Paks prefer UNHCR.”
10 Carter wrote in the left margin, “I agree.”
