644 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Shevardnadze: This is also my intention. This is how I also will speak to the press. Baker: I hope that’s how our delegations will handle it as well. Of course we can’t guarantee what everyone’s going to say. Shevardnadze: I recall my work with the US side on the INF treaty and that was work that went on to the very last minute because as you get closer to an agreement the complexity of the questions that remain become much greater. You know I was in Washington, and three times we thought everything was worked out and agreed. And three times problems emerged. Suddenly in a few days technical questions emerged, emerged that were political. Marshal Akhromeyev and I went to Geneva, and it wasn’t easy to get the treaty into the proper condition. It’s just a given that the negotiating process is often times difficult. Those planes that could carry conventional ALCMs are emerging as a problem, and it’s a new problem, it’s a new question. Tactical planes armed with strategic ALCMs, that’s not something that existed before so it’s not necessarily surprising that that question might be opened up. You criticize us on the transfer of SS–23 missiles before the INF treaty, and I must say that I think your criticism is partly appropriate. But, by the same token, you have not told us about these planes that can carry ALCMs with a range of over 600 kilometers. Baker: A tactical aircraft with that capability doesn’t exist right now. Shevardnadze: In the process of negotiations, these things happen. Bartholomew: Neither you nor we raised this issue in Moscow. As a point of information, conventional ALCMs on tactical aircraft was an issue that the Soviet side raised in Geneva as our negotiators were attempting to convert agreements made in Moscow into a joint draft text. We were surprised to hear this. I mean it is not as if it’s a special weapon. It doesn’t make sense that a conventional aircraft, armed with a tactical weapon should be seen as a nuclear weapon subject to START. Akhromeyev: This is wrong. Before you raised the question there never existed such tactical aircraft armed with strategic missiles. Bartholomew: A conventional ALCM with a 600 kilometer range is by your own definition not to be included in START. Akhromeyev: No one had such missiles until now. If they appear now, this can’t be just a unilateral issue for the US, it ought to be something that’s negotiated. Baker: This is serious. If you’re telling us that conventional weapons have to be in START, then we’re not going to have a treaty. Akhromeyev: I’m not saying that this has to be written into the START treaty. I am saying that as we negotiate a START treaty and new weapons emerge that no one had, you at least have to consider the possible effect. That’s especially true as we get nearer a treaty. At least one
