Afghanistan 751 conversation with Trudeau asking that the Canadians maintain their grain exports to the Soviet Union at last year’s level.3 (S) Noting that the Allied response to our efforts to restrain export credits to Moscow was very bleak, Secretary Muskie asked if we should nevertheless press ahead on this issue. Dr. Brzezinski said he thought that tactically we should continue to pressure the Europeans on credits even though we knew we would not get their complete cooperation. To do otherwise would send the wrong message to the Allies. At the same time, Dr. Brzezinski stressed that we should keep our efforts private since we did not wish to inflate this matter publicly to a point at which our lack of success became a public defeat for the President. Secretary Muskie registered the participants’ agreement that we should continue to push the Europeans on credits. (S) Moving on to COCOM, Komer emphasized that this issue had longrange strategic implications and that we should press the Europeans hard. The JCS agreed. Secretary Muskie thought reduced technology transfer to the USSR had the greatest potential for giving pain to the Soviets over time. The group thought that we should do our best to expand the COCOM list, recognizing that the Europeans would resist. Again, all concurred that this should not be a matter for public discussion. (S) On the Olympics, it was agreed that we should send messages this week to ensure that there is no slippage among those who had already decided not to go to the Olympics and to try to persuade individual federations not to attend the Moscow Games. Near the time of the Moscow Games, we should also emphasize to those who would be attending that we hoped they would insist on reduced ceremonies (no flags, anthems, etc.) at Moscow. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we try to think of ways to give more credit to those governments which would not be going to the Olympics. Secretary Muskie agreed, and thought perhaps the Senate might do something in this respect, as might the UN and public groups in the U.S. Aaron wondered whether we might schedule bilateral games—track with the Kenyans, swimming with the Australians, and the like—and it was agreed that these suggestions would be followed-up. (S) On the remaining issues before the group, it was agreed that we should make clear to the Allies that, aside from political-level contacts, we intended to maintain our basic practice of minimal contacts with the Soviets and hoped they will do the same; State promised an options paper on the issue of debt relief for Pakistan; and all thought it would 3 In the right margin at the end of the paragraph, Carter wrote: “OK—An official cable should also be sent.” No cable was found.
