It is appropriate to state that Peru is and has been a partisan of true
friendship; it can only renew it with Chile the day that the latter shows itself
disposed to return to Peru the territories of Tacna and Arica. Before that just
reparations, which would reveal sincere repentance, it is not possible for
treaties to come and which far from tempering forty years of continual
outrages would revive them and threaten peace. Peru does not deny its
friendship to Chile, but it demands that it come inspired by a spirit of
sincerity and of justice which will give it a stable character.
In speaking of the demilitarization, the memorandum refers to the territory
which now embraces Tacna and Arica. This phrase must be rectified so that
the question of Tarata may not be considered as included in the proposal of
the Honorable Secretary of State. In the award of His Excellency the
President of the United States of America it is decided that no part of the
Peruvian province of Tarata is included in the territory to which the
dispositions of article three of the Treaty of Ancon refer to, and which only
refer to the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica as they existed on
October 20th, 1883 and that the northern frontier of that part of the territory
included by article three which lay within the Peruvian province of Tacna,
was the river Sama. To establish the boundaries of the province of Tarata
the same award created the Boundary Commission. Once the award was
issued, delivery was made to Peru, six months afterwards, of a small portion
of the Tarata territory; Chile has still to return the rest of the territory which
belongs to the same province. It agreed to this by signing an act in which it
declared that when the special Boundary Commission made its report and
determined the true area of the Province of Tarata in accordance with what
article three of the Treaty of Ancon stated, as it was interpreted in the
arbitral award, then it would deliver the rest of the territory.
It is not therefore acceptable that it be said that the basis for the cession to
Bolivia must be the territories as they are today in the power of Chile. The
award has already resolved on those territories and has determined as their
area what the Peruvian laws of October 20th, 1883 established. There is
therefore a large part of the territory which cannot be disposed of.
The suggestion of the Honorable Secretary of State indicates that the
territory of Tacna and Arica will be completely demilitarized in the most
