796 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement You may inform President Duvalier that Mr. Atwood of ICA probably accompanied by new USOM Director3 plans visit Haiti in near future to assist you in more detailed discussion FY 1961 assistance program. Re President Duvalier’s request for moratorium on payments to ExImBank, you may state ExImBank carefully studying this request and you expect receive detailed instructions soon this subject. ICA concurs this message and request Ambassador discuss with Acting Director USOM. Herter 3 Earl. O. Finnie. HA–28. Telegram from the Ambassador in Haiti (Newbegin) to the Department of State1  Port-­au-Prince, November 23, 1960, 5 p.m. 163. As reported Embassy telegram 161, Foreign Minister in meeting attended by all Latin American Chiefs of Mission accredited Haiti read note requesting their support general moratorium on Latin American debt to U.S.2 I had had no previous intimation anything this nature contemplated and it came as complete surprise. I stated in course meeting that it appeared to me question this nature should be treated by individual governments with U.S. since these are related to bilateral and not multilateral arrangements. I indicated further that conditions varies as regards individual countries. I pointed out that since I had had no prior advice of nature of meeting I could not speak officially for my government but felt it incumbent at least make above observations. While it might be normal for Haitian Government endeavor get support from sister republics in direct negotiations, procedure this morning is unprecedented as far as I am aware, even for Haiti. Other than my remarks no Chief of Mission made any comment whatsoever except Mexican Ambassador as ranking member group, who merely 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 838.10/11–2360. Confidential; Priority. 2 Telegram 161 from Port-­au-Prince transmitted to the Department of State on November 23 the text of the note by Foreign Minister Joseph Baguidy at the meeting of that date. (838.10/11–2360)
