Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
387
of American people, an image that we don’t know exactly what we
want to do.
“I don’t claim to know everything about what we want to do. But
we try to bring the debate out into the open and let various voices be
heard, so that when I do make a final decision about SALT talks or non-
proliferation, or the use of solar power, or the control of the waste of en-
ergy, or farm agriculture policy, or urban policy, I will have listened to
hundreds, even thousands of voices of Americans who know better an-
swers than I do about a specific subject and who care deeply about our
country.
“So, to me it’s important that we do have some confusion, that we
do have an open debate, that we do have disputes on occasion and even
outright criticisms. I think that’s good in a strong, democratic society. I
don’t fear it. I also don’t fear addressing some very difficult questions
that have been ignored too long and have now become crises in our
Nation.”
During the subsequent question-and-answer portion of the event,
an audience member asked the President if he viewed Soviet and
Cuban intervention in Africa as a “test” of U.S. policy, then rephrased
the question to inquire as to the nature of U.S. policy “toward Soviet in-
tervention” in Africa and elsewhere. The President responded:
“I think we are holding our own in the so-called peaceful competi-
tion with the Soviet Union, in Africa, and in other parts of the world.
Again, I hate to refer repeatedly to what existed in the past, but I think
it’s accurate to say that never before in the history of our Nation have
we shown any substantial interest in the continent of Africa.
“Just a few weeks ago, I visited Nigeria, the greatest nation in Af-
rica in many ways—economically, population, vigor, influence, grow-
ing influence. There are about 100 million people who live in Nigeria.
It’s one of the present and future leaders of black Africa. I was the first
American President, by the way, in the history of our country who had
ever made an official visit to a black African nation.
“Two or three years ago when Secretary Kissinger wanted to go
and visit Nigeria, the country would not even let him enter that
country. But I was received with open arms in a tremendous out-
pouring of friendship and realization of mutual purpose.
“We are trying to do the same thing in other parts of Africa, partic-
ularly where the black nations exist. We’ve got a good advantage in
having a man like Andrew Young head our United Nations delegation.
He’s trusted by black people, not only in Africa but in the Caribbean
area, in Latin America, and around the world—also in this country, of
course. But just the fact that I appointed him to be our U.N. Ambas-
sador is a demonstration to those people in tangible terms that we care
about them for the first time in 200 years.
