1572 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement less Senator Gore’s idea. Mr. Greene mentioned whether we would do this in a letter to Khrushchev. The Secretary mentioned the following language: In view of your position on veto power and all other substantive aspects of control there is, therefore, no alternative but to advise the course of action on the one hand which will not require controls but which, on the other hand, will spare mankind against the growing race of nuclear extermination. Therefore, we propose for the time being, and until further notice, not to have any more explosions and to confine any explosions to underground. We hope you will do the same. If you will do the same, then at least the main concern of mankind will be satisfied. If you don’t do it, then we will have to reconsider. Mr. Greene mentioned this (above) was more or less as the Secre­ tary had explored with Macmillan. The Secretary said he would imagine Mr. Herter would have some ideas. Mr. Greene said that Mr. Dillon was following this matter closely. The Secretary suggested calling Herter by phone on the matter. The Secretary said we should consult with some of the Congressional leaders on this thing. Mr. Greene, to the Secretary’s question re Mr. Merchant’s apol­ ogy, said that Mr. Hoghland had addressed himself to this at staff meeting this morning, saying that the Post reporters had been inaccu­ rate in their account. Hays was in a very unfortunate frame of mind, etc. Mr. Greene said he had not been able to talk to Macomber about this. Mr. Macomber was tied up elsewhere. Mr. Greene reported the draft to the Soviets had finally gone to NATO. It would probably be delivered the first part of next week. 424. Letter From Herter to McCone1 Washington, February 16, 1959 Dear John: We have carefully considered the views and recommendations set forth in your letter of February 2 to Secretary Dulles concerning the 1 Source: Rejects AEC position on nuclear testing suspension talks. Secret. 1 p. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/2–259.
