International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
377
government to issue in early April, committing themselves to hold a
Bonn Summit in mid-July and indicating the main substantive pur-
poses that they will be seeking to achieve—both at the Summit and
beforehand.
—Relevant decisions that any of our governments take between
then and the Summit (for example, U.S. action on energy and inflation)
could be related to this broad statement of agreed purposes. Our gov-
ernments would try to consult with one another beforehand about
these national actions.
—The July Summit could then review actions that had been taken
and decide what further steps were needed to achieve these common
purposes.11
How does this all strike you? I have asked Henry Owen to seek
your views when he sees you next week. I look forward to hearing your
thoughts, given your wide knowledge and experience in this field. The
position and partnership that you and I shape in reviewing these issues
will be critical to the outcome. There is no way to achieve lasting
progress without the closest cooperation between our countries. That
cooperation can only be achieved if you and I stay in very close and
continuing touch.12
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
11 In Carter’s letter to Giscard, an additional sentence was added to the end of this
paragraph: “This would be consistent with your view that Summits should only be held
if they can do something useful—which must depend, in the end, on the heads of gov-
ernment themselves.”
12 In both Carter’s letter to Giscard and his letter to Fukuda, this paragraph is dif-
ferent. In the letter to Giscard, the final paragraph reads: “How does this all strike you? I
look forward to hearing your thoughts, given your wide knowledge and experience in
this field. In closing, Valery, I would like to express my personal admiration for your
leadership as President of the Republic during recent months. Now that your elections
are past—with such a remarkable turn-out of voters in support of the democratic
process—I look forward to continuing our close and personal relations. I felt in January
that you and I had helped to begin a new era in Franco-American friendship, and I shall
do all that I can to strengthen that friendship in the days ahead.” In the letter to Fukuda,
the final paragraph reads: “I look forward to learning your views on these issues when
you and I meet, little more than a month hence. I greatly value your judgment, given your
wide knowledge and experience in this field. There is no way to achieve lasting progress
without the closest cooperation between our countries. That cooperation can only be
achieved if you and I stay in close and continuing communication.”
