934
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
280.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the Acting Staff Secretary of
the National Security Council (Hornblow)1
Washington, April 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Retention of Interagency Task Force on International Population Policy
The Department of State suggests the retention of the existing In-
teragency Task Force on International Population Policy. The reason
for retaining the Task Force is that there is work to be done on the pop-
ulation issue, work that requires organized interagency cooperation.
Background
For over ten years, the Agency for International Development has
run a program of technical assistance to developing countries seeking
to cope with their population problems. AID is now working to inte-
grate its population activities into other aspects of its assistance pro-
grams. The Department of State has given increasing diplomatic atten-
tion to population issues, bilaterally and multilaterally, including the
convening of the World Population Conference in Bucharest in 1974.2
State is now considering the inclusion of the population issue as an ele-
ment of the North-South dialogue. The Department of Defense, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the CIA are concerned with the security impli-
cations which population growth has for our country. The Depart-
ments of Agriculture, Treasury, and the Council of Economic Advisers
have interests in the economic and food supply issues, and more re-
cently, the Council on Environmental Quality has had an active interest
because of the environmental implications involved. There is a contin-
uing requirement for coordinating and meshing these interests and
programs.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770061–0539. Un-
classified. Transmitted to Tarnoff under an April 15 covering memorandum from Froebe,
in which she outlined the disposition of outstanding Under Secretaries Committee items,
commenting: “I’m sure you didn’t realize when you accepted your new job that one of
your duties would be that of father to the Under Secretaries Committee orphans!” Froebe
recommended that Tarnoff approve and sign the memorandum to Hornblow. Tarnoff
added the following handwritten comment on the April 15 memorandum: “Louise:
Thanks. I’m glad that most of the orphans are finding homes . . . elsewhere. Peter.” (Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P77061–0543)
2 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume E–14, Part 1, Documents on the United
Nations, 1973–1976, Documents 115–117, for additional information concerning the 1974
Bucharest World Population Conference.
