The provisions of this convention shall apply to all bills of lading issued in any of the
contracting States.
ARTICLE 11
After an interval of not more than two years from the day on which the convention is
signed, the Belgian Government shall place itself in communication with the
governments of the high contracting parties which have declared themselves prepared
to ratify the convention, with a view to deciding whether it shall be put into force. The
ratifications shall be deposited at Brussels at a date to be fixed by agreement among the
said governments. The first deposit of ratifications shall be recorded in a procès-verbal
signed by the representatives of the powers which take part therein and by the Belgian
Minister for Foreign Affairs.
The subsequent deposits of ratifications shall be made by means of a written
notification, addressed to the Belgian Government and accompanied by the instrument
of ratification.
A duly certified copy of the procès-verbal relating to the first deposit of ratifications, of
the notifications referred to in the previous paragraph, and also of the instruments of
ratification accompanying them, shall be immediately sent by the Belgian Government
through the diplomatic channel to the powers who have signed this convention or who
have acceded to it. In the cases contemplated in the preceding paragraph the said
Government shall inform them at the same time of the date on which it received the
notification.
 
ARTICLE 12
Nonsignatory States may accede to the present convention whether or not they have
been represented at the International Conference at Brussels.
A State which desires to accede shall notify its intention in writing to the Belgian
Government, forwarding to it the document of accession, which shall be deposited in
the archives of the said Government.
The Belgian Government shall immediately forward to all the States which have signed
or acceded to the convention a duly certified copy of the notification and of the act of
accession, mentioning the date on which it received the notification.
ARTICLE 13
