272  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
mode is identified. However, you may want to reiterate your interest 
in examining the possibilities for a Trident II missile that can also be 
used by the Air Force. I would also recommend serious consideration 
of further improvements in systems that could make the launch-­under-­
attack strategy a less risky proposition if we must eventually adopt it.
—On essential equivalence, I suggest that you endorse develop-
ment of options to expand strategic forces, while reserving on the spe-
cifics. The current political environment would be improved by such 
actions; we can drop the options later if the Soviets curtail their strate-
gic build-­up.
3. Navy. This question involves enormously complicated issues 
regarding the appropriate missions for the Navy and the forces required 
to carry them out. It also involves important questions of foreign and 
domestic policy. Unfortunately, the Navy and OSD have become so 
polarized on this issue that neither can produce an adequate analyt-
ical basis for making decisions which will be politically credible. For 
this reason, I believe you should direct the National Security Council to 
develop a plan of action for resolving the larger Navy issues, perhaps 
through the PRM/SCC process or through a special NSC organized 
group with experts from outside the government.
NSC Meeting
Assuming that you are able to finish the above agenda during the 
lunch, you may want to turn to the following topics during the NSC 
meeting.
4. NATO Issues. The emphasis of our defense policy on NATO is 
manifested in new programs: to expand POMCUS; to increase mod-
estly the size of the Army; to mechanize an additional infantry division; 
and to respond to Allied interest in long-­range theater nuclear capabil-
ity. Harold is seeking your affirmation of the relative priorities in the 
CG that motivate these programs: NATO over worldwide contingen-
cies; NATO central front over the flanks; early combat over sustaining 
capabilities.3
—Priority on early combat capability was stated in PD–18;4 this 
priority has been reinforced by recent estimates on reduced warning 
time. One of the PD–18 follow-­on studies is examining the sustainabil-
ity issue, including the trade-­off with early combat capability; it will be 
ready for your review in the fall. I suggest you reserve judgment on any 
changes in this priority until you have reviewed this study.
3 Carter underlined “NATO,” “NATO central front,” and “early combat” in this 
sentence.
4 See Document 31.
