122 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement b. A second study would appraise the problem of survival of populations in the period following their coming out of shelter after a massive nuclear exchange. Further study is required, relating to the immediate and longer-­range period following such coming out of shel­ ter, with respect to such factors as: sources of food, water, and fuel; methods and feasibility of decontamination; measures to care for casu­ alties and bury the dead; means of restoring transportation and utili­ ties; requirements for stockpiling survival and relief items and of their protection from blast or fallout; the psychological and morale problems confronting survivors who have lost members of their immediate fami­ lies and face an environment without accustomed social, economic, and governmental institutions. [c. A third study would attempt to appraise what level of active defenses and of shelter, in any projected combinations, is required to limit casualties to a level which will permit the United States to survive as a nation.2] The Planning Board, therefore, recommends that: a. The Atomic Energy Commission, in consultation with the Spe­ cial Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, be requested to undertake through appropriate means a study appraising the upper limits of massive concentrated nuclear detonations and their by-­ products which could be tolerated by the peoples of the world and by the world itself. b. The Office of Defense Mobilization and the Federal Civil Defense Administration, in consultation with the Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, be requested to undertake a study apprais­ ing the problem of survival of populations in the period following their coming out of shelter after a massive nuclear exchange. [c. The Office of Defense Mobilization, the Federal Civil Defense Administration, and the Department of Defense, in consultation with the Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, be requested to undertake a study appraising what level of active defenses and of shelter, in any projected combinations, is required to limit casu­ alties to a level which will permit the United States to survive as a nation.3] d. The reports referred to in a, b and c above should be made to the Council prior to July 1, 1958. Flexibility of Prototypes (Pages 3–5) 3. The Planning Board deems the Committee’s recommendation with respect to the construction of 95 prototype shelters, some designed for fallout protection and others for blast protection, to be illustrative, and believes that there should be flexibility in choosing numbers and kinds of prototypes to be constructed. 2 Proposed by the ODM Planning Board Member. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.] 3 Proposed by the ODM Planning Board Member. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
