606
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
was very much stronger than before. He was granted full powers for
six months by the Majlis, the legislative assembly. Mossadegh, in order
to finance the government, started issuing currency. We estimate that
so far he has issued about 3,500,000 rials.
When I (Mr. Henderson) spoke to the Planning Board last No-
vember, I was hopeful that an oil agreement would be achieved which
would preserve the basic existing principles of international commer-
cial intercourse.2 The U.S. favored a lump-sum settlement which would
not detail reasons, to avoid the argument of whether compensation
should be made for loss of future profits. By mid-January of this year
Mossadegh’s statements gave us some hope, but then he and his three
advisers, all of whom are unfriendly to the West and very nationalistic,
considered the plan and rejected it. They offered counter-proposals. On
February 20 we presented the most liberal proposal so far. On March 20
it was rejected.3
Mossadegh did not listen to the other political leaders in Iran, and
this alienated them, including Kashani. Mossadegh came to believe
that the Shah was backing these oppositional elements. In January,
therefore, he began making demands on the Shah. First, he demanded
that the Shah give up his role as commander-in-chief of the armed
forces. Secondly, he attacked the use the Shah was making of Crown
lands. The Shah was using the funds from these lands for charity in the
name of the Crown, and giving the lands away gradually in a land re-
form movement. Mossadegh, a big landowner himself, believes in the
traditional landowning institutions and didn’t like this royal example.
He demanded that the Crown lands be turned over to the nation, and
that the profits be given to charity in the name of the nation rather than
in the name of the Crown. Thirdly, he demanded that certain religious
shrines in the custody of the Shah, from which considerable funds are
derived, be turned over to an appointee of the Prime Minister. A man
named Ala is one of our best friends in Iran. He was at one time the Ira-
nian Ambassador to the U.S. and for many years Court Minister (ad-
viser to the Shah), but has now been forced out of power. This man ad-
vised the Shah not to give way to Mossadegh’s demands. The Shah was
2 An apparent reference to Henderson’s participation in the NSC Senior Staff
meeting of December 6, 1952. See Document 150.
3 In telegram 3296 from Tehran, February 20, Henderson reported on Mosadeq’s re-
action to the Anglo-American joint proposals for settlement of the oil dispute presented
to the Iranian Government on February 20. “Referring to proposals in general he said he
was afraid he would have to reject them primarily because of terms reference; never-
theless he did not (rpt not) wish do so without discussion with his advisers.” (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 888.2553/2–2053) Despatch 780 from Tehran,
March 24, contains the text of Mosadeq’s radio address of March 20 discussing the oil dis-
pute and the reasons for his rejection of the February 20 proposals. (Ibid, 888.2553/
3–2453) See also Document 157.
