652 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I I personally do not favor sending more troops to Guantanamo, because Guantanamo to most Latin Americans looks like an imperialist outpost from days gone by—and it tends to reinforce the legitimacy of the Soviet troop presence in Cuba. I do favor the other steps, which I have incorporated in your speech outline: more defense, more intelligence, some limited steps regarding China (because that actually does concern the Soviets and we have to do at least one thing that genuinely bothers them), and a more generally tough line on Soviet adventurism and disregard for our interests.2 We should do all of these things, even if the Soviets give us something on Cuba. The fact is that they will not give us enough to enable us to proclaim a victory, and, much more important, even if we did, I have not the slightest doubt that the public will not accept some cosmetic arrangement of relocation within Cuba as a Carter “victory.” For the foregoing reasons, I would recommend: 1. That we start talking up the Berlin wall analogy;3 2. That we take the specific steps that I recommend in the speech outline, including at least one that genuinely hurts the Soviets; 3. That for the next several months at least we maintain a tough posture on the Soviets in our public pronouncements.4 What about SALT then? My view is that you will not get SALT ratified if the public thinks that we were timid on this issue. What I advocate above permits us also to argue that SALT is necessary for our national security, that it stands on its own feet, that it permits us to pursue a genuinely mature foreign policy toward the Soviet Union, which includes: 1. More defense 2. SALT ratification 3. Assertive competition.5 In the next few days you will be under considerable pressure to adopt a cosmetic solution and consider the case closed, or to exclude any response directed at the Soviet Union from our menu of responses—or both. In my judgment, such an outcome would be domes- 2 The President addressed the nation regarding the Soviet brigade in Cuba on October 1; see Document 129. According to Brzezinski, the President had already, by the third week of September, decided to give such a speech “because national concern had greatly increased.” (Power and Principle, p. 349) 3 In the right-hand margin next to this point, the President wrote: “You & Jody & State do so” and drew an arrow from it to the point. 4 In the right-hand margin next to this point, the President wrote: “ok.” 5 In the right-hand margin next to these points, the President wrote: “ok.”
