1182
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin said that that word (“authority”) is not in the
Camp David Accords.
The President said that if Israelis and settlements—which have gone
up rapidly under Prime Minister Begin’s government—are under the
jurisdiction of Israel, the percentage of land—10 to 20—is under Israeli
jurisdiction, therefore this is a subversion of the Camp David Accords.
This is a matter of how much land and water. Any settlement, under Is-
rael’s jurisdiction, is a subversion.
Minister Burg said that 20 per cent is too high.
The President asked if 15 per cent is better.
Minister Burg said it is much lower, primo, and secondo . . .
The President said he understands (what Minister Burg is saying).
Prime Minister Begin said that the President reads the Bible in
Spanish!
Minister Burg said that secondly, Jews and Israelis in the West Bank
and Gaza are about 2 per cent of the Arab population. Therefore, this is
not as important as the President’s understanding.
The President said: yes.
Minister Burg said that there is a difference between individuals
and settlements, because all governments since 1967 . . . and he has
been in almost all of them . . .
Prime Minister Begin said: 31 years in the government!
Minister Burg said . . . all say that these are in Israel’s jurisdiction,
not any other. Therefore, there are two points: first, the percentage of
inhabitants, and second, individuals vs. settlements.
The President said he understands. Will they apply Israeli jurisdic-
tion to all Jewish settlements and citizens?
Minister Burg said that if a citizen goes to Ramallah, there is no Is-
raeli jurisdiction there.
Ambassador Lewis said that there are no individuals on the West
Bank; only settlers.
Prime Minister Begin said that autonomy is for the Arab inhabi-
tants. Israelis do not need it: they are citizens of Israel.
The President said that he is concerned. Israelis have the right to live
anywhere—Arabs, too. If Israel says that, wherever Israelis live, Israel
has jurisdiction, therefore this will subvert (the agreement) on Israel’s
withdrawal. Therefore if there is Israeli authority wherever they live,
all of the West Bank is involved.
Prime Minister Begin said that he had told the President why they
can’t settle individuals: for security, there must be groups. They will be
in a limited number of places, and not be subject to the Self-Governing
Authority’s jurisdiction over them.
