Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA 173 facility or activity would give rise to some fears, both privately and publicly expressed, that the U.S. is withdrawing to “Fortress America.” While the reaction to a move by the Radios to the U.S. would be less than, for example, a decision to reduce dramatically the U.S. troop presence in the FRG, there would nevertheless be a negative reaction in the FRG to the move and questioning of the U.S. commitment to Europe. B. Q: Would a move at this time be perceived as a backing down from our Helsinki commitments in the face of increased Soviet and East European attacks against the Radios? A: Yes. The attacks on the Radios made by Communist states have risen dramatically since the signing of the Helsinki Accords. If we were to relocate to the U.S., or make any other substantial change, such as reduction in broadcasting hours or alteration of broadcast content, we should expect speculation that the change was caused by pressure from the East. We should also expect the Communist states to further this impression through their propaganda activities. If a decision to relocate were announced during the Belgrade Conference, the speculation that the move was made as a result of Eastern attacks would be much higher than if the announcement were made at another time. C. Q: How would such a move affect FRG internal politics, and might the relocation become a domestic political issue? To what effect? A: The FRG has just undergone a long, if not major, debate over the effect that an administrative consolidation of the two German radios which broadcast to the East will have over the content of broadcasts to the Soviet Union. The conservative opposition accused the government of trying to throttle criticism of the USSR through the consolidation move. It is probable that a similar debate would erupt over relocation. The CDU/CSU would undoubtedly accuse any SPD Government of being behind a relocation of the Radios from the FRG. If we said that this was not the case, the CDU/CSU would question our judgment in moving the Radios from Munich. Thus, relocation could be an embarrassment to the government. Having said that, we do not believe that it would become a major domestic issue in the FRG. D. Q: Would a move reduce the FRG resolve and commitment to international broadcasting? A: Yes. Those people in the FRG who support the Radios regard them as the “front line” of Western broadcasting efforts. They realize that if RFE/RL were to disappear tomorrow, Eastern attacks on Deutsche Welle and Deutschland Funk would increase in intensity. There would be a natural reaction “to give up the fight, especially since the Americans do not care any more.” Furthermore, given the extremely overcrowded situation in the European airwaves, we could not expect the same support from the FRG which we currently receive in defense of the Radios’ frequencies.
