136 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 The President: Fairly severe punishment—diplomatic and economic relations broken. Admiral Turner: The results would not be that bad; embargo without international cooperation would not be that bad. Dr. Brzezinski: argues that we should accompany the negotiating approval with a credible threat that we will mine if trials are held and will do more if our people are harmed. If peace succeeds, we could let it be known that we made a credible military threat. Secretary Vance: (Recounts how bitter our people are against the press.) Hamilton Jordan: If the mining could be done prior to release, it will look better. Secretary Vance: We shouldn’t act unless our people are hurt. (Cites Truman with Angus Ward and Johnson with Pueblo.)5 Dr. Brzezinski: The public and world are now much less certain about the United States; hence this is not the same situation. The President: Go ahead and negotiate—and plan punitive action. Assuming the above doesn’t work, what about the Shah? How authentic is the PLO claim? If the Shah goes and our people are released, we would free to take punitive action. Mining appeals to me. The Vice President: We don’t know the basic facts. The President: Zbig, how do you feel? Dr. Brzezinski: It depends on how it is perceived. If it looks like we contrived it, it will look bad. If the Iranians are against it, it looks less bad. But I am skeptical that we can avoid such an impression. Also, I don’t think we would then take the punitive action that we would need to take. Admiral Turner: A high risk for our hostages if he leaves. Could we negotiate with the Iranians? The President: That would be the worst. Now it would be a blow to Khomeini if he went to Mexico. Should ZB talk to David Rockefeller? (Discussion of contacts) 5 In November 1948, U.S. Consul at Shenyang Angus Ward was placed under house arrest by Mao Zedong’s People’s Liberation Army. Ward was ultimately arrested, brought to trial, and deported in December 1949. During the crisis, Truman and his advisors discussed but rejected the option of a rescue operation. The USS Pueblo was captured by North Koreans in January 1968. Eighty-two crew members were held as POWs and tortured by the North Korean government for 11 months. To gain the hostages’ release, the Johnson administration issued an apology in December 1968, admitted the Pueblo was spying, and assured North Korea that the United States would not spy again. There were no rescue attempts. The apology was rescinded after the crewmen were released.
