International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1085
1. You send a message (Attachment 1) to all our Chiefs of Mission,
stressing the importance which you attach to this issue and enlisting
their assistance in promoting accelerated progress toward goals widely
approved by governments.2
2. Shortly thereafter, you send a second message (Attachment 2) to
all Chiefs of Mission of certain key developing countries asking for
their views on and attention to these issues on the part of the host gov-
ernment, and (b) how we could be most supportive of individuals and
private organizations working in this field in the host country.3
3. A Departmental Notice on this subject (Attachment 3) be distrib-
uted to all employees in the foreign affairs agencies.4
4. Responsibility for follow-up action in this field be assigned to
the Ad Hoc Working Group, comprising representatives of interested
bureaus of State, AID, ICA and Peace Corps which prepared this mem-
orandum and its attachments. The Ad Hoc Group, which would be
co-chaired by Ambassador Marshall Green and me, in coordinating
and articulating U.S. policy in this field, will be guided by the advice of
our Ambassadors and other authorities and will remain in close touch
with Committees already established by our Government which have
related responsibilities. Within this general frame of reference, the
Working Group will draw up its own terms of reference and devise its
own method of approach, all of which are subject to your final ap-
proval; it will also prepare the information brochure referred to in the
cable.5
2 Vance wrote “ok” at the end of the paragraph. Attached but not printed is a draft
of the telegram, prepared by Good, Baer, and Green on May 25. (National Archives, RG
59, Central Foreign Policy File, P790085–0878) A handwritten notation on the telegram
reads, “Cable sent 5/30/79,” although the Department did not send a final version until
May 31. The telegram, as sent, is printed as Document 327.
3 Vance wrote “ok” at the end of the paragraph. Attached but not printed is the
draft telegram, prepared by Good, Baer, and Green on May 8. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P790085–0880) A handwritten notation on the telegram reads,
“Cable sent 5/30/79,” although the Department did not send the final version until May
31. In telegram 138589, May 31, to Bangkok, Cairo, Dakar, Dar es Salam, Islamabad, Ja-
karta, Jidda, Kingston, Lagos, Lima, Manila, Mexico City, New Delhi, Seoul, and Ouaga-
dougou, the Department requested that the posts comment on “innovative measures
and/or successful projects” undertaken in host countries that could serve as examples for
other countries. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790246–0830)
4 The undated Department Notice, attached but not printed, summarizes the con-
tents of the joint State/AID/ICA/Peace Corps message and was attached to the May 8
draft telegram to certain diplomatic posts, referenced in footnote 3 above. (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P790085–0880)
5 Wisner approved and initialed the recommendations for Vance on May 30.
