Czechoslovakia
327
ment that they are seriously considering a proposal to return the portion
of the Czechoslovak gold they hold to facilitate resolution of their
claims, a development which would clearly weaken our bargaining
position.4
In considering the timing of a proposal we have borne in mind
the generally poor human rights record of the Czechoslovak Govern-
ment and the May 29 arrests of the Charter 77 activists.5 We do not
believe that we should defer making a proposal on these grounds. In
fact, given the apparent differences within the Czechoslovak leadership
on the issue of whether to proceed with the trials of the Charter 77
activists, we believe that prompt tabling of a claims/gold proposal
might help to tilt the balance against those arguing for harsh punish-
ment. In any event, we expect the claims/gold negotiations to drag
out for a considerable time given our tough proposal, and we can
adjust the pace—and even suspend the negotiations if necessary—in
order to react to the outcome of the trials. We will of course make
our disapproval of any trials of Charter 77 activists very clear to the
Czechoslovaks in both the bilateral and CSCE contexts when and if
such trials occur.
Section 408 of the Trade Act of 1974 directed that the 1974 ad
referendum claims settlement agreement with Czechoslovakia be rene-
gotiated and submitted to Congress for its approval. All of the Members
of Congress with whom we have spoken or with whom the issue has
been discussed, including Senator Long who was chiefly responsible
for the Congressional repudiation of the 1974 agreement, clearly favor
moving ahead to resolve this matter. We believe that we will be able
to negotiate a new agreement providing enough compensation for the
American claimants to be acceptable to Senator Long. Treasury and
we plan to consult with key Members of Congress, including Senator
Long, before tabling the new proposal and to continue consultations
with them throughout the negotiations. Now that the US/PRC claims
settlement agreement has been accepted by Congress and a US/PRC
4 The Department reported the British response to Senator Long’s proposal to vest
the Czechoslovak gold unilaterally in telegram 240364 to Prague, September 12. In its
response, the United Kingdom stated: “After full consideration in London, we have
concluded that this proposal, if carried out, would be illegal under the terms of the Paris
Agreement as was explicitly recognized in 1974 by all three governments represented
on the Tripartite Commission.” The British stressed, “we very much hope that you will
not try to proceed with this form of action and that it will be possible for you instead
to make a renewed effort to resolve your claims against Czechoslovakia by negotiation.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790418–0244)
5 See footnotes 1 and 2, Document 107, for more information on the arrest of
Czechoslovak dissidents.
