616 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX —Note the concern felt in the United States on this subject, in the Administration, Congress and the Hungarian-American community. Point out our readiness to engage in a frank dialogue on this and any other human rights issues. —Stress U.S. support for Romania’s independence and territorial integrity. 199. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Goldberg) to President Carter1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Visit of Romanian President Ceausescu This memorandum, requested by the White House, is designed as a talking paper, relating to CSCE and the Belgrade meeting, to supplement the memorandum submitted by the Secretary of State to the President.2 I. HUMAN RIGHTS The Romanians at Belgrade were notably silent about the subject of human rights and fundamental freedoms (Principle VII of the Final Act). This is scarcely surprising in light of the fact that, although they 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 12, Romania, President Ceausescu, 4/12–13/78: Cables and Memos, 4/11–22/ 78. No classification marking. In an April 10 covering memorandum forwarding the Goldberg memorandum to Brzezinski, King noted that Joyce Starr, the NSC Staff member who handled human rights questions for White House Counsel Robert Lipschutz had requested the memorandum, since the Department of State’s HA bureau was dissatisfied with the coverage of human rights issues in Vance’s briefing memorandum. King explained: “Starr was asked by HA to ask Goldberg for such a memo to circumvent the State Department consensus.” King recommended against forwarding the memorandum to Carter; Inderfurth concurred, adding “particularly since you are forwarding the Rauta memo.” Brzezinski disapproved King’s recommendation. (Ibid.) 2 See Document 198. On April 11, Vance sent a separate memorandum to the President specifically on human rights. The memorandum, summarizing the decisions made by Christopher on April 8 (see Document 196), briefed the President on the Hungarian minority issue in Romania, the Rauta case, and the Romanian loans from the World Bank. Vance suggested that he raise these issues directly with Andrei, and that Carter tell Ceausescu he had asked Vance to do so. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 12, Romania, President Ceausescu, 4/12–13/78: Cables and Memos, 4/11–22/78)
