Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Pursuant to our telephone conversation,5 I would like to share with you some thoughts on the present state of the negotiations and how best to proceed in the days ahead. I am doing so in the spirit of friendship that binds us together and in all appreciation of your relentless effort in the pursuit of peace. I am also undertaking this exchange of views with full awareness of the historic significance of the task we have assumed for the good of our two nations and that of mankind. I believe that the negotiations held in Washington have reached a crossroads. Much has been accomplished with your help and determination. However, what remains to be finalized could affect the outcome of our endeavor at present and in the future. I also believe that this could be achieved without any undue delay. As I stated before, most of the task was done in Camp David. There, we laid down the foundations of a comprehensive peace that addresses itself to all aspects of the conflict. Special emphasis was placed on the Palestinian problem as it was agreed that it remains the heart and core of the dispute.6 Thus, it was only logical that we made it crystal clear that any attempt to work for a separate agreement must be rejected. You would recall that I told Prime Minister Begin that it is absolutely unacceptable to us to conclude a separate agreement, a partial agreement or a third disengagement.7 This was the overriding theme in the Camp David talks. Hence, it should be clearly reflected in the outcome of the current negotiations which are held under the umbrella8 of the “Framework for Peace in the Middle East”. This should be achieved, not by the insertion of a few words, but by reaching agreement on specific measures to be taken on certain dates in the direction of transferring authority to the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza. In all candor, I find the Israeli attitude in the Washington negotiations and the statements issued by members of the Israeli Cabinet rather alarming. Apparently, they are still thinking and behaving with the old mentality and complexes. The pre-initiative spirit persists, even though the Israeli people left no doubt that their yearning for peace is the paramount factor in their life. They received my message with enthusiasm and hope. To me, their response was gratifying. Nonetheless, the Israeli delegation remained seized by the worn-out concepts and the old suspicion. They fail to conceive the process as one of peace building for this generation and the generations to come. Their attitude toward the Camp David Accords is very telling. They want to pick and 5 See Document 143. 6 Vance underlined the final two sentences of this paragraph. 7 Vance underlined this sentence. 8 Vance underlined the phrase “held under the umbrella.”
