National Security Policy 61 the rule of law, our desire not to offend our old friends, and even our high regard for human life—­are often regarded as unrealistic in those countries where the struggle for existence and the social tradition do not encourage such attitudes. 23. While the educated classes almost everywhere have some famil­ iarity with the Western tradition, many of them resent the high level of American consumption and deplore what they see as a US preoccupa­ tion with military security. Although not necessarily pro-Communist, and often opposed to Communism, they join many past critics in look­ ing upon US policy as too inflexible and moralistic, and too exclusively concerned with the struggle against Communism. Thus, despite the intellectual and realistic justification of US policy, the simple formu­ las proposed by the USSR—European zonal demilitarization, a ban on nuclear tests and on the use of nuclear weapons, industrialization, anti-­ colonialism, peace, and so on—­often have a greater appeal even when they are little better than slogans. 24. As a consequence, the Communist states are gaining ground as advocates of peace and social progress, while the US is increasingly accused of indifference to these causes. Whether these images of the Communist states and of the US grow more firm depends largely upon the interplay of US and Soviet policies in the years to come. The Soviet leaders are doing all they can to sharpen these images wherever the US and the USSR confront each other in both the developed and the under­ developed areas of the world. III. KEY AREAS OF US-SOVIET COMPETITION A. Cohesiveness of Power Groupings 25. Although the nations of the world may be divided, for pur­ poses of analysis, into three main groups—­the Sino-Soviet bloc, the Western alliance system, and the uncommitted areas—­we must recog­ nize that the boundaries between these three are indistinct and change­ able. Some allies are closer allies than others, some countries are less uncommitted than others, and there is frequently considerable ebb and flow in the positions and strength of individual states or regional asso­ ciations. Moreover, both the USSR and the US are engaged in efforts to break existing ties in the other camp and to prevent new accretions to it. 26. The Sino-Soviet bloc. The solidarity of the bloc rests primarily upon the military power of the USSR and upon a strong identity of interests and ideology among the various ruling groups—­the latter consideration applies especially to Communist China. Since the death of Stalin, there has been a trend toward redefinition of relationships. Moscow’s monopoly of Communist thought and power has been diminished by Yugoslavia’s maintenance of an independent position,
