1082 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III pledge Cy Vance, Jim Williams,2 and Tom Ehrlich recommend, as do I, an increase in PL–480.3 OMB is opposed. (C) They also recommend, as do all your advisers, pressing ahead with our existing proposal to establish the Food Security Reserve, an earmarked four million ton portion of CCC holdings of wheat, for restricted use in meeting severe food supply shortages under our PL–480 food aid program. (C) Agriculture recommends, in addition, increasing commercial term export sales under the CCC credit program. (C) Memoranda from Vance, Williams, and Ehrlich on the PL–480 proposals and from Williams on the Food Security Reserve and CCC credit sales proposals are at Tabs A, B, and C, respectively.4 Jim McIntyre is submitting an analysis of the budget implications.5 (C) If you approve any of these recommendations, we would like to announce on Saturday.6 (U) 2. Food Security Reserve. All of your advisers believe that we should try to use the present situation to reinforce our previous request to the Congress to establish the Food Security Reserve. It would not increase the federal budget. It is a long-sought assurance of US readiness to respond to food crises and to maintain our food aid to needy countries when there is a short US grain crop. The Reserve will not work to depress US wheat prices because releases from it are restricted to situations of severe shortages. (C) Establishment of this reserve will not generally be seen as fulfilling your pledge to “increase amounts of grain devoted to alleviation of hunger in poor countries”; it would simply assure that we will be able to meet our minimum food aid commitments, whatever may be agricultural conditions. (C) 3. PL–480. All of the agencies concerned, except OMB, agree that increased PL–480 food aid should be part of our disposition of the 2 James Williams was the Deputy Secretary of Agriculture. 3 Documentation on the Food Security Reserve is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. 4 Annexes A–C are attached but not printed. Annex A is a January 17 memorandum from Vance to Carter entitled “PL 480 Allocations.” Annex B is a January 17 memorandum from Vance, Williams, and Ehrlich to Carter entitled “Request for Additional PL 480 Food Assistance.” Annex C is an undated memorandum from Williams (as the Acting Secretary of Agriculture) to Carter entitled “Options for Using CCC Credit and Credit Guarantees to Expand Exports and Help Offset Effect of the Soviet Sales Suspension.” A January 18 memorandum from Eizenstat to Carter entitled “P.L. 480—Food Assistance” is also attached but not printed. 5 An undated memorandum from McIntyre to Carter entitled “1980 and 1981 Budget Increases for PL 480” is in the Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 166, 1/21/80 [2]. 6 January 19.
