566
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
true, it would seem to him that Mosadeq had already forfeited any
claim he might have had to the Shah’s support.
The Sovereign felt that the United States should use its present bar-
gaining position, arising from Dr. Mosadeq’s great eagerness to obtain
United States support, to force a change in Mosadeq’s attitude towards
indigenous communist groups. Such a change could take the form of
strong measures against the Tudeh Party and would involve the dis-
missal of the fellow-traveler Minister of Justice on the pretext that he
acted without authority in liberating communist leaders. The Shah be-
lieved that Mosadeq was desperate enough to accept these terms as the
price of United States support.
The Ambassador pointed out to the source that such an approach
on the part of the United States would tend to under-emphasize the im-
portance of obtaining a settlement of the compensation problem. Mo-
sadeq might, therefore, gain the impression that, by making certain
concessions to the West, in the matter of dealing more firmly with Ira-
nian communists, he could obtain substantial economic aid from the
United States regardless of the fact that Iran had not agreed to pay com-
pensation for the losses resulting to the AIOC from the nationalization
of oil.
The source commented that Mosadeq, his supporters, and the Ira-
nian people generally were convinced that they could obtain American
aid without having arrived at any solution in the oil problem simply
because the United States could not permit the increase in communist
influence which would result from further economic deterioration of
the country. The Shah, he said, suggested the issuance of an official
statement by the United States, making it very clear to Iran and to the
world that there could be no further American aid until at least definite
willingness to achieve a solution of the oil problem had been demon-
strated. It was pointed out that, were such a declaration to be issued at
this time, Mosadeq could reply that he had offered to initiate conversa-
tions with the British regarding compensation for oil and had been
turned down. The source then suggested that attempts be made to in-
duce the British to begin conversations with Mosadeq, so that when
such conversations broke down, as they surely would, the United
States could issue the declaration in question without leaving itself
open to the Mosadeq rejoinder.
In the Shah’s opinion, said his emissary, no settlement of the oil
question was possible so long as Mosadeq remained Prime Minister.
The Shah was convinced that Mosadeq should be overthrown by action
of the Majlis, but felt that covert means must be employed to prevail
upon the Majlis to act. Specifically, such underground means would in-
clude material aid and encouragement from the United States to Gen-
eral Fazlollah Zahedi and Dr. Mozaffar Baqai. The Shah was sure that
