430
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
working for peace. Ultimately, it is Africans themselves who will bring
peace to their continent.
“—We will continue to respect the growing spirit of African na-
tional independence because it is important to economic and political
progress and because Africans will firmly resist yielding their hard-
won independence to outside powers. The history of the last 20 years
demonstrates that fact.
“—It has been our policy since the beginning of the Administra-
tion to consider security requests from African nations with legitimate
defense needs. Our friends in Africa must know that we can and will
help them to strengthen their ability to defend themselves. Any in-
crease in American military assistance will be done prudently and will
be consistent with this Administration’s policy of seeking arms re-
straint and concentrating our assistance on economic development.
“—In private and public, we have emphasized our concern about
the nature of Soviet activities in Africa and we have been in contact
with European, Arab, and African countries and members of the non-
aligned movement who share our concern. We have pointed out to the
Soviets the problems which their activities pose for Africa and for our
overall relations. Our actions will continue to be consistent with our
commitment to the peaceful resolution of disputes and with due regard
for the concerns of those African countries affected.
“—In Africa as elsewhere, we will work along with others of all
races to foster respect for individual human rights. We believe that civil
and political liberties and the right of each individual to basic neces-
sities, such as decent health care, education, and food, should be re-
spected throughout the continent.
“The strategy we are pursuing is a realistic approach that empha-
sizes our strengths and encourages an evolution of events that is in
both Africa’s interests and our own. It is a strategy that has earned the
support of African leaders throughout the continent.
“We do not ignore that there is a residue of suspicion among some
Africans who have fought against colonialism that our policy is simply
a tactic and not a reflection of a genuine commitment to African needs.
Only time and our continued demonstration that we mean what we say
will meet this problem.
“We are convinced that an affirmative approach to African aspira-
tions and problems is also the most effective response to Soviet and
Cuban activities there. Any other strategy would weaken Africa by di-
viding it. And it would weaken us by letting others set our policies for
us.
“Our nation and the nations of Africa have much in common. We
struggled hard for our independence, and we intend to remain free. We
