1957 1335 spoke about China’s desire friendly terms with US and American peo­ ple; specifically pointed out Chinese side taken many steps forward. In order really improve relations both sides must take steps forward simultaneously. 18. I replied, first let me correct apparent misunderstanding. I understood he thought I had said that concluding an international agreement is derogation of sovereignty. I did not say that nor at least did not intend to. What I said was exactly opposite—that concluding international agreement not derogation of sovereignty—in fact is exer­ cise of sovereignty. Interesting though it might be my point was not enter into philosophical argument but my point was that his govt hav­ ing entered into agreement Sept 1955, its carrying out that agreement would be exercise sovereignty rather than derogation sovereignty. 19. I continued, I did not believe I had said question civilians most fundamental question between us. What I had said was it a fundamental question between us and both our countries had agreed it first question between us. Demonstration our ability resolve what our govts ­considered first question between us certainly fundamental to resolving others. A fun­ damental question between us still remains question whether permit our misunderstanding in Taiwan area to lead war. Remains still for us say unconditionally unequivocally it will not. However to go back to what both agreed was first question it not question resolving it in part, for some Americans or most Americans—it question of resolving question. 20. I continued, when we issued statement Sept 10 we not talking of Americans who already left his country and returned US. We talking about 19 specific Americans still in prison that time. Not talking about American POW who voluntarily decided remain Wang’s country. We talking about these 19 Americans. He had termed it matter of few crimi­ nals. I could not agree with him on that. We had in past and still consid­ ered imprisonment these Americans completely unjust. However I did not ask him agree me on that. I only asked that first problem we came here resolve be resolved and good faith be shown here in resolving it. As had pointed out here many times, not only did we consider good faith not been shown in resolving it, but seem to have gone backwards. Considerations Wang’s country’s sovereignty and judicial procedures had not prevented release eleven fliers day our meetings opened here. It had not prevented release 10 Americans Sept 10 at time we issued agreement. Since that time, seemed quite clear they had adopted policy requiring these unfortunate people serve whole term their sentence. 21. I continued, it perfectly natural in light this history of carrying out agreement and treatment afforded Americans his country, that my govt felt it would be delinquent in its responsibility protect Americans to approve their travel to his country.
