452  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
71.	
Memorandum of Conversation1
Moscow, February 7, 1990, 8–10:30 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
The Secretary
Eduard Shevardnadze
Shevardnadze: I have just come from the Plenum. The Plenum is not 
over yet. The platform has been adopted but we are still debating with 
Lithuania. The debate has been quite heated and I may have to go back 
and give a second statement. I read your speech in Prague and I found 
many interesting points in it.
Baker: I am very grateful that you saw fit to leave the Plenum. I, 
of course, would like to discuss the events associated with the Plenum 
and I’d also like to discuss Germany. But I think it might be useful first 
for me to go through some of the general ideas that we have brought 
on arms control. I think we brought a basket of arms control items, and 
I hope you will see a number of new ideas. If we can get into some of 
these general points on arms control tonight then perhaps you can get 
that information to your experts this evening.
Shevardnadze: You have outlined a sensible plan. Let me just say 
this meeting is taking place at a very interesting time. The conditions 
are ripe and the events and dynamics, especially in Europe, are moving 
with great pace. Our Summit will take place in a couple of months, and 
it will be extraordinarily important. Thus, we attach great importance 
to the talks I will have with you over the next couple of days. And, if 
you go ahead and outline the main elements of your new arms control 
ideas it will make it easier for our experts.
Baker: I’d like very much to do that, and I believe that what I am 
bringing can help us do what our two Presidents asked us to do in Malta, 
that is to say, resolve certain key START issues. Let me just add that both 
the President and I are very anxious for you to succeed in what you are 
doing. We know there is a limit to what we can do to help, but we are 
trying hard to provide and contribute to a secure and stable international 
environment. We know that that can be of assistance to you. Of course, 
we also know that a stable international environment is not simply a 
1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat, S/S-IRM Records, Lot 93D187, 
Secretary James A. Baker III’s Classified Papers, January 1989–August 1992, JAB Papers 
Feb 1990. Secret. The meeting took place in the Osobnyak Guest House at the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs. The full memorandum of conversation is scheduled for publication in 
Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-
Level Contacts. Baker arrived in Moscow earlier that day, after flying from Washington 
to Shannon and Prague on February 6.
