3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1977 41 We are working on these problems with the greatest possible effort, preparing for Secretary Vance’s discussions with you in Moscow. I hope you will4 not predicate your future correspondence on the erroneous assumption that we lack sincerity, integrity, or the will to make rapid progress toward mutually advantageous agreements. I do not underestimate the difficulty of the substantive issues or the technical details, but I am determined to succeed in laying the foundation for a stable and peaceful relationship between our two countries. We do not seek any one-sided advantage. I do not think of our letters as official negotiating documents, but if exchanged on a personal and completely confidential basis they may very well help us both to chart the needed sense of historical direction. It is in this spirit that this correspondence was initiated, and I want you to know that I am committed to arms reduction as a matter of personal belief and because it represents the desire of the people of my country. I hope and believe that you and your people have the same commitment. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter5 4 This sentence originally began “Please do.” Carter struck through these words and substituted “I hope you will.” 5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. 14. Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to President Carter1 March 15, 1977 Dear Mr. President, Having studied your letter of March 4,2 I would like to set forth once more the substance of our understanding of the way the things are with the working out of an agreement on strategic offensive arms limitation (to be effective till 1985), as well as to state in more detail our position on specific questions which are still outstanding. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 69, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR): Brezhnev– Carter Correspondence: 3–5/77. No classification marking. Printed from an unofficial translation. 2 See Document 13.
