Chapter 6, June–December 1990  879
We think this is enough to solve your problem. It should be reas-
suring to you on the size of the British force and the relative weight of 
the British force.25
The long-­established pattern of US/UK cooperation has not upset 
the balance, and will not upset the future balance.26
All that said, I am prepared to take two more important steps to 
meet your political concerns and close off this issue.27
First, not only to close off non-­circumvention but also the whole 
question of third country issues, we are prepared to accept a ban on 
overseas basing of strategic offensive arms.28
—The US does not base strategic offensive arms outside its national 
territory. The only ambiguous situation is Holy Loch, where US SLBM 
submarines receive support from a support ship, a tender.29
—We are prepared to state that US SLBM submarines will not use 
Holy Loch after 1991, assuming START enters into force in 1991. No 
arrangements similar to Holy Loch will be established in the future.30
—We are further prepared to accept your proposal to ban third 
country basing. While your proposal would not take effect for seven 
years, we are prepared to accept a ban on overseas basing within six 
months of entry into force.31
—This would not affect port visits by ballistic missile submarines, 
nor would it preclude temporary deployment of heavy bombers to 
overseas locations. Neither of these activities constitutes basing. Here 
is the text of an agreed statement to make this clear. (Give him draft 
agreed statement at Tab 2.)32
—You would drop your proposal for inspections in third countries, 
which would now be unnecessary.33
25 Baker numbered this point 4.
26 Baker numbered this point 5, and drew an arrow pointing to it in the left-­hand 
margin.
27 Baker underlined “All that said,” “prepared to take two more important steps,” 
numbered this point 6, and drew three asterisks in the left-­hand margin beside it.
28 Baker underlined “First,” “but also,” “ban on overseas basing of strategic offen-
sive arms,” and numbered this point “A.”
29 Baker numbered this point “i” and placed a checkmark in the left-­hand margin 
beside it.
30 Baker numbered this point “ii” and placed a checkmark in the left-­hand margin 
beside it.
31 Baker underlined “six,” numbered this point “iii,” and placed a checkmark in the 
left-­hand margin beside it.
32 Baker underlined “basing,” “draft agreed statement at Tab 2,” numbered this 
point “iv,” and placed a checkmark in the left-­hand margin beside it.
33 Baker numbered this point “v” and placed a checkmark in the left-­hand margin 
beside it.
