Chile  225
CH–2.	
Press Release Prepared in the Office of the Secretary of 
the Interior (Seaton)1
Washington, April 11, 1958.
SECRETARY SEATON URGES REPEAL OF SUSPENSION 
ON COPPER-IMPORT TAXES
Secretary of the Interior Fred A. Seaton today recommended that 
Congress repeal the suspension on copper-­import taxes which has been 
in effect since 1947.
In recommending passage of S. 3234 which would revoke the sus-
pension of copper-­import taxes, Secretary Seaton said: “The import tax 
was suspended at a time when copper was in short supply the world 
over. Serious difficulties were being experienced in meeting defense 
requirements arising from the Korean War. Both the Government and 
domestic producers wished to remove any obstacles to increasing cop-
per supplies.”
“The circumstances on which the original suspension and its sub-
sequent extensions were based no longer exist. In the course of the past 
year and one-­half the extreme shortage of copper has disappeared and 
there is now an adequate supply,” the Secretary said in a letter to the 
Senate Finance Committee.
Copper-­import taxes have been suspended since 1947 with the 
exception of short periods in 1950 and 1951. The current suspension 
remains in effect so long as the price of copper is 24 cents per pound or 
above, or until June 30, 1958, unless sooner repealed by Congress. The 
suspended import taxes on copper are now two cents per pound when 
the price drops below 24 cents per pound and 1.8 cents per pound so 
long as the price is at/or above 24 cents per pound.2
1 Source: Department of State, ARA/WST Files, Lot 63 D 85, “Copper.”
2 Ambassador Mariano Puga of Chile and Roy R. Rubottom, Assistant Secretary of 
State for Inter-American Affairs, discussed Seaton’s statement on April 14, 1958. In his 
memorandum of the conversation, Rubottom stated that he explained that the Department 
was faced with two problems: “Our foreign relations problem, which involved our desire 
to avoid any increase in tariffs on copper which would affect Chile adversely, and our 
domestic problem, which involved the complaints of the industry and their efforts to 
seek from the Congress protection which they considered necessary.” He further stated, 
“The Department felt it would be hard to oppose stubbornly the industry’s pressure for 
a tariff on copper but if there had to be an increase in copper tariffs, the least damaging 
would be to permit the old rate to be reinstated upon the expiration of the suspension on 
June 30.” The Ambassador remarked that, “he greatly feared that if this problem could 
not be resolved promptly, there was a possibility that President Ibáñez might cancel his 
[proposed] visit.” (411.256/4–1458)
