546
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
“these extraordinary.” Such a reaffirmation would be enacted in both
Houses and thus be more binding than an Executive agreement. Secre-
tary Vance and I have discussed this with Congress and they are
prepared to move ahead. The contemporary vitality of this agreement
will reassure you and educate our people. This is an unprecedented
way for us to go about making such a commitment. (S)
It is also unprecedented that the legislation will provide for assist-
ance “notwithstanding any other provision of law”, thus setting aside
the Glenn and Symington amendments and any other obstructions. (S)
We need to see this as a beginning of a process. We have to get it
enacted. Congress is chary of such things, but at this time it is willing
to do it. Proceeding this way is much quicker, cleaner and more decisive
than a treaty. You recognize the delay that would be involved in a
treaty, and an in-treaty [a new treaty?] would likely incur debate over
various conditions such as non-proliferation. (S)
Addressing the contingencies you raised, a Soviet or Soviet/
Afghan attack that threatened your independence or integrity would
fall under the terms of the 1959 agreement. The President would imme-
diately consult with you under Article I of the agreement, and also
consult with Congress. Our response could involve the use of armed
force. (S)
In case of a concerted Indian-Soviet attack, the first article of the
1959 agreement would also come into play. (S)
If the Soviets have India attack as a proxy—we see this most
unlikely. India is even less willing to do this after the invasion of
Afghanistan. The key, though, would be whether the attack was Com-
munist controlled and/or inspired. More important, though, is that
the United States and India have good relations. We are pleased that
you are consulting with the Indians. To sum up, though, if India
attacked as an agent of the Soviet Union, Article I would indeed come
into effect. (S)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
You have talked about “keeping the insurgency alive” in Afghani-
stan. The issue is one of motivation. To accept an injection of arms to
the refugees would be dangerous for us unless we are able to defend
against the first two strategic contingencies we discussed earlier.12 (S)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
12 Text of the full record of the talks is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia. Zia called Carter, February 4, to notify the President
that he thought the talks were “excellent.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 38, Memcons: President: 2/80)
