488
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
metry between ourselves and the Soviets—that conclusion cannot be
readily drawn in the case of the zero-yield test ban. As a result Congres-
sional resistance will be formidable and the arguments sharp. The
Chiefs are already on record as opposing such a ban. The laboratories
and DoE personnel will be obliged to elucidate the consequences for
certification under such a ban. Leaving aside the military questions, the
political consequences could hardly be worse.
6. Since (a) some testing will be required to maintain confidence in
both weapons reliability and safety, and (b) very low or zero thresholds
[less than 1 line not declassified] even under optimistic assumptions about
Soviet agreement to on-site seismic detection, I urge you to consider the
following course of action.
This alternative approach serves the national security interests of
the United States and its allies, takes a reasonable step toward legiti-
mate arms control (no new weapons development), and avoids a pro-
tracted and uncertain Congressional debate. The alternative is to indi-
cate American willingness to accept drastic reduction in the presently
proposed threshold test ban from 150 KT [less than 1 line not declassified]
Such a level is consistent with our existing verification capabilities.
Moreover, we should also indicate that, if the Soviets are prepared to
allow a network of internal seismic stations or arrays, we could reduce
that threshold [less than 1 line not declassified]
Such an approach would be consistent with both certification re-
quirements and our present verification capabilities—and would also
put pressure on the Soviets to allow improvements in those verification
capabilities. A prudent approach of this sort on arms control would
better serve the interests of the nation and would also have a higher
chance of success.
203.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, June 1, 1978
I attach a copy of a memorandum from the Joint Chiefs of Staff on
(PD)/NSC–38, announcing your decisions as to the U.S. negotiating
1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–81–0202, Box
53, A–400.112 TEST BAN (Apr–5 June) 1978. Secret. A handwritten “J” in the upper
right-hand corner of the memorandum indicates Carter saw the document.
