Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 349 practical to view a missile as made for that launcher. But practical difficulties arose when you began with the missile and put it with the launcher. Koltunov repeated that both sides were assuming that launchers should be used above all for counting and monitoring. In both versions the same situation existed: each deployed launcher corresponded to a missile, and the reverse was also true. So in either case there would be a strict correspondence between a deployed launcher and a deployed missile. Koltunov said perhaps the sides needed more time to think about this question and to reach a mutually acceptable solution. 20. Burt said that in listening to Koltunov’s very learned statement he had been impressed, and he knew Nazarkin had been impressed by what Mr. Joseph had said. But Burt had two things he wished to add. He was a bit concerned with Koltunov’s last assertion that the sides needed more time to address this issue. The sides had a tremendous amount of work ahead of them in Geneva. They now had conceptual agreement on the unit of account issue. The START negotiations had been in progress since 1982, Burt said; if the Soviet or U.S. public knew the sides were still arguing about what was being limited both negotiators would be hanged. So, having reached conceptual agreement, Burt thought the sides had to make a commitment to resolve the issue, sooner rather than later. If the sides always backed away from tough issues, they would never reach agreement. Secondly, Burt wanted to make a personal appeal to Nazarkin: recalling his days as a newspaper reporter during the SALT II debate of 1979, he remembered that one of the main lines of attack was that the agreement only limited launchers. That was why the U.S. side was very mindful of the fact that there would be a debate on any agreement signed, and that this agreement would be compared to SALT II. Burt and others would be asked to testify and explain how they had improved the START treaty by comparison with SALT II. Symbolism would be very important in that debate; for the negotiations to succeed each side would have to take into account the domestic circumstances of the other side. Thus Burt appealed to Nazarkin to take into account the special psychological requirements of the U.S. side. 21. Nazarkin said that first he wanted to state that in principle the sides had already reached agreement on this issue, because they had agreed to count a combination of both items. The problem they were now discussing was psychological and theological. Burt agreed. Nazarkin said the sides would solve it; he was sure that when Col. Koltunov referred to needing more time he was referring to time spent in Washington, not in Geneva. It would be a matter of a few days. Nazarkin saw two possible options: either the sides would find a compromise that would satisfy the ambitions of both sides—­and frankly
