94
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
ernments have been somewhat more supportive of US measures. [por-
tion marking not declassified]
Most Arab nations have privately condemned the seizure of the
American embassy, with only Libya supporting Iran. Many Arabs feel
that the Iranian regime is giving Islam a bad name. The Arabian Penin-
sula Arabs, moveover, fear the new Shia militancy being pushed by
Khomeini. Iraq has been the most vocal in expressing anti-Iranian
feelings. The Iraqis have talked of abrogating the 1975 Iran-Iraq security
agreement and have signaled to the United States their support of
continued US pressure on Khomeini. [portion marking not declassified]
The Arabs have, however, expressed concern over the precedent
being set by the blocking of Iranian assets. UAE officials, for example,
reportedly feel that the US move was misguided and that it will force
a reevaluation of UAE foreign investment policies as well as those of
other oil producers. The Libyan delegation to the Arab Foreign Minis-
ters meeting in Tunis called for joint Arab reprisals against the United
States. The Libyan initiative received only mild support from Syria
and was soundly rejected by the conference, suggesting considerable
sympathy for the US position. [portion marking not declassified]
Reactions from the major industrial countries have been subdued
and publicly balanced. This apparent lack of enthusiasm for US
measures is probably due to nervousness over the potential for disrup-
tions in international financial and oil markets. Reaction to the US
halt of purchases of Iranian oil has been positive and supportive, but
extremely low key. [portion marking not declassified]
The US decision to freeze official Iranian assets held abroad is
causing few specific difficulties for foreign governments, but almost
all foreign governments have questioned the legality of the US action.
Nevertheless, there appears to be general agreement not to actively
pursue the question of legality at this moment. All available reports
indicate that the US blocking order has been extremely effective abroad,
particularly in the United Kingdom, which harbors a large percentage
of Iranian investments. [portion marking not declassified]
Prospects for Foreign Cooperation With Other US Sanctions
The prospects for active foreign support of additional US counter-
measures against Iran are slim, if the American hostages are not harmed
and if other countries are not more directly provoked. The West Europe-
ans and Japanese will continue to maintain as low a profile as possible
and will watch the mood and response of the other OPEC states
extremely carefully. In the meantime, they will likely continue to
applaud US firmness, argue against military action, and attempt to
remain as uninvolved as possible. [portion marking not declassified]
A request that Brazil—a possible major exporter of food to Iran—
join an embargo would be met by stiff opposition on the grounds that
