332 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement as it can be without creating legislative chaos, Protestant churches and schools can seek through the courts to obtain their legal rights. Obviously, it would be better from the viewpoint both of the Embassy and of the Colombian Government if the problem could be solved in this manner. We would not be placed in the unhappy position of flying in the face of Colombian Catholic prejudices and of being accused of taking action far beyond anything we in fact contemplate. The Colombian Government, in reopening churches and schools, could say that they were simply respecting court decisions. Moreover, if the Protestants can secure their rights by court action, it would then be of doubtful propriety for the Embassy to continue to make representations, at least until a denial of justice had occurred. However it must be borne in mind that many Colombian judges doubtless share the fervor of the general populace in their Catholic predilections and some might, therefore, yielding to Catholic pressure, find legal quibbles or devise endless delays by which Protestants might in fact be further deprived of their rights. On the balance, nevertheless, it would appear to me that this course should be urged upon the Protestants as soon as it is clearly open to them, despite the dangers which it involves. If it should prove impossible through the Colombian courts to secure Protestant rights, it is also true that in most of the Latin American republics an American company cannot be entirely sure of securing its rights. I question whether we should go further to secure Protestant rights, even where a legitimate American interest is clearly involved, than we should in securing any other American right which has been violated by the Colombian authorities. We should perhaps remember that our original representations were with regard to violence visited upon American Protestant missionaries, their churches and schools when requests for adequate protection were obviously a duty as well as a right, and that we may not have perceived the line beyond which the law should have been invoked before we made representations regarding the allegedly arbitrary actions of Colombian authorities. Our rights and duties in this matter are precisely the same as they would be in the protection of any legitimate American interest, and we should not be swayed in it by emotion, or beyond the bounds of prudence or propriety by our devotion to the democratic principle of freedom of worship. John M. Cabot American Ambassador
