144 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 49. Memorandum From the Deputy Coordinator for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Schneider) to the Coordinator for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian)1 Washington, May 23, 1977 SUBJECT PRM Meeting 1. Primary Goal: Retraction of PRM on basis that all or virtually all objectives are now in process of being resolved. 2. Strategy: (a) Define interface between on-going activities and PRM; (b) Emphasize overall coordination will be hampered by interfering in process already set in motion by NSC April 1 memorandum calling on State to establish inter-agency committee2 (in place). (c) Recommend reporting by inter-agency committee on weekly basis of actions undertaken—but by agency representatives to their respective agencies based on D/HA summary of inter-agency meetings. 3. Interface between on-going activities and PRM: (a) First objective is “Define U.S. objectives in the area of human rights, including, where appropriate, the timeframe for achieving such objectives.” RESPONSE: The Deputy Secretary was charged by the Secretary with following up on the NSC Memorandum of April 1. On that basis, country action plans are currently being drawn up which focus on specific U.S. objectives.3 These plans, as well as objectives in such functional areas as International Organizations (UN, ILO, etc.) are soon to be available. Those objectives, spelled out along with summary of current conditions, will be provided through the inter-agency committee 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Chron and Official Records of the Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Lot 85D366, PRM–28. No classification marking. Schneider did not initial the memorandum. Another copy is in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 23, Human Rights—PRM I. 2 See Document 31. 3 In a May 12 memorandum to Holbrooke, Christopher directed EA to develop country-specific action plans and submit them to Schneider and Vogelgesang by June 7. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P830106–1949)
