1955  373
had not yet been able to unscramble as it required servicing by the 
Department. Fortunately, it did not turn out to be anything of great 
importance for that particular meeting but it gave me a very uneasy 
feeling for the time being.
I am very glad that you have established direct contact with the UK 
Embassy in Washington so as to keep them fully informed on matters of 
direct concern to them. It seems to me very important that O’Neill and 
I know very promptly and fully what the other is doing. Give Hubert 
Graves my very best. It is a comfort to know that he is back.
I think I have rather fully covered the major questions in my tele­
grams and will not repeat them here. I hope shortly to receive the 
Department’s study on renunciation of force. The prepared statement 
gives me an excellent opening but am anxious to have the full back­
ground of our thinking.
If and when we ever get around to “embargo”, I wonder whether 
a simple explanation of the rationale behind our trade controls is going 
to be the best approach. It seems to me we have a choice between a 
presentation that assumes they are never in our minds going to qualify 
for any relaxation, or that there are certain standards which if they met 
we would consider relaxation. We have also got to be clear as to when 
we are talking about our total embargo, the CHINCOM level and the 
Soviet level.
As you know I never did feel that we were going to obtain any 
quick or mass release of the remaining Americans, and still feel it is 
going to be a long slow process. If there were no compulsion to keep 
the talks going, there would be many things we could do which might 
or might not be successful. However, I do not see how I can go much 
farther than I have and still keep them going. There is no doubt their 
asking price for the release of all of the remainder is something on the 
embargo, but most important of all the Foreign Ministers’ meeting. It 
is a dirty business on their part, but that is the way they are playing 
the game. How much less they would settle for remains to be seen. 
If we are going to keep the talks going, I do not see much choice but 
to keep postponing as long as possible any final conclusion on their 
part they are going to get nothing out of them. I think Americans will 
begin shortly to trickle out but doubt that we are going to get them 
all any time soon. Perhaps the Secretary can use Molotov during the 
Foreign Ministers’ Conference here quietly to bring some pressure on 
them. However, the difficulty is what we are able impliedly to prom­
ise or threaten. I do not see we have much ammunition in the way of 
threats, neither do I see we are able to say much in the way of implied 
promises. The only real weapon we have is using the pressure of for­
eign opinion on their performance under the Agreed Announcement 
and I think the time is approaching that we should do so. I do not
