1066  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
PE–24.	
Despatch from the Ambassador in Peru (Achilles) to the 
Department of State1

Lima, August 3, 1959.
No. 60
SUBJECT
Beltrán’s Program
There is enclosed a memorandum of long conversations with 
Sr. Beltran over the week-­end.2
His program, both with respect to a sound, free economy, based 
on private enterprise and stimulation of domestic and foreign invest-
ment and to the urgent need of social progress, is in broad terms sub-
stantially identical with what the Department, other agencies of the 
U. S. Government, and this Embassy have long advocated. After three 
years of weak and vacillating Peruvian Government we now have one 
headed by a man who deeply shares our views as to what is necessary 
and is determined to do it. He will work closely with us and seek our 
advice but he will not need much of it. What he needs most is our moral 
and some material support. I believe the latter will be both relatively 
small and soundly based but its psychological effect will be great.
On my return I find more support for him and more optimism that 
he can succeed than I expected. Despite the great difficulties he is hav-
ing, he has a good fighting chance to succeed. If he fails, as was pointed 
out in Mr. Sayre’s Despatch No. 41 of July 22,3 not only will Peru be in a 
grave situation economically, politically and socially, but the American 
philosophy of free economy and free enterprise will also be gravely 
discredited in Peru.
I am doing everything I can morally here by radiating confidence 
in the new Government to all and sundry and will be asking con-
crete assistance as soon as sound projects are developed. I know the 
Department will appreciate the importance of rapid, and wherever pos-
sible, favorable action.
Theodore C. Achilles
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 823.00/8–359. Official Use Only.
2 August 1–2.
3 Not printed; it reported the Embassy’s views on the background selection, and 
prospects of the Beltrán Cabinet. (723.12/7–2259)
