860 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Iranian Majlis. There were some problems involved, but we could probably find ways for some Americans to go to Tehran. Even Beheshti had referred to the need to deal with the U.S. “people” rather than the government. If this could be evoked by private citizens, members of Congress, or even members of FLAG, it might dramatize the hostage problem to the Majlis. The President emphasized that he was not trying to impose an idea on them, but he thought they should discuss the idea with Secretary Muskie. Katherine Keough noted there are things they could do which the government cannot, and vice versa. They wanted to try and be more in synch with policy in order to protect you (the President) and to help the families. They thought there was a possible opening for some movement after the release of Richard Queen to his parents. The President agreed and noted that even Beheshti had repeated this formulation. Katherine Keough thought this might offer the possibility of a role for them. However, she was leery about the families going to Tehran where they were extremely vulnerable to being run through cemeteries, having crutches waved at them and the like. However, that may be necessary. The President said he was thinking more toward a family visit to the UN to meet with the Iranian UN Representative, or perhaps to Switzerland for a meeting with some Iranians. Louisa Kennedy said she had seen Farhang (the former UN Representative) in New York on June 20. He had told her he was going back to teach in Iran, but it was evident that he is going back to try to help Bani-Sadr. She told him that if the families can be helpful at some point or if the Iranians develop some scenario utilizing the families—which would have to be highly organized—we could possibly be helpful. The President said if there was a meeting in Switzerland, then a judgment would be required whether it should be secret or whether it should be done with fanfare. What is probably not possible is to deal with representatives of Ghotbzadeh or Bani-Sadr. It should preferably be a representative of Beheshti or the Majlis, with the Iranian leaders guiding the operation with the help of the Swiss or perhaps Austrian governments. The U.S., of course, should avoid direct association with such a move. Katherine Keough opined that the Iranians would probably prefer doing it publicly. This would provide an opportunity for the families to be seen pleading for the release of their sons, etc. The President added “because Jimmy Carter could not do it” (i.e. the public line which the families would take in their plea). He asked Gary Sick to follow up on his note to Secretary Muskie. The FLAG
