Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA 215 •Package I, priority expansion of broadcasting in Persian, Azeri, Urdu, Bengali, Uzbek and Turkish, was unanimously endorsed. (U) •Package II—construction of four new 250 KW shortwave transmitters for broadcasts to South and Central Asia, had been approved, it was noted, by the President in March 1977. VOA explained that ambassadorial reservations about the willingness of the Sri Lanka government to permit construction had delayed action. The Chairman said that a delay of more than 2½ years in implementing a Presidential decision was unfortunate and asked that a detailed report of actions taken or attempted be prepared by State and ICA. He directed that urgent diplomatic steps be taken to secure approval for beginning construction as soon as possible and said the status of the effort should be reviewed at frequent intervals by the SCC Radio Working Group, with any impasse being referred back to the SCC for resolution. (C) •Package III—expansion of additional Muslim-language broadcasts— Hausa, Swahili, Indonesian, Hindi and Arabic—was unanimously endorsed. (U) •Package IV—adding four 250 KW shortwave transmitters to existing VOA facilities in England, to provide replacement for obsolescent transmitters in Germany and Morocco, was endorsed unanimously. These transmitters will improve VOA’s capabilities toward Eastern Europe and the USSR as well as the Near East. The Chairman noted that the political situation in Morocco made it especially desirable that VOA have an alternative for its transmitters there. (C) •Package V—further increases in Persian, Azeri, Urdu, Bengali, Turkish and Arabic to capitalize on South Asian and British transmitters, when available, was also unanimously endorsed. (U) The Chairman observed that improving broadcasts did not involve only more programs and more transmitters, but better content in broadcasts. The whole Islamic World is going through a rennaissance, he said, and we must find ways of responding to it. The Director of ICA said that his agency was giving high priority to getting improved research and information input by contacting academic specialists. He said that his agency did not believe that improvements in communication with Muslim peoples should be confined to broadcasts but that all of ICA’s techniques of communication should be employed. The group agreed and the Chairman advised ICA to plan urgent expansion in other fields as well. Though this meeting was concerned only with Muslim areas, the Chairman added, the current crisis had revealed deficiencies in our ability to communicate with other parts of the world as well which also needed attention. (U) The Committee then turned to the BIB proposals. The BIB Chairman made an introductory statement which stressed Radio Liberty’s enormous potential for impact on the 50 million Soviet Muslims and the meager resources which had been applied to this task to date: only 46 people in all, including secretaries and researchers, for only 3½ hours per week of original programming in 7 languages. Though the expansion was not as easy as for East European or Russian, he said that
