344
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Czechoslovakia. We have not been able to conclude a satisfactory agree-
ment on compensation for the claims of American citizens and corpora-
tions whose property was nationalized during the early post-war
period or on several other related financial issues. The Foreign Claims
Settlement Commission has adjudicated the value of the claims in 1958
as $72.6 million in principal and $41 million in interest. In return,
we have refused to consent to the delivery to Czechoslovakia of the
remaining portion (18.4 metric tons) of its share of the Nazi-looted
monetary gold which the Allies recovered at the close of the war. We
have also maintained blocking controls on approximately $1.4 million
of Czechoslovak assets in the United States and have refused to consider
granting MFN status to Czechoslovakia.
The Gold
We are a member of the Tripartite (U.S., U.K., France) Commission
for the Restitution of Monetary Gold, established by multilateral agree-
ment in 1946 to marshall all monetary gold found in Germany and to
allocate it among the countries whose gold was looted by the Nazis.
Unanimity is required for the Commission to effect delivery of the
remainder of the share it allocated to Czechoslovakia in 1947 and we
have so far not consented to such action. The French would like to see
the gold delivered, having settled their claims in 1950. The British
are even more interested since under a 1964 UK-Czechoslovak agreed
minute, settlement of British claims will begin only after the gold is
delivered. The British have, in fact, been pressing us rather actively
during the past year to get on with a settlement.
Past Claims/Gold Negotiations
Serious discussions with the Czechoslovaks on these issues have
taken place intermittently since 1949 and twice we have reached ad
referendum agreements. In both cases, however, Congress objected to
the claims settlement as too low. Most recently, a 1974 settlement for
$29 million or approximately 40 cents on the dollar (typical of our
settlements with other Eastern European countries) was repudiated by
section 408 of the 1974 Trade Act added at the insistence of Senators
Long and Gravel. The Trade Act also requires that any future agreement
be approved by Congress. Our efforts to resume negotiations since
that time have regularly been thwarted by a souring of the political
atmosphere caused by repressive measures of the Czechoslovak Gov-
ernment against its dissident citizens. We had obtained interagency
agreement last fall to propose a claims settlement of $51 million (70
percent of the adjudicated principal with no interest).2 We did not go
2 See Document 109.
