Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1091 230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France1 Washington, July 9, 1991, 2132Z 223429. Subject: Official-Informal 1. Secret—Entire Text 2. I talked to Karen Groomes last night, mostly about who is coming to help from the delegation and the other agencies. As you know, she keeps track of such things. I took the opportunity to ask her about the schedule. What she says JAB plans, and Ross has since confirmed this, is to meet with Bess 1-on-1 at 3:00 on Thursday.2 On completion of that meeting, Baker and Bess would meet briefly with the larger group up on the 8th floor to tell them where the ministers left things and give them guidance. Then you and Moiseyev would take over for the rest of the day. Friday morning, you would report to Baker and Moiseyev would report to Bessmertnykh on what has been accomplished, and at 10:00 Friday Baker and Bess would get back together in a small group to tackle whatever is left to be done. 3. I told Ross that if this scenario is to have a prayer of success, the ministers will need to mix it up on the big three plus heavy bomber contingency operations at that first meeting. Ross agrees and he has since gotten JAB to agree to that. I have put together a first cut at points for that meeting, and they are at para 10 at the end of this cable. They are designed to make clear to Bess right off the bat what we need on data denial and HBCO, what we are prepared to offer on new types. And let Bess do the talking on downloading. That way, when we decide what our real position is on downloading Thursday night or Friday, we can do that in light of whatever Bess has to say on downloading, data denial, HBCO, and new types. I have proposed that once JAB has felt out what Bess has to work with in the 1-on-1 format, he bring in you and Moiseyev for the deal-making. Ross agrees, and points out correctly that Bess may have his own reasons for wanting Moiseyev in the room when the deal is cut. In any event, the plan is for you and Brooks and Moiseyev and Obukhov to be the “small group” that meets with the ministers at 10:00 on Friday to work out the remaining issues. 4. As I mentioned yesterday. Larry Gershwin, the NIO for strategic programs, came in this morning to talk about downloading. I wanted 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, N910005–0215. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Timbie; cleared in S/S and S/S-O; approved by Timbie. 2 July 11.
