822
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Points to be Made:
—We respect Yugoslavia’s policy of nonalignment, and seek the
views of the nonaligned on matters of mutual interest.
—We look forward to bilateral consultations on multilateral mat-
ters, including the Special Session of Disarmament, and we will make
a strong and positive contribution to the success of the session.
—In the spirit of our improving relationships, we should both
avoid actions which cause difficulty for the other. In this connection,
the status of Puerto Rico is a United States domestic question and
we hope that Yugoslavia will use its influence within the nonaligned
movement and in other multilateral fora to see that it is not discussed
as an international question.3
6. International Economic Issues, North-South Dialogue
U.S. Objectives: To assure President Tito that we welcome a positive
North/South dialogue, including the negotiation of key economic
issues in appropriate functional fora and the discussion of global rela-
tionships in the new UNGA Committee of the Whole.
Yugoslav Objectives: To stress the political need for greater sharing
of economic benefits by industrialized countries with LDCs and to urge
us to be more forthcoming on specific LDC demands; perhaps to press
for more frequent bilateral consultation on North/South issues.
Essential Factors: Yugoslavia and President Tito in particular have
been historic leaders of the “Third World.” They can justly claim a large
measure of the responsibility for initiating the variety of multilateral
economic discussions which we today call the North/South dialogue.
Yugoslavia’s leadership among LDCs on economic issues has decreased
as its own economy has developed and as the number of LDCs in the
G-77 has increased. While the Yugoslavs publicly support the demands
for a New International Economic Order, they have been willing to
compromise and can thus play a useful role as a moderator of
extreme views.
Multilateral discussions are going forward in many fora (the MTNs
in GATT, Common Fund in UNCTAD, etc.), but the main focus now
is on the new UN General Assembly Committee of the Whole, which
will “oversee” the North/South dialogue. An organizational meeting
of the Committee took place February 13–17, and the first substantive
meeting is scheduled to take place in May.
3 Cuba and other socialist countries were attempting to use the Puerto Rico issue
against the United States in the UN Special Committee on Decolonization. The U.S.
Government maintained that as long as Puerto Rico could vote for independence, the
issue was an internal matter and the UN had no jurisdiction.
