160 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 56. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State1 Tehran, November 28, 1951, 7 p.m. 1984. Please do not (rpt not) disclose to British. 1. Middleton, British Charge´ d’Affaires, talked with me today in extreme confidence re political situation. Said under instructions he was planning to see Shah within next few days in order to point out dangers to Iran from present Communist activities. British first-hand info indicated Communists and fellow-travellers have greatly improved their organization and have penetrated certain Iran civilian agencies and military institutions. British concerned unless these activities are checked, there can develop real danger Communist coup. 2. Turning to political situation Middleton said British Embassy feared if Mosadeq carried out plans for “free elections” result would be elimination from Majlis of moderate elements and packing of Majlis with emotional, ignorant national extremists and groups willing to look to Russia for leadership. Elections would probably come within ten days and unless in interim something could be done to replace Mosadeq, it would be extremely difficult if not (rpt not) impossible to bring about reasonable government in foreseeable future. Future for Iran under present auspices looks so dark he thought he should take advantage his coming conversation with Shah in order point out gravity situation and suggest time had come for Shah take action to have Mosadeq replaced. He intended to send at once telegram to Eden requesting authority to take such step but before doing so would like to ascertain what US attitude wld be. He thought Shah might hesitate to take necessary action unless convinced that both UK and US believed it should be done. Would I be willing support suggestions made by him to Shah for effecting change in government? 3. In response my inquiries Middleton said although British not (rpt not) enthusiastic about Qavam, they still thought latter with his political experience and well-organized following would have better chance of replacing Mosadeq than any other political leader. He did not (rpt not) believe Qavam serious in demanding his passport to leave country. In his opinion Qavam was merely trying to force Shah to make decision whether or not (rpt not) to give him support. 4. I told Middleton by no (rpt no) means sure it would be in our joint interest for US at this juncture join UK in pressing Shah to take 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/11–2851. Top Secret; Security Information; Priority. Repeated to London. Received at 3:02 p.m.
