626 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 State preferred 48 hours, but eventually acquiesced to the 24-hour deadline. The Department of State will develop a plan for the exit of the diplomats from the country. The Defense Department will be prepared to provide transportation if necessary. (S) Approve 24 hour notice4 48 hours Other It was also agreed that a Justice, State, FBI group would develop a plan for removal of diplomats. The plan could be reviewed tomorrow afternoon if required.5 (S) The Attorney General noted that as many as ten of the Iranian diplomats may seek asylum here. Others, such as the Chargé in Washington, may apply for residence on the grounds that he has an American wife. Mr. Aaron said we do not want an expulsion which results in half the expellees staying here under various pretexts. He said we should be harsh in our interpretations of the rules. If the Chargé is required to leave under the order, he should go and then apply for residence from outside the country. 3. Additional Sanctions. Mr. Aaron noted that we need to consider measures which go beyond the three sanctions we had previously accepted. Those measures had been widely advertised and might be discounted in advance by Tehran. The Department of State circulated a list of possible measures they had developed for the discussion.6 Resolutions in the UNSC or UNGA. All agreed that any new condemnatory resolutions would fail due to the Soviet veto, and we might also lose support as compared to the past. However, this may become an option once the ICJ hands down a final ruling. That will probably be about a month. (C) INS Tighten Up Examination of Iranian Students. The Attorney General said this was being done. However, the delay in deportation resulted from the requirements for due process. By utilizing all channels of appeal, the process could be drawn out for as much as two years. Another problem is confirming departure of those deported or choosing voluntary departure. We do not maintain INS presence at departure points. We have no established checks on departures from this country. 4 Carter approved this option with a checkmark and wrote in the right margin: “discuss at NSC mtg.” 5 The paper prepared in the Department of Justice, “Operational Outline for Expulsion of Iranian Diplomats and Closure of Diplomatic Missions (Draft No. 1),” April 4, is in Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 100, Meetings File, 4/4/80 SCC re Iran. 6 Reference presumably is to the undated list, “Possible Further Measures Against Iran.” (Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 2)
