Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
395
be strongly negative. The applause would come from sectors of Amer-
ican political life who are not likely to be numbered among your sup-
porters, whereas the prevailing sentiment among your natural constit-
uency would surely be a negative reaction to the intensified arms race,
the renewal of Cold War tensions, and the consequent weakening of
domestic programs. The heightening of militancy, the polarization of
political positions, and the destructive emotional tensions that would
be generated would make it more difficult to realize the objectives to
which you have dedicated your Administration.
II. POLICY
To put our relations on a more stable footing, while advancing our
interests and clarifying our public stance, we need to take steps to in-
sure that we have a coherent approach in three general areas: our direct
relations with the Soviets; our competition (as well as cooperation) in
third areas; and our public position.
A. Direct Relations
The essential issue here is the military balance. The fact is that the
Soviet Union has greatly increased its defense expenditures in the past
fifteen years while ours have declined in real terms since the Vietnam
War years. It is also true that the Soviets have now reached a state of
broad equivalence with us, certainly in terms of military strength and,
to a lesser extent, in terms of military reach. The question is whether
they will seek to go beyond parity to dominance in some areas.
Our response, as put in Harold Brown’s excellent posture state-
ment, is the right one: a prudent increase in our defense spending,
keyed to NATO and mobile forces while maintaining our strength in
the Pacific.3 Continued efforts to strengthen NATO and other alliance
relationships are also crucial.
Stabilizing the arms competition between ourselves and the So-
viets is the other essential element of maintaining the military balance.
A major priority in the Soviet-American relationship is therefore the
negotiation of a SALT treaty. Despite all that is said about the difficulty
of getting the treaty ratified, I believe that when it is signed and pre-
sented to the Congress, major sources of support will emerge as you
and the entire Administration make a major effort to carry the case to
the American people. Ultimately, with proper preparation, I believe
this issue can be made a political advantage instead of the liability it is
now wrongly thought to be.
3 Documentation on the Department of Defense posture statement is scheduled for
publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IV, National Security Policy.
