1282  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
f. Contribution of Other Intelligence Sources to the Detection of Clandes­
tine Nuclear Test.4
“In addition to the aforementioned capabilities of the U.S. Atomic 
Energy Detection System as augmented, it is anticipated that a concur­
rent expansion of the clandestine collection effort will be attempted. 
This covert effort will be designed to help detect attempted evasion of 
a test moratorium via the development of selected informants and the 
surveillance of activities which may be indicative of such an attempt.
“The routine flow of information from all other intelligence sources 
should provide assistance in alerting us to possible attempts at evasion 
within the USSR, but they will not provide any direct evidence that 
a test in violation of the moratorium has been conducted. The major 
contribution of such sources would be the detection of preparations for 
such an evasion and the targeting of the general area involved.
“Conceivably, Soviet clandestine nuclear tests could be staged 
in remote areas outside the Soviet Bloc such as Antarctica or southern 
waters. However, all intelligence agencies have agreed that such possi­
bilities would probably be excluded by the Soviets, since various conven­
tional intelligence collection efforts would be almost certain to spot the 
activities which would be associated with test preparations, if not the test 
itself. Difficulty would probably be encountered in proving such a test 
had actually been conducted unless fresh radioactive debris was obtained, 
and this could be associated in some way with Soviet operations.”
g. Security and Classification Problems. It would probably not be 
advisable to reveal the existing operational network of the AFOAT–1 
Long Range Detection System to other nations for the following reasons:
1. Termination of the moratorium would leave the U.S. with the 
requirement to use a compromised world-­wide network of stations.
2. Many small countries presently giving hospitality to AFOAT–1 
stations would be compromised by release of the information to the 
Soviet Union.
The operation of an International Test Monitoring System will pre­
sumably be for the purpose of producing scientific proof of a violation 
by the U.S., the USSR, the U.K., or any other nation. The type of scien­
tific proof will be as follows:
(1) Seismic, acoustic or electromagnetic records of nuclear tests 
which permit determinations of time, place, height of burst, and yield.
(2) Radiochemical data on samples of debris which establish its 
date of origin, nature of the device (fission or fusion), etc.
4 These opinions of the Central Intelligence Agency were prepared by the Assistant 
Director of CIA for Scientific Intelligence, Dr. Herbert Scoville, Jr. and are included at 
this point in the AFOAT–1 report at the request of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Panel on 
Nuclear Test Limitation. [Footnote is in the ­original.]
