Human Rights
263
(5) Improvement of Relations with Congress
The mess with the IFI bill, and the recent refusal to fund 15,000
more Indochinese refugees, is evidence of the severe problems in
Congress at both extremes of the ideological spectrum. The human
rights leaders in Congress are perfectly aware that the Right is using
this issue to end all foreign aid, but because of their criticism and lack of
trust in the Administration’s policies, they are in a box, and a coalition
of the Administration with those who should be its natural allies on this
issue is much more distant now than it was last January. Before rela-
tions deteriorate further, we should make a determined effort to turn
things around by initiating a series of working meetings—chaired by the
Vice President with Christopher also present—with the prominent
members on this issue from both Houses and both parties. The agenda
should be set by the Congressmen (through staff consultations) but
should include one meeting devoted to bilateral assistance policies
(economic and military), and one to the IFIs, with explicit discussion of
what Congress wants and expects from the US delegations. There
should also be a meeting devoted to policies toward the USSR and
Eastern Europe, where a consensus might be built about the Jackson-
Vanik problem. These meetings would provide a reasonably quiet and
apolitical forum for the Administration to try to explain why it has
taken some of the actions it has, (for example, on the recent Nicaraguan
decisions).9 This would be helpful for us too—if our policies cannot be
rationalized in this forum then they will obviously never work on the
Hill.
(6) In the UN—Fight Efforts by the USSR, Argentina, Chile, etc., to
Remove the Consultative Status of the NGOs.
This move is apparently afoot10—I have not yet heard about it from
USUN—but it is widely worried about elsewhere. We should be in the
lead of those fighting it.
9 Presumable reference to the administration’s late September decision to extend a
military aid agreement with Nicaragua, while simultaneously withholding economic aid,
following President Anastasio Somoza’s lifting of a 3-year “state of siege.” (John M.
Goshko, “U.S. Decides to Aid 2 Nations,” The Washington Post, September 29, 1977, p. A–3
and Karen DeYoung, “Nicaragua Denied Economic Aid, Gets Military,” The Washington
Post, October 5, 1977, p. A–10) At the September 28 IAGHRFA meeting, the members con-
sidered several AID loans and opted to support only those that involved grants to volun-
tary agencies. The Group decided “to take no action for the time being with regard to
other AID loans, and to try to seek a delay in the consideration of the IDB loan so that the
group could consider it at a subsequent meeting after more time had elapsed so that it
could better access the effects of the lifting of the state of siege in Nicaragua.” (Meeting
minutes of the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance; National
Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher,
1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 17, Human Rights—II)
10 Brzezinski underlined the phrase “is apparently afoot” and wrote in the margin:
“? is it or isn’t it?”
