472  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
of nuclear weapons—­and to identify alternatives to current policies. 
In conducting this evaluation, we focused particularly on the relation-
ship between our stated policy (as set forth in PD–18 and NSDM–242) 
and the targeting plans designed to carry out that policy. We have 
also reviewed, where appropriate, the relationship between employ-
ment plans and the capabilities of forces and supporting command, 
control, communications and intelligence. The evaluation that follows 
uses as its framework the principal objectives of nuclear employment 
policy, namely: deterrence and essential equivalence; escalation con-
trol and war termination; and the four general war targeting objectives 
described below. We also have evaluated the Secure Reserve Force 
(SRF) concept, Launch Under Attack (LUA) targeting and targeting 
policy for China.
B. Major Findings
1. Deterrence. Our deterrence objectives are to deter nuclear attack 
on the United States; to deter attacks on U.S. forces abroad and on our 
allies; and to impede coercion by unfriendly nuclear powers of the US, 
its allies and other friendly nations. Nuclear weapons play a major role 
in meeting these deterrence objectives, but they are not expected to do 
this task alone.
While we are not sure what deters the Soviets, there is fairly broad 
consensus in the US intelligence community and among a number 
of Soviet experts that the Soviets seriously plan to face the problems 
of fighting and surviving a nuclear war should it occur, and of win-
ning, in the sense of having military forces capable of dominating the 
post-­war world. Their emphasis on planning for nuclear war and on 
damage limiting measures, including civil defense and civil emer-
gency preparedness testifies to this overall thrust in Soviet policy. This 
does not mean that the Soviet leadership is unaware of (or indiffer-
ent to) the destructive consequences of a nuclear conflict. Indeed, there 
are many statements by Soviet leaders which attest to their desire to 
avoid nuclear war and to their recognition of its potential destruction. 
However, the Soviets appear to have prepared themselves militarily 
and psychologically for the possibility that a nuclear war could occur 
and within the limits of their resources, they have prepared plans and 
developed capabilities which would permit them to do as well as possi-
ble in surviving a nuclear conflict and in defeating the military forces of 
their adversaries. It is clear that they are continuing substantial efforts 
to improve their own strategic posture. The effect is to pose new obsta-
cles to achievement of our strategic objectives. We do not argue that the 
US concentration on deterrence is wrong, or that the Soviet idea that 
nuclear wars are winnable is right, but rather that carrying out a policy 
of deterrence cannot ignore these Soviet attitudes.
