1955  603
70. Wang said if since September 10 side issues had not been 
raised in discussion, he was sure we would have been able on basis 
September 10 agreement make steady progress in settlement other 
matters at issue in sincere spirit. However, stalling by U.S. side 
in discussion item 2 and entangling over question of first item of 
agenda, even with accusation PRC has violated agreement, will not 
help obtain better understanding
71. Wang said during course discussion PRC side has firmly fol­
lowed understanding between both sides to discuss matters in frank 
and open spirit without engaging in progpaganda. However repeated 
distortions appearing in press originated by U.S. official quarters alleg­
ing PRC side violating agreement have compelled PRC Government 
make its position clear.
72. I asked whether Wang’s government had already or was going 
to issue statement.
73. Wang replied he had not said his government had already 
made statement.
74. I asked whether it was going to do so.
75. Wang said that was correct.
76. I said that he must realize that my government would have to 
consider making statement in reply.
77. Wang said to his knowledge U.S. Government had already 
made public statements on numerous occasions.
78. I asked what statements he was referring to.
79. Wang said without enumerating all instances, he could cite 
­Secretary Dulles’ press conference of December 6.
80. I said I did not wish to argue the point. Secretary was asked 
question in press conference and carefully refrained from making this 
public issue. As I had pointed out, American people expected impris­
oned Americans would be permitted expeditiously return. By any 
standard they not returning expeditiously. Inevitably Secretary of State 
is being asked questions this regard. His answers entirely directed at 
reducing public controversy this point. He has consistently taken stand 
he hoped and expected agreement would be carried out. I did not see 
how exception could be taken to such statements, which in fact directed 
at attempting improve atmosphere surrounding talks and allaying 
public speculation in U.S. If PRC Government now determined bring 
matter into public propaganda field, difficult for me but to conclude 
that PRC does not share our desires for progress in talks. This cannot 
but adversely influence whole atmosphere that has been created.
81. I said Wang had spoken of September 10 announcement as 
furthering understanding and confidence between us. That had been 
exactly my hope. However, it is not words of announcement and
