3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
583
was opposed to the export of counter-revolution. That had been said a
long time ago by Lenin.
If one were to read a number of articles in the U.S. press or certain
statements by certain politicians, it would appear that the only thing
the Soviet leadership was thinking of was how to organize a coup
d’etat in one part of the world or another. Sometimes attempts are
made to base practical political action on such false premises. In
Brezhnev’s view, this was nothing but a dangerous self-delusion. He
would stress over and over again that the Soviet Union did not have
any hostile designs against the United States, that it was not in any way
striving to prejudice legitimate American interests. On the other hand,
the Soviet Union was entitled to expect a reciprocal attitude on the part
of the United States. Brezhnev repeated and emphasized that thought.
Regretfully, he had to state that in recent years the development of rela-
tions between the Soviet Union and the United States had been uneven.
In a number of directions these relations had evidently been thrown
back. He was deeply convinced that this was not in accord with the
fundamental interests of either country.
Brezhnev told the President that the Soviet leadership had noted
with great satisfaction those statements the President had made which
favored good relations between our two countries and spoke of ridding
mankind of the threat of war. But, speaking frankly, he would ask
what, then, was the purpose of those ever increasing military outlays
and the persistent buildup of military forces? Was it to achieve superi-
ority over the Soviet Union? For its part, the Soviet Union was not
seeking superiority over the United States, but could not, of course,
allow such superiority to be acquired by the United States. What, then,
was the sense in whipping up an arms race? Experience clearly showed
that an arms race did not result in greater security or peace, but rather
the opposite. The true path toward strengthening security was to lower
levels of military confrontation, reduce existing stocks of arms, nuclear
as well as conventional. Of course, this would only be possible if there
were no attempt to upset the obtaining balance of forces, if there were
no attempt to violate the basic principle of equal security. Whether or
not the United States will take that path would depend above all on
what general policy the United States intended to follow with respect
to the Soviet Union. Quite frequently the concept of combining compe-
tition and cooperation between our nations was voiced in the United
States. In the Soviet view, that formula rests on quicksand. It could
hardly serve as a reliable reference point for policy. In the United States
the U.S.S.R. was frequently referred to as an adversary. By competition
or rivalry our two countries would not be able to resolve a single
problem of bilateral or international relations. Quite frequently the un-
favorable atmosphere deliberately generated in the United States with
