1978  455
deserves more intelligence emphasis; our current capability is far from 
perfect, but it is also far from zero. This issue is not unique to MAPS. It 
is fundamental to our ability to assess strategic balance, with or with-
out MAPS—­in fact, with or without SALT. As explained above, that 
confidence is a necessary precondition of the military acceptability of a 
MAPS system—­that we could detect a massive Soviet effort needed to 
prepare to overwhelm it with secret missiles. If the Soviets can covertly 
produce and store more than a thousand SS–16s, SS–17s or SS–18s, 
they can launch them from their storage areas. All these missiles are 
designed for “cold-­launch,” and could be launched from a simple pad 
or a simple erector launcher, with no need for silos. A MAPS, to be sure, 
would provide in-­place C3 and logistic support, but would do so at 
locations which are under our intelligence “microscope.” If the Soviets 
can solve the problem of covertly producing and shipping that many 
ICBMs and expanding the support base in deployment areas for 2–3 
times as many launchers as the legal force (which I doubt), I believe 
they could solve the further problem of covertly producing and ship-
ping the attending C3 and logistic support. Thus, to the extent this is a 
real risk, it is a risk with or without MAPS.
6. If the Soviets deployed MAPS, and in fact complied with SALT provisions, 
would SALT critics claim they were cheating, and that our MAPS mis-
sile locations were not secure?
The answer is probably yes—­such claims likely would be made, 
no doubt by some of the very people now advocating MAPS. Would 
that destroy our confidence in the viability of the system and force us 
to respond by filling up our shelters and abrogating SALT? Not unless 
the credibility of our strategic strength had been badly eroded by other 
issues. Your Administration and two which preceded it have weathered 
similar charges about Soviet cheating on SALT I—­and about alleged 
Soviet military superiority in various areas—­and have not given in, 
nor have they ever lost public support as a consequence. We probably 
shall have to deal with similar charges that the Soviets are cheating on 
Backfire, cruise missiles, SS–16 production, RV freeze, and other Treaty 
limits.
To summarize, I believe that for strictly military reasons our intel-
ligence must be able, even without SALT, to detect a Soviet buildup 
big enough to threaten MAPS’ viability. Most of the additional veri-
fication questions raised about MAPS in the context of SALT can be 
answered by the special design provisions we would make on MAPS 
to provide for adequate verification while maintaining security. In 
addition to political problems and impressions, that still leaves two 
possible situations that cannot be put aside. One is the possibility that 
the Soviets might succeed in covertly producing and storing more than 
a thousand missiles, and then suddenly “breaking out” from SALT.
