974 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Tab I Paper Prepared in the National Security Council3 Washington, January 23, 1991 Downloading Background The U.S. and the Soviets have agreed in principle to permit downloading in START. In contrast to their earlier position (which would have accepted a ban on downloading), it now appears that the Soviets place great importance on the ability to download large numbers of RVs. Disagreements over downloading could become a major obstacle to completing START. The Soviets have proposed an approach that would allow both sides to download a maximum of 1250 RVs from two existing types of ICBMs (except heavy ICBMs) and SLBMs. Additionally, the Soviets recently declared that their SS–N–18 SLBM carries only three RVs, rather than the seven attributed to it in the 1987 Washington Summit Joint Statement. They insist that this change, which amounts to an apparent 900 RV reduction, does not constitute “downloading” and should not be counted against the 1250 RV limit in their downloading proposal. (The Soviets also have proposed an approach to the definition of “new types” of missiles in START that could be a partial substitute for, as well as complement to, their downloading proposal. Under the Soviet proposal, it would be relatively easy for variants of existing missiles to be categorized as a “new type.” This means that a variant of the SS–24, for example, would count as a “new type” which the Soviets could claim carried only five RVs rather than the ten RVs on the current SS–24.) In some respects, downloading could enhance strategic stability. It would reduce the concentration of RVs on missiles, a longstanding U.S. goal. The Soviets probably would exploit downloading to increase the number of SSBNs they retain in their START-­constrained force, a step that we have encouraged them to take to achieve a more balanced strategic force. The U.S. also has an interest in downloading some of its ballistic missiles. If downloading were banned, the U.S. would have room only for about 300 of its current 500 deployed Minuteman IIIs in a START-­ constrained force. The right to download 500–1000 RVs on one type of 3 Secret.
