Nicaragua 853 your experience and advice is needed to assist us in adopting a policy that will be best for United States interests. We have been impressed by President Somoza’s sincere desire to lead the Nicaraguans to a type of government more democratic than that which existed under his father. If Luis is able to continue his present policy of ample civil liberties, and adheres to his promise of ending the so-­called “Somoza dynasty” when his term is completed on April 30, 1963, I think our interests and those of Latin America as a whole will be served. However, the emergence of the Betancourt and Castro Governments has created a new situation. Tacho’s campaign against Betancourt while the latter was in exile in Costa Rica, and the sale of armored cars to Batista by the present Government have not endeared Luis’ regime to the current rulers in Venezuela and Cuba. Nicaraguan exiles who worked closely with Cuban and Venezuelan revolutionaries are already clamoring for help to overthrow the Somozas. We are receiving reports that Nicaragua and the Dominican Republic are likely to be targets of revolutionary groups which may assemble either in Cuba or Venezuela. We have reports that men are being trained in Cuba now for an invasion of Nicaragua and we are making a check. This seems unlikely; nevertheless, when the new Venezuelan and Cuban Governments become organized they may do so, or at least encourage and supply arms to anti-Somoza groups. Castro already had made threats against the Nicaraguan Government. We will attempt to dissuade these or any governments from encouraging armed attacks against friendly regimes in this hemisphere and if Nicaragua should be invaded we would support, of course, the immediate application of the provisions of the Bogotá Pact2 and the Rio Treaty.3 If we have judged President Echandi’s policies correctly, I doubt that he will permit any invasion to originate on Costa Rican soil. The obvious staging point, it would appear, will be either of the two ­countries above named or Honduras. I think the Somozas would be making a grave error if they interfered in Honduran affairs in an effort to overthrow President Villeda and see installed a government considered more friendly. These are my reasons: 1. The United States has gone on record in support of Villeda, since he is a symbol of a new era of constitutional Government in Honduras. 2 The Charter of the Organization of American States was signed at Bogotá,
