Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 —Determined efforts to scale down U.S.-Soviet nuclear armaments, to halt qualitative improvements in nuclear weaponry; and to obtain a CTB; —Positive U.S. interest in East European independence and respect for human rights, without subordination to U.S.-Soviet relations; —Enhancement of U.S. long-range rapid reaction military capability; —Energetic pursuit of the MTN, joint efforts against inflation, and stimulation of economic growth. Our minuses: —Unnecessary friction with some friendly states over nuclear nonproliferation; —Stimulation of fear of U.S. unilateralism and unpredictability; —Uncertainty about how we reconcile detente and Alliance security; —Lack of adequate preparation of the Soviets for our new approach; —Underestimation of domestic reaction to some aspects of our Middle Eastern policy; —Absence of concrete economic initiatives on the North-South front; —Seeming disinterest in the Far East; —Some loss of credibility in the energy and non-proliferation areas; —Seeming softness in our policy regarding Soviet assertiveness; —Except for the Notre Dame address, inadequate articulation of our broad foreign policy assumptions and priorities. With the above in mind, it is noteworthy to note the nature of the criticism that has lately been directed at this Administration’s foreign policy. Almost none of it entails any specific or concrete charge. The Administration is neither condemned for any particular major failure (such as the Bay of Pigs) nor for any particular misdeed (destabilization of Chile, or the fruitless enterprise in Angola, or the ineptitude regarding Cyprus). In contrast, it is criticized more generally for a lack of cohesion, for absence of clearcut priorities, or for shortcomings on the level of tactical execution. Some of these charges may, in fact, be justified. It is probably true that in the first year we undertook too much and thus could not deliver enough. At the same time, what we undertook was in some respects a response to what we inherited. Thus, in a sense, the generalized charge of lack of cohesion involves in some measure an acknowledgment that there has been an absence of specific failures or misdeeds. Our own self-criticism—in addition to the ones made earlier— would tend to be of a different nature: we probably did overstate our determination to pursue a different and more ambitious SALT agree-
