700 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII no more Chiles.2 The implications of that remark are sobering, to say the least. (TS) It is therefore crucial for us to do everything that we possibly can to make the Soviet adventure in Afghanistan extremely costly to the Kremlin. The Mujahidin, if they had the right kinds of weapons, could considerably impede Soviet mobility and “air-cav” tactics, which give the Soviets an enormous tactical advantage over the resistance forces. Men on horseback are no match for men in helicopters. (TS) Our efforts thus far have been tentative, piecemeal, and inadequate. The Soviets wiped out 372 insurgents in a single operation the other day. We will be seeing many more such reports in the months ahead if the Mujahidin are not adequately supplied. We should keep in mind that SA–7s are hard to get and very expensive and it is for this reason that we are only planning to supply the Muslims with 85 of these weapons, literally a drop in the bucket. (TS) At the same time, we must also keep in mind that the Pakistanis are not eager to provide weapons to those who could become future security problems. Punjabis have an inbred reluctance in arming Pathans. They know that the gun pointed against Kabul today might be pointed against Karachi tomorrow. (TS) Furthermore, we have a natural opening in Zia’s public criticism of the US for not providing greater support to the resistance forces. We should take him at his word. This is especially the case in that political opposition to Zia is mounting and opposition leaders are now calling for rapprochement with the Soviets and the cessation of support for the Mujahidin. All our eggs should not be in Zia’s basket. (TS) How to Operate. There are 53 Afghan refugee camps along the Pakistan border. We should have at least three agents in each of those camps; ostensibly for refugee relief purposes, but principally to ensure that the Mujahidin are getting the weapons they need. A similar effort should be made in eastern Iran. We should not restrict ourselves to the use of American citizens for this purpose. In addition, we ought to explore and take advantage of traditional gun smuggling routes, which have been used in that part of the world for centuries. There should never be a shortage of the right kinds of weapons in the marketplaces of Peshawar. (TS) 2 Telegram 12604 from Paris, April 17, reported on the speech delivered by Chervonenko, Soviet Ambassador to France. Regarding Afghanistan, Chervonenko hewed to standard Soviet positions that the crisis there was not relevant to U.S. national security and that the Soviet military presence was necessary so long as Afghanistan was threatened by external aggression. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800191–0155)
