448 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 145. Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department of State1 Budapest, August 5, 1977, 1349Z 2644. Subject: Ambassador’sConversation With President Losonczi. 1. President Losonczi began our private conversation after my formal presentation of credentials, August 4, by expressing his pleasure over recent improvement in our relations. He referred specifically to the Scientific and Cultural Exchange Program, to the settlement of claims and debts, and to progress on family reunifications. 2. He then went on to talk at considerable length about detente, the Helsinki Accord and the two special Hungarian-American problems—the Crown and MFN—and I responded briefly to the points he raised. 3. Detente. Losonczi emphasized that the recent improvement in our bilateral relations had been due in no small part to the detente in the U.S.–USSR relationship. Good bilateral relations between us could make a positive contribution to the atmosphere of detente, but it was essential that there be a continuation of a meaningful detente policy between the two super powers. He talked at considerable length on this point, leading up inevitably to an expression of concern over the present state of Soviet-American relations with a not-too-subtle blaming of American actions for that situation. He hoped that there would be a change. 4. In reply, I stated that President Carter’s policies were aimed at the establishment of a detente relationship with the USSR based on the enlightened self-interest of both sides. It would be unfair and unrealistic to impugn the motives of the President. There should be no doubt about President Carter’s positive and constructive attitudes toward American-Soviet relations. He had no interest in reviving the Cold War. On the contrary, he wanted a realistic relaxation of tensions. In order to fully appreciate President Carter’s position, I urged President Losonczi to read the full text of President Carter’s recent speech in Charleston, South Carolina.2 In spite of Moscow’s polemics, in recent weeks there have been some favorable developments in U.S.-Soviet relations as evidenced, for example, by the progress in negotiations for banning nuclear testing and in the renewal of the 1972 Agreement for Cooperation of Science and Technology. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770283–0669. Confidential. 2 Remarks at the 31st Annual Meeting of the Southern Legislative Conference on July 21. (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, pp. 1309–1315)
