706 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV more willing to negotiate. Without M–X, the Soviets will whip [us]—­ something the US has been slow to realize”. (U) Harold Brown said we are not just building up a force of 2,000 warheads, what we are doing is decoupling the numbers of warheads on our side from their survivability. The key to understanding the potential for a race between Soviet efforts to expand their capability to target M–X and our efforts to maintain M–X survivability is that, unless the Soviets go mobile, they will have to worry about survivability themselves. For that matter, if they push too hard, we can conceivably put M–X’s in silos ourselves. (C) George Seignious noted that the prospect of this system will change the context of the SALT negotiations in 1982. We will be moving toward a system that will be able to destroy the Soviet’s missile silos. (C) Harold Brown noted that if the Soviets build 20,000 RVs, that implies no SALT, and that we should consider ballistic missile defense systems for M–X. We should also realize that we will have the option of expanding our ongoing cruise missile programs. (C) George Seignious said that, in view of the uncertainty of the situation we are looking at, we should not lock ourselves too tightly into the idea of exactly 4600 M–X shelters, it might be more, and it might be less. (Presumably in response to Seignious’ remark about the possibility of fewer than 4600 shelters), the President said that it would be a mistake to view M–X as a bargaining chip). (C) The President then remarked that he was prepared to go ahead with the system. Dr. Brzezinski then asked how the President’s decision ought to be announced? (C) The President asked if, setting aside the cost uncertainty, and assuming that suitable arrangements for cooperative verification can be negotiated, and that we are satisfied concerning the possibility of a dramatic expansion of the Soviet threat, whether anyone saw any other issues that seemed to suggest a need for a different basing alternative? (U) Admiral Turner responded that the Soviets may make us pay heavily for the continuation of the implicit limits on numbers of RVs that is embodied in SALT II. He went on to say that a strong US commitment to this system could thus be particularly expensive. The President asked if the costs to each side of competing (in terms of an expanded threat and the adjustments to M–X required to meet this expansion) are comparable? Stan Turner responded yes. (C) The Vice President asked if Harold Brown hadn’t said that the Soviets would pay more than us to run such a race? Harold Brown responded that the real drawback with the Soviets in running their cheapest race
