876
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
268.
Research Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
PA 79–10305
Washington, July 1979
[Omitted here is a map.]
Israel’s Goals in Southern Lebanon [handling restriction not declassified]
Key Judgments
The Begin government’s new search-and-destroy policy against
the Palestinians in Lebanon over time is likely to lead to an expansion
of Israeli control over all of southern Lebanon up to the Litani River.
To this end, the Israelis probably will try to bolster the effec-
tiveness of their southern Lebanese surrogates, the Maronite Christian
militias commanded by Major Saad Haddad.
Some Israeli military figures probably hope that the new Israeli
policy, combined with the provocations of Haddad’s forces, will lead to
the withdrawal of UN troops from the south and clear the way for ex-
panded operations against the Palestinians.
In the event of a terrorist “spectacular” within Israel, the Israelis
are not likely to be deterred by the presence of UN troops from aggres-
sively seeking out the Palestinians, including sending Israeli troops
into UN-patrolled areas.
Once installed at the Litani, the Israelis probably would refuse to
withdraw or to permit a meaningful restoration of Lebanese Govern-
ment authority in the near term.
Israel is not likely to be dissuaded from pursuing a more aggres-
sive policy in Lebanon by considering its effect on the autonomy nego-
tiations. Egypt would hesitate to take action in opposing Israeli moves
that might seriously jeopardize the negotiations or the Israeli with-
drawal from the Sinai.
[handling restriction not declassified]
[Omitted here is the body of the research paper.]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Near East and South Asia Analysis,
Directorate of Intelligence, Job 06T00412R: Intelligence Publication Files, Box 1, Folder 65,
PA 79–10305 Israel’s Goals in Southern Lebanon. Secret; [handling restriction not declassi-
fied]. The research for the report was completed on June 29. The report was coordinated
with the Office of Strategic Research, the Directorate of Operations, and the NIO/NESA.
