1955  201
equivalent to simultaneous release.) However, I do feel that they are 
still a very long way from this point.
The question, therefore, is whether or not we can expect and hope 
to work them up to this point within a reasonable period of time and 
without subjecting Americans whose release can now be obtained to 
undue risk of unreasonably prolonged detention. While frankly admit­
ting to the narrow viewpoint of the man in the field, I am inclined to be 
very doubtful.
One aspect that worries me is that the longer we continue in the 
present deadlocked position, the more hardened positions on both 
sides tend to become and the more difficult it becomes to shift there­
from. Looking at it solely from the standpoint of the overall welfare 
of the detained Americans, I find it hard to work out the equation but 
believe it important that we do so. We are today able to obtain the 
release of X number of Americans and within the next month or two Y 
number may well have been added to that. How large the remaining Z 
will be I have no way of telling, but it will certainly include the three or 
four “difficult” cases. I am convinced that these latter cases are, under 
the best of circumstances, going to take a long time and doubt whether 
what we now have to offer under agenda item one is going to obtain 
their release. Of course I know that the answer is that under the present 
outlook neither under agenda item two are we going to be able to offer 
anything that would obtain their release. This may well be the case. 
However, should X and Y be indefinitely detained in what may be a 
futile effort to obtain Z?
Also it seems to me that the price we would be paying for X and Y 
is in reality very small. The third party arrangement is very limited in 
scope, and I believe that we would be in a position to withdraw it at any 
time that we considered it desirable.
There is a very small point which struck me today and which I am 
surprised Wang has not caught me up on—I have been pushing very 
hard the thesis that we came here to settle the repatriation of civilians, 
but in re-reading the July 25th announcement today, I was struck by 
the fact that it refers only to “in order to aid in settling the matter of 
repatriation . . .”
I am a little concerned that we may be permitting our bargaining 
positions to become our final position without enough ammunition in 
our belt to overcome the resistance.
With respect to the thought that we might go ahead and inde­
pendently announce the Indian representation arrangement, it seems 
to me that this would be most unwise. If we are prepared to do this, we 
can get the U.K. representation in Communist China for whatever it is 
worth but, much more importantly, the release of at least a considerable
