654 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I viet challenge. As on the economic front, they want to see some light at the end of the tunnel. (C) What is needed to meet this need is less specific immediate actions (which might look like gimmicks) than a basic change in emphasis, which will be reflected in a variety of actions over time. The Cuban problem could be the occasion for a speech spelling out that shift. You might recall that your Annapolis speech had said that the US was ready to respond to either competition or cooperation, depending on Soviet actions;3 after pointing out that the Soviets’ actions since then have made clear that their main emphasis is on competition,4 you could indicate that we are ready to respond in kind: While we are still anxious to join in cooperation (SALT), where this serves both sides’ interests, our main effort must be to make clear to the USSR that the competition they are forcing on us will be unrewarding. This means: —Responding directly to Soviet pressures in Third World areas, e.g., by military aid to intended victims and, if requested by countries of the region concerned, by interdicting the movement of outside forces across national frontiers to intervene in local hostilities.5 (C) —Trying to mitigate turbulence that lends itself to exploitation by the USSR and its proxies—e.g., by intensified efforts to reach a settlement in the Middle East and by providing effective aid (which doesn’t necessarily mean more money) for economic development in troubled areas of the developing world. (C) —Pushing ahead with the 3% real increase in defense expenditures.6 (C) It also means (though you may not want to say this in your speech) counter-pressures on the USSR—e.g., not being deterred by Soviet concerns from feasible improvement in our relations with China. (C) What is important, I repeat, is less specific measures, which will no doubt be modified or discarded as events evolve, but a general shift in emphasis: not a return to the cold war, but an adjustment of the balance between competition and cooperation in response to recent Soviet behavior. You would be signalling that we have read the Soviets’ signal and are sending an equally clear one in return. We hope that it will be read; to the extent that the Soviets respond by shifting away from competition toward cooperation, we will be only too glad to do the same. (C) 3 See Document 87. 4 The President underlined the portion of this sentence beginning with “main” and ending with “competition.” 5 The President underlined “by military aid to intended victims,” “if requested,” and “interdicting.” In the left-hand margin next to this point, he wrote “war?” 6 The President placed a checkmark in the left-hand margin next to this point.
