3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 270 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI Otherwise, I fear that it can give rise not only to additional tensions in the region but adversely affect our relations more generally. Let me be quite direct: I believe it essential that our two countries continue to widen our collaboration—but that collaboration is not compatible with the unilateral use of force, direct or through proxy, designed to exploit local turbulence or local conflicts for ideological or other purposes. Such one-sided actions can only breed similar counter-reactions, with unavoidably negative effects on our bilateral relations. I discuss these difficult matters frankly in the earnest desire for a more cooperative relationship between our two countries. That relationship will not be easy to establish and to maintain. It will take consistent and continued efforts to avoid needless friction, and it will require the generation of mutual confidence. You put it well in the concluding paragraphs of your recent letter: “. . . it is important for us to move steadily forward, building upon what has already been achieved in our relations.” I wish you an early and complete recovery from your recent illness. With best wishes, Jimmy Carter 78. Paper Prepared by Professor William E. Griffith1 undated THE HORN AND U.S. POLICY For a situation as complex and fluid as the Horn of Africa, correct categories of analysis are absolutely necessary, both in general and because the current crisis in the Horn is a classic example of the interaction between global (Soviet/U.S.) and regional issues. CATEGORIES OF ANALYSIS 1. While the origins of the crisis are primarily regional, and it did not begin as a “Soviet expansionist plot,” its primary significance for U.S. policy is the Soviet involvement. This is true because of: 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special, Box 1, Chron File: 1/78. Secret. Henze sent the paper to Brzezinski under a January 28 covering memorandum. A handwritten notation on the memorandum indicates that copies were sent to Huntington, Quandt, and Sick on January 31. Griffith, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, later became an adviser to Brzezinski.
