592 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement and the increasing availability and capabilities of surface-­to-­air missile systems. 160. Surface-­to-­air missiles designed for optimum effectiveness at altitudes of 30,000–60,000 feet and probably having limited effective­ ness at 80,000 feet are now in operation in a dense and costly complex of 56 sites around Moscow. This complex, which could include a limited number of missiles with nuclear warheads, can probably direct a very high rate of fire against multiple targets under all weather conditions. It is probably ineffective against very low altitude attack, however. We believe the USSR may have altered an earlier intention to install a some­ what similar surface-­to-­air missile complex around Leningrad, and that the missile defenses of this and other critical Soviet targets will employ systems with greater flexibility and less cost than that at Moscow. There is now some evidence of the installation of surface-­to-­air missile sites in a few other key areas, such as Baku. We believe that more such sites will be built through the period of this estimate as improved systems for both high and low altitude defense become available, and that surface-­ to-­air missiles will be provided for numerous Soviet fixed targets as well as field forces and naval vessels. Surface-­to-­air defenses in key areas will probably become effective both at very low altitudes and up to 90,000 feet during the period. 161. The Soviets continue to employ antiaircraft guns for defense of field forces and fixed targets, including airfields. More than 25,000 light and medium antiaircraft guns are believed to be available to Soviet forces at present; in addition, about 5,000 are available to East European forces and nearly 4,000 to Communist China, North Korea, and North Vietnam. Large numbers of automatic antiaircraft machine guns are also available to field forces. As suitable surface-­to-­air missiles become available in quantity, a large portion of the medium and some light antiaircraft guns will probably be phased out of the air defenses of static targets in the USSR. 162. Air defense radar and control equipment. Radar coverage now extends over the entire USSR and East European Satellite area, except for certain inland portions of central and eastern Siberia; coverage also extends along the entire coastal region of Communist China. The long-­standing gaps in radar coverage in the Soviet Arctic are now believed to have been filled, although this deployment is probably not as extensive as in many other areas. About 1,200 heavy prime radars, primarily of the TOKEN type, and about 3,000 light auxiliary radars are employed in various combinations at about 1,700 radar sites in the Sino-Soviet Bloc. Under average conditions, TOKEN radars can probably detect jet medium bomber aircraft, penetrating at alti­ tudes up to their combat ceilings, at distances between about 80 and about 180 n.m. from radar sites. New radars of much higher quality,
