Preface  VII
covered, as well as some lengthy documents and attachments which 
could not be printed because of lack of space, such as the full texts of 
National Security Council reports, National Intelligence Estimates, and 
Special National Intelligence Estimates.
Editorial Methodology
The documents in this microfiche supplement are arranged in two 
sections: national security policy and arms control and disarmament. 
Within each of these sections, the documents are presented chrono­
logically, according to Washington time or in the order of individual 
meetings. Incoming telegrams from U.S. Missions are placed accord­
ing to time of receipt in the Department of State or other receiving 
agency, rather than the time of transmission; memoranda of conver­
sation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, 
rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.
The documents are numbered at the top of the first page of the 
document. The List of Documents is ordered according to these num­
bers. The documents are not annotated nor is there any other editorial 
apparatus. Material not declassified has been blacked out; for each doc­
ument not declassified, a page has been inserted that shows a title, date, 
classification, number of pages, and source citation.
The List of Documents, which includes for each document the title, 
date, participants (for memoranda of conversation), from/to informa­
tion, classification, number of pages, and source citation, as well as a 
brief summary, is part of this printed guide and appears on the first 
two microfiche cards. The printed guide also includes Lists of Sources, 
Abbreviations, and Persons.
Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation
The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documenta­
tion, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records, 
advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations 
series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and 
editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the prepara­
tion and declassification of the series. Although the Advisory Committee 
does not attempt to review the contents of individual volumes in the 
series, it does monitor the overall process and makes recommendations 
on particular problems that come to its attention.
The Advisory Committee has not reviewed this microfiche 
supplement.
Declassification Review
The declassification review process for this volume was particularly 
lengthy, requiring 8 years to complete. It resulted in the withholding
