Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX firms. Despite considerable facilitative assistance by the Department of Commerce in locating appropriate American partners, there have been few success stories. The reasons for this include: asymmetry of economic systems; insufficient information from the potential Romanian partner; Romanian toughness in business negotiations; and, most importantly, skepticism by U.S. firms that the likely benefits warrant the required investment of time, money and effort to put the deal together. In an effort to wrap up some cooperation projects which could be announced during the visit, the Romanian Minister of Machine Building (Ioan Avram)7 and a host of other officials have been visiting U.S. firms for the past week. Points to be Made (if Ceausescu raises): —As part of our policy to forge even closer economic ties with Romania, we wish to see U.S. firms engage in mutually beneficial cooperative projects with Romanian enterprises. —Our government will continue to facilitate contacts with U.S. companies wherever possible, but in our system there are limits to what U.S. officials can do. It will be up to the Romanian side to convince its potential American partner that the proposed cooperation project is truly of mutual benefit. 3. Middle East President Ceausescu will look forward to your assessment of the present situation, including the prospects for Israeli-Egyptian negotiations and for dealing with the Palestinian issue. He has recently been in touch with Dayan and others and will want to give you his views. 4. US-Soviet Relations and Detente U.S. Objectives: To give an overview of the present state of US- Soviet relations, including SALT. Ceausescu’s Objectives: He will be interested in your assessment of the present state of US-Soviet relations (including the prospects for SALT agreement) in the light of recent developments. He will be concerned about a period of chill in US-Soviet relations and the implications of this for Soviet policies in Eastern Europe. Essential Factors: Bucharest’s independent policies—which Ceausescu has been careful to keep within well-defined limits—are an irritant which Moscow has learned to tolerate grudgingly, though not necessarily to accept as a permanent or desirable state of affairs. 7 Brzezinski underlined the Minister’s name.
