508  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
to ban mobile MIRVs, a majority in Congress might be willing, albeit 
reluctantly so, to go along with RGMX. With the proposal, I can argue 
that in voting funds for MX, they support a negotiating position that 
will lead to elimination of the rebasing of MX and destruction of the 
Soviets’ SS–24 rail mobile ICBM systems. In addition, some who are 
currently opposed to Midgetman may reluctantly support that pro-
gram if they think there is a serious prospect that START will ban 
RGMX, thereby making Midgetman our only option for achieving 
mobility in the ICBM force.
Let me add one other dimension. We have to start looking ahead 
to the START ratification hearings. The intelligence community has 
cautioned that Soviet rail-­based ICBMs present especially difficult 
verification problems and that it would be harder to verify Soviet 
compliance with a numerical ceiling on rail-­based ICBMs than a 
numerical limit on truck-­mounted ICBMs.
In addition, a ban on mobile MIRVed ICBMs would aid START 
ratification by eliminating a particularly worrisome breakout scenario. 
If the Soviets are not permitted a legal SS–24 force under START, along 
with its whole deployment infrastructure, then there would be no train-
ing, logistics, or deployment base for the Soviets to exploit were they to 
try to hide a large force of illegal SS–24 trains. In this case, the Soviets 
would not likely take the risk of cheating. To be sure, the Soviets could 
covertly hide SS–25s, but would they take this chance if every illegal 
SS–25 got them only one additional warhead (versus 10 RVs for each 
hidden SS–24)? Those who raised this argument with regard to the 
secretly hidden SS–20 scenario during the INF ratification debate did 
not get very far.
For all these reasons, I urge you to consider this proposal.
Quotes on Mobile MIRVed Ban Proposal
1. Brent Scowcroft, Nick Brady, Harold Brown, Lloyd Cutler, John 
Deutch, Al Haig, Richard Helms, Henry Kissinger, Mel Laird, Bill Perry, 
Don Rumsfeld, Jim Schlesinger, and Jim Woolsey (members of and 
counselors to the Scowcroft Commission), December 9, 1987:
The rail-­garrison basing for the MX missile, while possessing 
attractive features, is not a substitute for the Small Mobile ICBM, inas-
much as it requires significant warning time to achieve survivability.
2. Harold Brown, Les Aspin, Bill Cohen, Joe Jordan, Bud McFarlane, 
Sam Nunn, John Warner, and Jim Woolsey (CSIS “Discussion Group on 
Strategic Policy”), January 1989:
We should . . . give consideration to proposing a continued ban on 
multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle (MIRVed) mobile 
systems in view of their more accelerated effects in cheating scenar-
ios. A trade of the MX for the SS–24 deserves serious consideration.
