Covert and Overt Operations 825 Daoudi and the Commission had been told in broad descriptive categories without passing judgment one way or another or presenting detail. We will be providing separately our thoughts on this particular question and on how it might relate to other possible initiatives. 300. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Algeria1 Washington, June 22, 1980, 1807Z 165006. Subject: Iran Hostages Conversations With Algerians (addressee please handle as Stadis). 1. Secret–Entire text. 2. In your conversations with leading Algerians following your return, you might want to consider the following themes and points in describing attitudes in Washington toward the Iranian hostage crisis: —The frustration level seems to be rising again. After the rescue mission which tended to relieve the popular feeling that “something must be done,” the public seems to place a great deal of hope in quick, positive action by the Iranian Parliament. Several weeks have gone by, however, and the Iranians seem no closer to the day in which the Parliament will address the hostage issue. The public is still patient but clearly the idea is growing that key Iranian leaders are willing to exploit the hostages for their own internal political purposes and that other leaders who want to end the crisis are powerless to do so. Out of that kind of perception could again come the demand that the U.S. “must do something.” —The press, radio and television have been giving less prominence to the hostage issue, partly because there is less news coming out of Iran and partly because the administration is working to keep public anxiety about the hostages at a restrained level. The issue has not figured recently in the political campaign. —Next month, however, the Republicans have their convention and in August the Democrats will meet. Then the campaign will be 1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Iran NODIS Cables June 1980. Secret; Immediate; Stadis; Nodis; Special Encryption. Drafted by Precht. Approved by Saunders.
