International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
485
fect on U.S. exports of their major administrative and regulatory ac-
tions that have significant export consequences. This could be an im-
portant item in reducing the arbitrary impediments to U.S. exports. We
recommend that you approve this proposal.
7. Use of Export Controls As a Foreign Policy Tool. Commerce recom-
mends that export consequences be weighed as a factor, along with
other factors, when considering the use of export controls for foreign
policy purposes. We agree that the effect on exports should be consid-
ered as a major factor, along with foreign policy, in decisions involving
the use of export controls. However, we do not think that exports
should be given an automatic priority and caution that the reference in
the decision memo to giving “particular weight” to whether the U.S.
goods are available from alternative suppliers may have that effect. We
recommend that you approve this proposal but that you cross out the
second sentence of this item from your decision memo.
8. Guidelines Clarifying the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. Commerce
recommends that the Justice Department be directed to issue guide-
lines clarifying the requirements of the anti-bribery statute. We have
discussed this matter with the Justice Department and they are pre-
pared to provide some affirmative guidance as to the kinds of viola-
tions they deem most serious; however, it would be improper for them
to indicate which violations of the law they will not prosecute. With
that understanding as to the “guidelines” Justice will provide, we rec-
ommend that you approve this proposal.
9. Antitrust Business Review Procedure. We recommend that you ap-
prove this proposal, which calls for prompt Justice Department re-
sponse to business questions on international antitrust issues and addi-
tional educational work by the Justice Department. We have discussed
this item with Justice and, although they regard it as window dressing,
they will be glad to cooperate.
10. Expansion of Webb-Pomerene Exemption to Include Services. The
Webb-Pomerene Act provides an exemption under the antitrust laws
for U.S. firms forming a consortium for the export of goods. Commerce
proposes that we seek to amend the Act to provide a similiar exemption
for the export of services. Some members of the business community
believe that this Act restrains their ability to bid on foreign engineering
and construction contracts. The Justice Department disagrees and
points out that there have not been any prosecutions under the Act in
over 20 years. Justice has agreed to provide us with language for the ex-
port policy announcement which would provide further guidance and
reassurance to businessmen in this area but believes we should not
amend the Act because that would be inconsistent with the Adminis-
tration’s antitrust stance and could provide some encouragement for
foreign cartels. Although we do not regard the issue as vital one way or
