136 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI We believe it would be useful for the NSC principals to confirm explicitly that even though the U.S. has no air defense, the future of the B-­l as a penetrating bomber may be limited, and the B-2 may prove to be unaffordable, we still want to encourage a long-­term Soviet shift to air-­breathing systems. ICBM Sublimit. Our proposed sublimit will not constrain the U.S. under any foreseeable post-START force and the Soviets have stated that they will not exceed 3300 ICBM warheads. However, the Soviets have refused to accept our sublimit unless we also agree to parallel limits on SLBM warheads and ALCMs, which have been unacceptable to us. All agree that we should not simply withdraw the 3000–3300 sublimit when we return to Geneva. Some see the sublimit as largely tactical; however, in the Deputies’ meeting, only the JCS favored giving the negotiator flexibility now to trade it for a Soviet concession, arguing that gaining Soviet acceptance would cost us more negotiating capital than it is worth. OSD argued that preserving the sublimit was important because a larger ICBM force would be useful as part of a first strike strategy. We recommend that you attempt to draw out the participants on the substantive importance of this limit. If this is a critical element of the U.S. proposal, we need to think much more seriously about a realistic strategy for gaining Soviet acceptance. If this is primarily a tactical question, it would be helpful for the negotiator to know that. (You also should keep in mind, however, that some have included dropping this sublimit as part of a negotiating package on new initiatives to be discussed by the NSC later.) Heavy ICBMs. The final issue in the discussion paper is whether to modify our position on heavy ICBMs and 1) seek the total elimination of heavy ICBMs and/or 2) modify our proposed bans on flight-­testing, production, and modernization of heavies. The Soviets have agreed to reduce their S-18s by 50 percent, but object to our proposed bans. We understand you want to defer this issue until the NSC takes up the subject of mobile ICBMs next week. However, you may want to raise in this meeting two broader policy questions on two broader policy questions: (a) given agreement on a 50 percent reduction in S-18s, how important is it—­strategically and politically—­to negotiate further reductions in heavy ICBMs and (b) given Jackson amendment sensitivities is it sufficient for the U.S. to have a de jure right to deploy heavies, or does U.S.-Soviet equality require that all Soviet heavies be eliminated. Bob Blackwill and Condi Rice concur.
