1979  523
13. Last year, in NIE 11–3/8–77, a dissenting view was voiced 
with respect to the usefulness of such theoretical analyses. In part as a 
result of this difference of opinion, the Studies, Analysis, and Gaming 
Agency (SAGA) of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during this past year has 
conducted a simulation of a nuclear exchange between US and Soviet 
forces. This simulation differs from the work in this Estimate in two 
cardinal respects:
—It seeks to be more realistic with respect to what might happen 
in wartime. The simulation attempts to take into account many more 
elements, such as a full range of economic and military targets on each 
side, the targeting doctrine of each side, and the possible attrition of 
bombers and cruise missiles by air defense.
—It analyzes the results of a two-­sided exchange in which the 
opposing forces seek to achieve specified levels of damage against a 
wide range of military and nonmilitary targets. The NIE looked only at 
the remaining and surviving forces after a first strike by only the ICBMs 
of one side against only the strategic nuclear forces of the other.
14. These different analytic approaches shed light on different 
aspects of the question of deterrence.
—The residual calculations in the NIE focus on the question of the 
capability of a side after its strategic forces had been attacked first. They 
shed light on the question of deterrence to the extent that the criterion 
is whether, after absorbing a first strike, a side would have enough 
destructive potential remaining to deter the other from attacking in 
the first place. Broadly speaking, this is the outlook of the doctrine of 
assured destruction as the principle of deterrence.
—The other form of analysis focuses on what the situation would 
be after a full-­scale two-­sided exchange. Broadly speaking, such anal-
ysis sheds light on ultimately war-­fighting potential as the principle of 
deterrence.
15. The SAGA simulation has reached only preliminary conclu-
sions thus far, and a number of the key assumptions are still being 
reviewed and tested for sensitivity. Thus, it is too early to draw opin-
ions as to the nature of the balance of strategic forces from the SAGA 
effort. Next year, we hope, the results of both techniques will be avail-
able for comparison.
16. Over and above the question of whether the NIE and SAGA 
techniques lead to differing conclusions about the strategic balance, 
there remains a divergent view in the Intelligence Community about the 
propriety of the quasi-­dynamic assessments of residual potentials con-
tained in the NIE. The holders of this view believe that: (a) the analysis 
of relative US and Soviet strategic nuclear capabilities in wartime cir-
cumstances is not a proper function of the US Intelligence community; 
and (b) such analysis is best done within the Department of Defense, 
with Intelligence as a full partner. The holders of this view also believe 
that only the form of analysis that considers comprehensive two-­sided
