662 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 ity of detection. He said, at the moment, surveillance is down, but as pressure is applied, the Iranians will go back to a more vigilant stance. The President said that we could have some diplomatic subterfuge. Admiral Turner suggested, for example, that we gear up another action by Waldheim. The Chairman said that mining would not adversely impact on a rescue unless, as a result of the mining, the Iranians did something with the hostages that would reduce our capacity to free them. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we would want to save mining as a postrescue option to deter subsequent actions against Americans left in Tehran. The Chairman concluded by saying that we should use the threat to work on a rescue operation, and come back in several days for a decision on whether to proceed with a fuel caching operation. The President said we cannot make idle threats. We cannot sit here three or four weeks from now still wondering what we are going to do. On the other hand, he was still not inclined to do the rescue until the hostages’ lives were in danger. He said there is no question but what we will kill some of them. On the other hand, we cannot foreclose all our options. He noted the Secretary of State was against mining and he, himself, was against the rescue. There seemed to be nothing we could do. Dr. Brzezinski said we could tell the Allies that we would take more forceful action by mid-May and then, if necessary, we could go earlier with the rescue operation. The President emphasized once again that he would not go for a rescue until the lives of the hostages were threatened. Dr. Brzezinski pointed out that we might get that reaction with the break in the relations we were announcing today. Admiral Turner added that the trouble with that criterion is that if the hostages are threatened, the possibility of a rescue drops. The President said he saw no objection to caching the fuel. The Chairman pointed out that we would have a lot of people on the ground during the operation. He said it was a fairly large operation. However, if we were to get away with it, we would gain confidence that we could also get away with a rescue undetected. He concluded by saying that if we are not going to go after the hostages until they are threatened, then he thought that mining was a reasonable alternative. The President discounted that mining would drive the Iranians into the arms of the Soviets. Dr. Brzezinski said that we should send a message to the Iranians giving them a deadline by which time we would take an action such as mining. The President asked to whom we would send the message. Dr. Brzezinski indicated that we could send it to Khomeini. He felt that the history of his behavior indicated that he was subject to pressure and threats.
