910  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
221.	 Memorandum From JCS to Commander in Chief, Europe1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
[text not declassified]
1. [text not declassified]
2. [text not declassified]
3. [text not declassified]
4. [text not declassified] you are authorized by the President to 
expend nuclear weapons in the following circumstances in conformity 
with these instructions:
a. For the defense of U.S. forces in foreign territory and in inter­
national waters against Sino-­Soviet Bloc attacking forces, subject to 
applicable agreements or understandings, if any, with the government 
exercising sovereignty over the country or countries concerned—
(Special Additional Instructions in Section “A” below).
b. In the event of nuclear attack upon the United States, in retalia­
tion against the enemy identified as responsible for the attack, subject 
in the case of retaliation from friendly foreign territory to applicable 
agreements or understandings, if any, with the government exercis­
ing sovereignty over the country or countries concerned—(Special 
Additional Instructions in Section “B” below).
3. OPERATIONAL LIMITATIONS. Because of the serious interna­
tional implications of the use of nuclear weapons by U.S. military forces, 
it is essential that particularly strict command control and supervision 
be exercised, and that the use of nuclear weapons be limited to circum­
stances of grave necessity. [text not declassified]
[NOTE: Pages 3–6 of source text denied in full.]
[text not declassified]
Section “B”
Special Additional Instructions Regarding Retaliation in the Event of a 
Nuclear Attack Upon the United States
1. PURPOSE. These special instructions provide additional guid­
ance applicable to the expenditure of nuclear weapons in the event 
of a nuclear attack upon the United States in retaliation against the 
enemy identified as responsible for the attack, subject, in the case of 
retaliation from friendly foreign territory, to applicable agreements or 
1 Source: Instructions for use of nuclear weapons. Top Secret. 9 pp. Eisenhower 
Library, White House Office Files, Records of the Special Assistant to the President for 
National Security Affairs, NSC Series, Atomic Weapons, Corr. And Background for Pres­
idential Approval.
