266
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—An Indian Ocean stabilization agreement concluded at the same
time or perhaps earlier if it looks desirable. It is a moderate step within
reach which might help maintain momentum in the relationship, while
buying us time on more serious and difficult fronts.
—A grey area systems initiative, possibly linked to MBFR, to
follow shortly after SALT II and demonstrate our continued concern for
Backfire, SS–20’s, etc. We have started planning work on this.2
—A CTB agreement in late 1978, perhaps before the elections.3
Your Spring Summit meeting could be used to open the way.
—Intensive negotiations in 1979 looking to the expiration of the
SALT II Protocol which coincides with the end of your first term, and is,
therefore, a major political benchmark.
These are the key elements. A comprehensive plan would have to
fit in such negotiations as MBFR, ASAT, CW, radiological weapons,
civil defense, and conventional arms restraints. Each of these could be
fitted into a general scheme of steady and controlled progress in our
dealings with the Soviets. Indeed, if we want to add something to SALT
for a possible Spring Summit, ASAT in some ways is a more directly re-
lated subject and perhaps more feasible on terms acceptable to us, than
CTB.
Finally, a major argument for the approach I am describing is the
need to phase the various negotiations and agreements to give the So-
viets a continuing incentive to moderate their behavior in our relation-
ship generally. The Soviets have gotten used to some pressure on
human rights and their tack now is to down-play the issue and to sug-
gest that we have learned our lesson. You may have to speak out again
publicly on the issue to disabuse the Soviets and to head off domestic
charges that you are backing off human rights. When you do speak out,
the Soviets’ reactions will be moderated to the extent they are en-
meshed with us in a controlled process of negotiations, and have some-
thing to lose.4
Similarly, in the period immediately ahead, getting to Geneva on
the Middle East and what happens once we are there will be real tests
of Soviet intentions. How they respond cannot be divorced from SALT
or any other negotiation. Especially disruptive Soviet behavior in the
Middle East could not help but affect SALT and, above all, how any
2 In the right-hand margin next to this point, the President wrote: “I don’t favor de-
liberate delay—just hold firm on PNE, etc & not be in a hurry.”
3 Reference is to the November 1978 mid-term elections.
4 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, the President wrote: “Brezhnev
attacks on [Arthur] Goldberg are helping us.”
