Special Session on Disarmament
1173
Accordingly, the Delegation should seek to maintain the phrasing
used in the Non-Aligned paper as a suitable compromise—i.e., review
of the role of the UN and of disarmament mechanisms, including the
question of convening a WDC. The Delegation should seek further
guidance if agreement on a formula of this kind cannot be reached.
(2) Role of the Secretariat:
Mission’s report (USUN 1290) suggests that there may not be sig-
nificant pressure for substantive studies by Secretariat at this stage. We
are prepared to consider any proposals that might be made, but would
not favor any studies requiring additional expenditures.
We see no advantage in opposing a request that the Secretariat pre-
pare a report organizing the views contained in responses to the SYG
into general categories or “themes,” although, in view of the vastly dif-
ferent approaches taken by various governments, we doubt that any
precise categorization will be possible or that the results will be of great
value. A committee request for such a report should be as specific as
possible, making clear that the document should not attempt to inter-
pret views, assess trends, or draw conclusions.
We have no objection to the preparation of the following support
documents by the Secretariat:
—Presentation of disarmament resolutions adopted by the Gen-
eral Assembly.
—A paper on existing principles and proposals for the conduct of
disarmament negotiations.
—A description of existing structures and machinery for disarma-
ment negotiations.
—A compilation of presentation in thematic form of responses to
the secretary general’s request for country views on the SSOD . . . pro-
vided the costs of such services fall within currently budgeted Secre-
tariat funds ($90,000).
(3) Non-Governmental Organizations: Assuming the statement on
NGOs to be prepared by the Chairman and rapporteur accurately re-
flects the agreement reached at the March 31 Bureau Meeting (USUN
1027)6 the Delegation may support it as indicated (State 82519).7
6 Telegram 1027 from USUN, April 6, reported that the members of the SSOD
PrepCom agreed that NGOs should be “welcomed but that they have no right to ‘partici-
pate’.” This reflected the “deep and general fear” of “NGO ‘agitation’ or ‘interference’ in
Special Session,” as the Soviet bloc was “adamantly opposed to NGO involvement”
while “many Western Delegations fear domestic reverberations if ‘their’ NGOs, often af-
filiated with opposition political parties, are allowed any status; and many Non-Aligned
seem to have vague fears that NGOs will inject extraneous (or even relevant) issues em-
barrassing to them.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770119–
0388)
7 In telegram 82519 to USUN, April 13, the Department of State informed the UN
that it found “no objection to NGO participation formula” proposed in telegram 1027.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770128–0116)
