National Security Policy  415
term “joint.” Any strategic plan should be considered a “defense” plan 
(rather than a “joint” plan) which means that it is unified from its incep­
tion and is not the result of a welding of separate efforts. He stated that 
he would designate the senior military body the “Military Chiefs of 
Staff for Defense” rather than the “Joint Chiefs of Staff.” This he said 
he would do in spite of current legislation, in answer to Mr. Quarles’ 
statement that the name “Joint Chiefs of Staff” is statutory. (In this con­
nection, the President pointed out that his residence is designated by 
law as the Executive Mansion, but he has never heard it referred to as 
anything but the White House. He voiced the opinion that many of 
these terms came about as a result of the school systems.)
The President then summarized the matters he would like to insure 
in his last two years in office. These he listed as follows:
(a) A realization of the fact that the Joint Chiefs of Staff are respon­
sible to the Secretary of Defense.
(b) Recognition of the fact that the Joint Chiefs of Staff comprise 
a single group and not a collection of Service Chiefs. (The President 
recognizes that the Joint Chiefs of Staff have some responsibilities to 
the President.)
(c) Amalgamation of the present “Joint Staff” into a truly single 
staff.
Mr. Quarles then stated that the only problem is to be sure that 
the Department of Defense is implementing the President’s desires. 
He  invited comments from Mr. Harlow and General Goodpaster. 
Mr. Harlow summarized his view of the President’s desires on the 
responsibilities of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense, 
emphasizing the statement of the President that excessive debate over 
organizational detail constitutes “straining at a gnat.” He considered 
these matters clear. He then questioned the matter of budgeting in this 
new directive.
To this Mr. Quarles stated that the unified commanders make mil­
itary requirements known to the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Provisioning as 
such is requested by the Services through the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the 
Secretary of Defense. Mr. Harlow objected to this explanation, pointing 
out that a separate provisioning channel sets up two channels, in that 
the component commanders of the unified commands go directly to the 
Services for their “provisioning.”
When the President voiced objections, Admiral Burke attempted 
to explain the situation to some extent by assuring the President that 
the unified commander does know what is going on but does not con­
cern himself with costs and finances. This appeared to alleviate the 
President’s concern. General Taylor attempted to bring the matter into 
focus by pointing out that the channel from the component commander 
to the chief of a service is a budgetary channel; but that the channel from
