For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office

PRESENT
Governor Jimmy Carter, Senator Walter Mondale; Barry Blechman, Harold Brown,
Lynn Davis, Paul Nitze, Walter Slocombe, Paul Warnke, James Woolsey, and Cyrus
Vance; David Aaron, Stuart Eisenstadt, Richard Holbrooke, Jack Watson, and other
staff members.
at about 6:30 P.M. The discussion focused first on strategic forces, sec-
ondly on general purpose forces, thirdly on questions of efficiency
in the utilization of manpower, and finally on the overall size of the
defense budget. There was also a brief discussion of the benefits and
risks of arms transfers.
2. Strategic forces. Mr. Vance spoke first. He said that all the advisors
present at the meeting agreed that there was rough equivalence between
U.S. and Soviet strategic forces at present. The Soviets have advan-
tages in some measures of strategic capabilities (e.g., throw-­weight),
while the United States has advantages in other measures (warheads,
for example). He noted, however, that there was disagreement among
the group as to where present trends in strategic deployment programs
were leading, and what the United States should do about those trends.
He concluded by briefly reviewing recent developments in Soviet stra-
tegic capabilities.
Mr. Brown spoke next. He noted his agreement with what Mr. Vance
had said and emphasized that the key question is what would happen
if present trends continued into the future. He then discussed specific
changes which might be made to U.S. strategic programs in response
to trends in relative strategic capabilities. He particularly emphasized
modernization of the bomber force as an important program, and
tion marking. Drafted by Blechman, who forwarded the notes to Eizenstat under a July
29 covering memorandum. (Ibid.)

discussed criteria which would affect evaluations of possible follow-­
ons to Minuteman ICBMs.
Mr. Blechman spoke next. He emphasized the difficulty of com-
paring U.S. and Soviet military forces, and in particular strategic forces.
Mr. Warnke stressed that the present situation is not too bad from
the United States’ perspective; that the question was how to avoid a
deterioration in the present strategic balance. Warnke emphasized,
however, that avoiding a deterioration meant reaching further SALT
agreements, not responding to Soviet strategic programs with step-­ups
in U.S. strategic programs. He noted that in the absence of strategic
arms limitation agreements, differences in relative U.S. and Soviet stra-
tegic capabilities would lead to political pressures for step-­ups—­both
domestically and from allies, even though they would not mean any-
thing in military terms. Consequently, if further SALT agreements were
not reached, the United States would be forced to compete.
Lynn Davis spoke next and emphasized that one needed to look
at the full range of strategic forces and compare aggregate capabilities,
rather than focusing on one specific component of the strategic forces.
She also emphasized that the statements of U.S. decision-­makers had
perhaps the major effect on perceptions of the strategic balance in the
Soviet Union, in third nations, and in the United States.
Walter Slocombe spoke next emphasizing that it was very difficult
to understand what the Soviets were doing; that is, what their strate-
gic objectives were. The characteristics, or the numbers of weapons, or
the rate of weapon deployments simply do not lead to clear indica-
tions of strategic policy. He strengthened this point by illustrating what
one might make of U.S. strategic policy if one just viewed actual U.S.
weapon deployments.
Mr. Nitze spoke next. He noted his disagreement with much of
what had been said so far. In particular, he emphasized that he was
more pessimistic than most of the other people in the room, that he
thought that the existing trends were extremely negative. More specifi-
cally, he stated that if the trends were not reversed quickly, that within
ten years the ratios of U.S. and U.S.S.R. strategic capabilities that would
survive a counter-­force exchange would be most unfavorable from the
U.S. perspective. He cited a recent study2 in which calculations showed
that following a Soviet counterforce attack on the United States in the
mid-1980s, surviving U.S. retaliatory forces would be able to kill only
4.5 percent of the Soviet population. On the other hand, the study
concluded, Soviet forces surviving a U.S. counterforce attack, under
present plans, would be able to destroy a much larger proportion of
2 Not further identified.

the U.S. population. Mr. Nitze summarized his key point as follows:
the assumptions underlying statements made by the majority of the
group were not supportable by the data—­that, in fact, the data showed
that in the future the Soviet Union would be able to survive a nuclear
exchange but that the United States would not; and that, in his view, if
such a situation were to develop, it would have a major impact on the
two nations’ respective behavior.
A discussion ensued among the advisors. Other members of the
group, particularly Mr. Vance and Mr. Brown, emphasized that the
calculations cited above were dependent upon assumptions such as
the effectiveness of Soviet civil defense preparations and U.S. target-
ing policy, which would be questionable to most observers. In effect,
they argued that the calculations presented a “worst” case for the U.S.
and a “best” case for the U.S.S.R., both of which were unrealistic. They
believed that Mr. Nitze’s scenario was biased toward the Soviets, and
that a more even handed approach would yield different results. Other
members of the group questioned the implications of the calculations
advanced by Mr. Nitze.
There was general agreement that the question was a critical one,
and that there should be a thorough study aimed at testing the hypoth-
esis advanced by Mr. Nitze.
Senator Mondale asked why the United States, after having built
and deployed large missiles early in the 1960s, moved to smaller and
more accurate missiles? Mr. Brown responded that the U.S. believed
that the diversity and flexibility of its strategic forces was more import-
ant than sheer force. It felt that throw-­weight could easily be re-­built if
that appeared to be necessary, but that building a lot of throw-­weight
into fixed-­site ICBMs did not make sense because of the vulnerability
problem. He also stated that mobile land-­based missiles implied high
costs and political problems.
The discussion continued with Mr. Woolsey, who noted that in
discussing these issues it should always be kept in mind that we are
not really talking about nuclear war, but about Soviet perceptions of
the risks of nuclear war and its likely outcome. He then discussed the
ambivalence of weapon systems, and the difficulty of inferring policy
from the characteristics of weapons.
Governor Carter asked three questions. First, what is the Soviet
attitude toward limited nuclear war? Second, what is the U.S. attitude?
And third, what U.S. programs exist now to build-­up strategic forces
and what are the Soviets doing?
In response to the first two questions, there was a long discus-
sion the upshot of which was that Soviet attitudes were mixed, that
one had to discriminate between tactical nuclear wars and strategic

nuclear wars, and that it was very difficult to assess what the Soviet
attitude was. Moreover, there was general agreement that the Soviet
attitude was likely evolving from a point where they believed
that limited nuclear war was impossible, to one where at least some
Soviet decision-­makers might consider it possible to control a nuclear
exchange. It was also noted that the U.S. policy always has been that
tactical nuclear war was possible, and indeed, that the United States
might make first-­use of nuclear weapons if it were losing a conven-
tional conflict in Europe or Korea.
In response to Governor Carter’s third question, Mr. Blechman
reviewed current U.S. strategic programs and developments in Soviet
strategic capabilities. Other members of the group supplemented the
discussion.
Following a short recess, Governor Carter asked for a five minute
brief on the SALT talks. Mr. Brown noted that the purpose of the talks
was to achieve equivalence without building new weapons and that
SALT I had resulted in an ABM Treaty and an Interim Agreement on
offensive weapons; each of which he described in detail. Mr. Brown
then discussed the Vladivostok Agreement3 and described the present
impasse in negotiations toward implementing that agreement.
Governor Carter asked if the Soviets really wanted an agreement.
The consensus of the group was that indeed they did, but only on
favorable terms. Mr. Slocombe emphasized that questions of verifica-
tion, especially for cruise missiles, were very important ones.
3. General Purpose Forces. This portion of the discussion was intro-
duced by Mr. Vance. He emphasized that questions of the general pur-
pose force structure involved a basic assessment of the purposes of U.S.
foreign policy, of the roles the armed forces served in support of that
policy, and of the nation’s vital interests. He highlighted the following
areas:
a) Europe—­the key question is what kind of war, particularly what
duration of war, NATO should plan to fight.
b) The Middle East—­because contingency planning for what
the United States might have to do in defense of Israel was not well
advanced, this was an area that needed concerted planning effort. The
questions are what kinds of forces would be needed to help defend
Israel, and to what extent those forces would have to be additional to
forces already maintained for European requirements.
Ford and General Secretary Brezhnev, in which the two leaders outlined an agreement on
the limitation of strategic arms (SALT II) to replace SALT I, set to expire in October 1977,

c) Asia—Mr. Vance noted that there was no question that the
United States must maintain close ties with Japan, but that the U.S.
commitment to Korea, and the forces necessary to maintain that com-
mitment, were more questionable.
[Omitted here are discussions of the bilateral military relationships
between the United States and Korea, and the United States and Israel.]
There was further discussion of relative U.S. and Soviet positions in
the Middle East, which emphasized relative capabilities to project and
sustain military power in the region. Mr. Blechman noted that although
the Soviet Union was located geographically closer to the Middle East,
the United States had far greater capabilities to project power into the
region.
Mr. Woolsey noted his view that the links between foreign policy
and force structure decisions was weaker than that implied by the pre-
vious discussion. He stated that foreign policy has much less an effect
on the overall size of the defense budget than decisions on the way
defense resources are utilized.
Mr. Vance disagreed with Mr. Woolsey in this regard emphasiz-
ing that even if the latter’s assessment was correct, the administration
should still focus on the purpose of the armed forces—­that is, on the
link between the military and foreign policy, and that the rest was rela-
tively unimportant.
Mr. Brown stated that it was necessary to look at both the pur-
poses of the armed forces and the efficiency with which resources were
utilized.
Mr. Slocombe returned the discussion to NATO, emphasizing that
requirements for European wars were the most important factors in
decisions on the U.S. force structure. There was then a discussion of the
balance in Europe, and of the European contribution to NATO defense.
Mr. Blechman indicated that over the past twelve years, the states of
Western Europe had increased, in real terms, the amount they spent on
defense by 20 percent, and that they had kept military manpower levels
roughly constant. There was some disagreement as to how well NATO
would do in the event of a conventional war in Europe. Generally, Mr.
Nitze took a more pessimistic view of the situation than did the other
members of the group.
Mr. Warnke emphasized that an all-­out war in Europe was most
unlikely, but that more realistic contingencies, such as a Soviet incur-
sion into Yugoslavia following Tito’s death, were more likely and that
planning should focus on these limited contingencies.
Mr. Vance emphasized that we need a thorough review of NATO
plans and forces—­that such a review had not been undertaken since
1967, and that in view of developments in technology and Soviet capa-
bilities, such a comprehensive review was necessary.

Governor Carter than asked what Presidential mechanisms there
were to correlate defense policy with foreign policy and changes in
Soviet military capabilities. There was a lengthy discussion on this point,
with the general answer being that what mechanisms did exist had not
been developed very far. The previous administration’s unhappy expe-
rience with the Defense Program Review Committee of the National
Security Council was reviewed. Governor Carter indicated that, if nec-
essary and desirable, he would play a direct role in causing the DoD
budget to go through, a more general review process, in which both
OMB and the NSC staff would play important roles.
There was then a brief discussion of the Navy and requirements
for naval forces. Mr. Blechman reviewed developments in Soviet naval
capabilities and problems in U.S. naval force structure and operational
patterns.
4. Manpower utilization. There was a brief discussion of problems in
the efficiency with which manpower was utilized by the Department of
Defense. Mr. Vance emphasized that more than one-­half of the budget
went for manpower expenses and that there was lots of room for greater
efficiency. He put particular emphasis on reforms in the structure and
utilization of reserve forces. Mr. Blechman reviewed various measures
that have been suggested for reducing the price of defense manpower
and the number of people in the DoD workforce, both civilians and mil-
itary. He noted, particularly, savings made possible by increasing the
length of the average tour of duty, by using manpower more efficiently
in the military training establishment, by reforming the military com-
pensation system, by consolidating bases, and by eliminating duplica-
tion in logistics and headquarters’ units.
A discussion ensued of the political difficulties involved in mak-
ing changes in manpower policies and practices. Governor Carter
emphasized that members of the Defense study group should not be
dissuaded by these obvious difficulties, insofar as he believed that if
the President took a direct hand in the process, it would be possible to
overcome many of these obstacles.
5. Overall size of the budget. There was a very brief discussion on
the overall size of the defense budget and of the trend implicit in the
administration’s program. The sense of the discussion was that it would
be difficult to achieve the $5 to $7 billion reduction as phrased in the

Democratic platform committee.4 The problem stemmed from the plat-
form’s failure to note that the reduction would be one from a projected
increase in the budget, that it would take time to attain such a reduc-
tion, and that the reduction would be in budget authority rather than
outlays. There was a discussion of the manner in which this pledge
should be treated, and of the realistic possibilities for reducing defense
spending.
6. Arms transfers. Mr. Vance introduced this topic by noting his sup-
port for the Humphrey Amendment.5 Governor Carter noted that he
too would have vetoed the Humphrey bill, insofar as he believes that
it infringes on Presidential prerogatives.6 Mr. Vance noted the desir-
ability of investigating the possibility of multilateral efforts to restrain
arms transfers. There was a discussion on the pros and cons of selling
sophisticated weapons to third world countries, with Mr. Nitze gen-
erally being less hostile to such arms sales than other members of the
group.
7. Conclusion. Governor Carter concluded the meeting by noting
that he would like to have follow-­up sessions on specific regions and
on specific types of forces with fewer people who specialized in the
particular topic.
4 The 1976 Democratic Party platform stated: “Barring any major change in the
international situation, with the proper management, with the proper kind of investment
of defense dollars, and with the proper choice of military programs, we believe we can
reduce present defense spending by about $5 billion to $7 billion.” (“Excerpts From Plat-
form to Be Submitted to the Democratic National Convention,” New York Times, June 18,
5 An amendment to the fiscal 1976 military assistance appropriation. [Footnote is
in the original. Senator Humphrey’s amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961,
postponed indefinitely by the Senate on June 14, would have set restrictions on U.S. arms
transfers to foreign countries.]
election. He took the Presidential oath of office on January 20, 1977.

2.
Minutes of a Meeting of the National Security Council1
SUBJECT
Defense Issues
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Secretary of Defense Harold Brown
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. George S. Brown
Acting Director of the Central Intelligence Agency Enno Knoche
Mr. W. Bowman Cutter, Office of Management and Budget
OTHER ATTENDEES
DOD
Jack Quetsch, Principal Deputy Comptroller
White House
Stuart Eizenstat
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Jack Watson
William G. Hyland
NSC Staff
Edward R. Jayne
Jeanne W. Davis
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
—It was agreed to hold a four to five hour detailed session on the
defense budget the following week with the President, members of the
NSC and OMB Director Lance.
—The President asked for a written presentation prior to the
meeting.
(The meeting began without General Brown)
President Carter: The purpose of this meeting is to consider changes
in the FY 1978 defense budget. It should be interpreted as purely an
exploratory discussion. We need to know what the issues are. I will
want to get involved in the details at an appropriate time. We can set
aside a Saturday or a Sunday afternoon for a detailed discussion. I real-
ize the urgency of assimilating your recommendations. Bert Lance isn’t
here?
Cabinet Room of the White House.

Mr. Cutter: He is on the Hill.
President Carter: Harold (Brown), why don’t you go ahead.
Secretary Brown: With regard to your comment about getting into
things, I would applaud your deep participation at any time. I have
made it clear both publicly and privately that these are very prelimi-
nary proposals. I need to get further reactions in my building. Unfor-
tunately they have gotten out, but they are certainly subject to further
discussion. Input from the President and from other NSC members will
have a substantial effect. I am not shooting at any particular number,
but I wanted to show a decrease. I have tried to find things that were
being done too fast or that should not be done at all. As you know, the
cut amounts to about $2.5 billion. At the moment, of course, we are
cutting the wrong things. I would expect to get most of the money from
base closings and manpower adjustments, but that takes much longer.
In these first few weeks, in order to get reductions, I have had to hit the
procurement programs harder than I would choose to in the longer run.
President Carter: This is my first experience in a Departmental Bud-
get and I want to learn all I can about it. I would like OMB to make a
critical analysis of all expenditures. Then I want a thorough analysis of
ongoing programs. There is a tendency to consider them all sacrosanct
in the absence of such an assessment. I need some understanding of the
manpower problems. Possibly we need more rigid entrance standards.
Within a few months or a year we will have to decide whether to have
some kind of conscription or even an all-­out draft. Also, the ratio of
combat to non-­combat troops concerns me. Jim Schlesinger told me that
when he was in Defense he set an overall personnel level then told the
forces to increase by two combat units in their own way.
I will, of course, need and will respect your advice. But on the mat-
ter of new weapons systems—­the B–1, M–X—I will have to make the
decision myself. Before I make the final decision, I hope we will have
some means to assess the Soviet attitude on global force reductions.
(General Brown arrived.)
President Carter: I assume NSC meetings are confidential. Cy (Vance)
has an indication from Dobrynin that the Soviets would like to see mobile
missiles banned in SALT. If we could get an agreement, that would be a
major factor. Some elements might be decided by external events. Let’s
proceed with a detailed presentation to me by OMB and Dr. Brzezinski.
I want to be involved in this assessment with you. There’s a question at
what point we bring in DOD and the JCS. In Georgia, I did an indepen-
dent analysis with the budget people, then I met with the Department
leaders. But I have no preconceived notion on this. I will defer to the
Defense Department’s judgement.

Secretary Brown: I believe our existing process works well. Most of
the detailed information has to come from Defense. Our Comptroller,
through me, works with OMB and the NSC staff to produce the analy-
sis. The recommendations you get from your staff may be contrary to
our recommendations, but the facts are assembled together. As a prac-
tical matter, it qualifies pretty well as zero based budgeting. I believe
the Defense Department process is clearer and more along the lines you
indicated than that of the other departments.
President Carter: I want the OMB budget process to be quite incisive
and intrusive.
Secretary Brown: We have been through the figures with OMB and
there are a few items still disagreed. At the present time, the fights
between Defense and OMB have gone on before the President gets into
it. If you want to enter the process earlier, we could fight better because
we would have an idea of your views.
Mr. Cutter: There were 45 issues, and OMB, Defense and the Transi-
tion staffs in the two agencies each had a position on each. OMB wrote
a letter to Defense defending the OMB position.
President Carter: At what point has the President been involved?
Secretary Vance: We would wrestle the issues with OMB. There
would still be some unagreed issues. Then the President would sit
down with OMB, Defense and JCS and make his decisions.
Secretary Brown: That should still be the case except that we would
have an earlier input from the President.
Dr. Brzezinski: Both State and the NSC should have an opportunity
to review the budget for political implications.
Secretary Brown: With regard to these particular budget amend-
ments, that review will happen after the fact. In the future, it will
happen in the course of developing the budget. I wanted to delay my
recommendations to very near the time for decision so as to minimize
the political flack. However, they began to leak, and we are already get-
ting some flack from the Congress, and we will be hearing from some
foreign countries. The longer the lapse between recommendations and
decisions, the worse the effect will be.
President Carter: I want a fairly definitive presentation to me quite
early. I will set out as much time as we need. I want you to explain to
me how you arrived at the 45 items. Let’s have a multi-­hour session
within the next week where I can ask questions. I don’t have an ade-
quate basis on which to reach conclusions. I don’t want to interfere,
but the final decision is mine. I don’t like to be presented with a final
product without having a more complete presentation. I may be able to
help. The more I am involved, the more you will have my imprimatur
and my support. There might be disagreements, but I don’t look on this

process as two contending forces. You all work out a time for a lengthy
session. Do it quickly. Harold (Brown), do you want to outline what
you are doing?
Dr. Brzezinski: How much time do you have this morning?
President Carter: About 15–20 minutes. In a way we are really wast-
ing this meeting, but I wanted to let you know how I viewed this.
Secretary Brown: I can summarize the proposed changes quickly.
I have placed greater emphasis on combat readiness while continu-
ing essential modernization. I have slowed down some things that I
thought were going too fast.
In strategic forces, on the B–1, I have reduced the rate of produc-
tion and have deferred the decision as to whether to continue the pro-
gram until FY 1979. On the M–X, I have slowed major development to
its original (1977 budget) pace, but have left the final question open.
Developments in SALT might preclude further development of the
M–X. I have left cruise missiles at their present level, but have reorga-
nized what gets done under the program. The cruise missiles are not so
far along as the B–1, but are farther than the M–X. We can’t really tam-
per with these until we know where we are going. I’m not foreclosing
any options, and we will want an in-­depth review in the spring.
President Carter: We need to know how far along we are in each
instance, and what would be the consequences of slowing down and
trimming the programs.
Secretary Brown: On land and tactical air and mobility forces, I
am changing the mix of F–15s and F–16s. We will reduce the number
of high-­performance aircraft and keep five wings. I would terminate
A–7E production. This program is largely political. They have knocked
it out every year and Congress, under pressure from the aircraft indus-
try, puts it back.
On land forces, I am substituting two Reserve Component bri-
gades for two late-­deploying active Army brigades. I recognize there
are foreign policy issues here. Also, I have stopped the non-­nuclear
Lance procurement. I don’t think it’s efficient. The Army disagrees. I
suspect they may have sold its value to other countries.
On NATO and mobility forces, I have added shelters for additional
aircraft and additional storage capacity and have increased the heavy-­
lift capacity by modifying aircraft in the civilian fleet. Congress keeps
turning this program down. Naturally, the aircraft industry wants us to
buy new planes rather than modify old ones.
On ship construction, we had six programs last year—I think four
came from the Pentagon and two from the Hill. Except for the nuclear
powered strike cruiser, which will cost over a billion dollars, the ship-
yards are so jammed that adding additional money doesn’t get us any

more ships. I would defer one attack submarine and two patrol frigates.
And I would cut back on some experimental ships.
Dr. Brzezinski: There are political reasons for continuing with the
attack submarine.
Secretary Brown: In a number of cases, the political and the man-
agement/efficiency factors are on opposite sides. In this first cut, I
have proceeded only on management grounds. We will get the political
input later.
President Carter: I would like to make our decisions on a non-­
political basis, but I’m not naive. The question is how to give the nation
maximum security on X number of dollars—­that should be our con-
stant, single criterion. If domestic or international political interests are
involved, we need to understand when we are yielding on a political
basis. That is my realm. If we yield to the Congress or to a foreign coun-
try, I need to know what the trade-­off is. Let me be the one to say we
can cut defense capacity on political grounds. Of course, I may have to
do it.
Secretary Brown: That’s why I did it this way.
President Carter: Good.
Secretary Vance: With regard to the B–1, the arms control decisions
can make the case. You should look at the other alternatives before
making any decision.
President Carter: That’s why I need to understand the consequences
of procurement, deferral or slow-­down. As we talk to the Soviets, their
understanding that the B–1 is still alive is a major factor. The Soviets
perceive the B–1 and cruise missiles as a real threat. A commitment to
the B–1 would indicate to the Soviets that we are still committed to
the triple method. If I were Brezhnev, I would want to understand the
ultimate intentions of the US. I plan to put all possible pressure on the
Soviets this spring and summer to get substantial mutual reductions.
We should keep the option on the B–1 open as long as we can. I don’t
know the advantages and disadvantages yet.
Secretary Vance: On cruise missiles, we are making a major commit-
ment to go ahead.
Secretary Brown: There are 250 in the total R&D program. We are
committed to developing some kind of cruise missile. But we can shift
from one to another—­from air to land to sea. All options can be kept
open.
President Carter: Also nuclear and non-­nuclear.
Secretary Brown: The non-­nuclear missile is much further off. There
are tougher guidance programs. We are committed to develop some
but not necessarily deploy them. And we’re not committed to one or
another developed use. They’re not unique now.

Dr. Brzezinski: And we still have the option of pulling back if there
are reductions.
Secretary Brown: Yes.
Secretary Vance: What about our allies? They will expect a piece of
the action—­that we will provide them with these systems.
Secretary Brown: We are now supplying them with quick reaction
land-­based missiles. It’s better to give them cruise missiles than air-
craft. Aircraft are being diverted for other missions. They would be
concerned if they thought we would pull out.
President Carter: Aren’t our cruise missiles superior to the Russians
in airframe, engine and electronic control?
Secretary Brown: Yes.
President Carter: I want to learn the details on this.
General Brown: On the point of our allies, the Germans have stressed
repeatedly to us that what may be tactical to us is strategic to them.
They look for deployment of land-­based cruise missiles in Central
Europe. But use of cruise missiles makes verification most difficult. For
tactical use, whether armed or un-­armed, the situation is very fuzzy.
Secretary Brown: That argues for going slowly.
General Brown: When we think about cruise missiles we tend to
think too much about offense. We also have to face the challenges of
defense. They would be a decided threat to the US if they are not cov-
ered by SALT.
President Carter: Our advanced stage of development is a major
advantage over the Soviets. We can continue procurement and keep the
advantage or reduce it as leverage.
General Brown: The same is true of the B–1.
Secretary Brown: There is one specific thing about cruise missiles
with regard to SALT. The Backfire corresponds to land-­based cruise
missiles in Europe. They are tactical. Let the Russians know that they
are something we may want to deploy if the Backfire is not take care of.
General Brown: The SS–X–20 concerns the Europeans, too. It’s
mobile.
President Carter: It concerns China too.
Dr. Brzezinski: Any cut-­back would send the wrong signal to both
the Europeans and the Chinese.
President Carter: Without cutting back, the actual numbers are not
very high.
Secretary Vance: On the shipbuilding program, the Germans are
very much interested in the hydrofoil program. They will take this as a
signal that we are not really interested in standardization. On the heels

of the Vice President’s statements in support of NATO,2 we would be
giving the wrong signal. The same thing would be true if we substi-
tuted two reserve brigades for active brigades. When we look at our
active forces and pull out two from NATO, it will raise questions.
Secretary Brown: Your points are well taken, but they are superrog-
atory. They go beyond the question of what we really need.
Secretary Vance: You’re degrading readiness. The reserves can’t do
the job.
Secretary Brown: These are late-­deploying units, primarily infantry.
They’re relatively unimportant in NATO. It would not mean a substan-
tial reduction in capacity. This is a separate problem from what others
see.
Dr. Brzezinski: I agree with Cy (Vance) on the active brigades. Wait
until our world-­wide review is finished.3
Secretary Brown: You’re talking about perceptions.
Dr. Brzezinski: Politics is perception.
Secretary Brown: They’re two separate things.
Dr. Brzezinski: You have provided the military considerations;
we will add the political. On the nuclear submarine and AWACS, we
need to look at the European reaction. If we reduce our effort, they will
reduce theirs.
Secretary Brown: That’s an appropriate issue. If we buy more, they
won’t have to.
Dr. Brzezinski: We should develop a package on manpower, includ-
ing base closings.
Secretary Brown: That’s a good idea, but it’s not new. Nothing can
be done by February 15. If we made manpower cuts it should be in the
tail, not in the teeth. We have been talking to Congress about this.
Dr. Brzezinski: We should get an interagency group together.
Secretary Brown: We don’t need it for base closings. (to Dr. ­Brzezinski)
I’ll discuss it with you. Do you know it takes at least two years to close a
base. It takes one year for Congressional consideration and another year
for the environmental impact study. We started to close the Franklin
Arsenal in 1965 and are still getting complaints about it.
President Carter: That’s Fritz’ (Vice President Mondale) favorite.
Secretary Brown: I strongly agree on manpower reductions, but the
package has to be large enough so that both the fiscal conservatives and
the doves will get behind it and push it.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, Document 16.

Secretary Vance: On the Lance, I’m for dropping it, but do we have
enough spares to continue our support to our allies?
Secretary Brown: I’ll check.
General Brown: I know we’re not here to debate the issues now, but
I do want to make two points. Secretary Vance has made a very import-
ant point about the perceptions of our allies. We have been very critical
of the British defense posture decisions for the last two years. We have
confirmed our support for NATO and the Vice President has given
them assurances. If we replace two active brigades with reserves, we
will be acting just like the British. We have reached the point in trying
to sustain our reserve forces where our recruitment objectives are based
on what we can get, not what we need. I don’t know how we would
man two additional reserve brigades.
President Carter: Zbig, how soon can we get four to five hours on
this? I will want a written presentation first.
Dr. Brzezinski: We’ll do it next week.
President Carter: Possibly on Saturday afternoon.4 You can have
supper with me, and we could continue in the evening.
Dr. Brzezinski: You would want (OMB Director) Lance there.
President Carter: Yes; he and I both need educating. I have no idea
of excluding anyone. Set up an adequate amount of time so that I can
learn and share my thoughts with you.
Dr. Brzezinski: And we will get into political issues?
President Carter: Yes. This has been a productive meeting.
Dr. Brzezinski: The press is going to want to know the subject of this
meeting. I don’t think we need always necessarily tell them what NSC
meetings are about. I’m a little reluctant to say it was on the defense
budget.
President Carter: Just tell them it was on budget issues, not defense.
of a meeting on either date was found. On January 31, Carter met with his advisors in
Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No minutes of the conversation
were found.

3.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President
Carter1
Washington, February 18, 1977
SUBJECT
FY 1978 Budget Revisions
Attached for your approval are my recommended adjustments
to the FY 1978 Department of Defense budget request. I believe they
accurately reflect the conversations we have had, but they should be
formalized for the record.2
Harold Brown

Enclosure

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense3
Washington, February 16, 1977
Department of Defense—FY 1978 Budget Revision
Summary of Approved Issues
Budget Authority
($ in Millions)
STRATEGIC NUCLEAR FORCES
B–1 Bomber—Slow down and re-­evaluate pro-
gram. Reduce planned FY 1978 buy from 8 to
5 aircraft.
MX Missile—Defer full-­scale development.
Follow-­on Interceptor—Defer funding of advance
procurement items until FY 1979.
Minuteman III—Cancel FY 1977 missile pro-
curement except for 60 each guidance sets
and stage III motors. FY 1977 savings will be
reprogrammed.
2 Carter signed his approval at the bottom of the memorandum.
3 For Official Use Only.

Budget Authority
($ in Millions)
Polaris Overhaul—Defer procurement of long
lead items for 2 ship overhauls scheduled in
FY 1979.
SRAM B—Defer procurement of production
missiles 1 year to match new B–1 schedule.
Total Strategic Nuclear Forces
GROUND, TACAIR AND MOBILITY FORCES
AWACS—Reduce procurement in FY 1978 from
6 to 3 aircraft.
Non-Nuclear Lance—Cancel FY 1978
­procurement of 360 missiles. FY 1977 funds
($64.6M) will be used for spare nuclear
­missiles and termination costs.
HAWK Missile System—Cancel FY 1978
­procurement of 6 sets of ground support
equipment.
Advanced Attack Helicopter—Slow development.
Cruise Missile—Accelerate development of the
ground launched missile while slowing the
anti-­ship version.
N/C
­aircraft from 108 aircraft.
A–7E—Terminate production. Use FY 77 funds
for spares.
CH–53E—Delay procurement one year. ­Provide
additional RDT&E funds to fully fund
­development program.
NATO Airfield Readiness—Increase FY 1978
funding of aircraft shelters, passive defense
measures, and facilities at collocated
­operating bases.
Advanced Tanker Cargo Aircraft (ATCA)—Defer
procurement program 1 year.
Civil Reserve Air Fleet (CRAF) Modifications—
Fund 8 (vice 4) cost-­shared mini-­mods in FY
1978.

Budget Authority
($ in Millions)
Facilities for Prepositioned Stocks in Europe—Fund
additional maintenance facilities for prepo-
sitioned equipment and igloos for preposi-
tioned ammunition.
Total Ground, TacAir and Mobility Forces
NAVAL FORCES
Nuclear Strike Cruiser (CSGN)—Delete long lead
funding and cancel construction of FY 1979
CSGN.
SSN. Production schedule will hold at 2 per
year.
Patrol Hydrofoil Program—Delete FY 1978 fund-
ing for the conversion of an LST to a PHM
support ship. Restructure and reduce prior
year program.
FY 1977 and prior year savings.
Frigates (FFG)—Defer 2 ships from FY 1978 con-
struction program to later years. Fund long
lead-­time items to sustain deployment sched-
ule and force objectives.
Reactor Components—Reduce FY 1978 procure-
ment recognizing adequate inventory levels
funded through FY 1977.
Total Naval Forces
MANPOWER
Naval Reserve—Reduces paid drill strength by
40,000, shifting reservists assigned to lower
priority billets to the Individual Ready
Reserve (2 week training).
Retirement Reform—Delete funding for imple-
mentation of retirement reforms now delayed
pending re-­examination.
University of the Health Sciences—Closes
University.
Total Manpower

Budget Authority
($ in Millions)
OTHER INVESTMENT
Construction—Restore certain urgent and oper-
ationally important projects unlikely to be
affected by the current base structure review.
Equipment Readiness—Increase effort on ship
and aircraft overhaul and equipment repair
to increase the number of ships and quantity
of equipment in ready-­for-­combat condition.
Communications and Electronics Equipment—
Defer procurement of communications and
electronics equipment of lower priority or
with high development and production risk.
Army Equipment—Defer procurement of lower
priority items of equipment or with high
developmental or production risk.
Air Force Equipment—Defer procurement and
test programs of lower priority or with devel-
opmental or production risk.
Navy Equipment—Reduction of procurement
funds as a result of schedule slips, program
cancellations and pricing adjustments.
Total Other Investment
OPERATIONAL EFFICIENCIES
Intelligence
Flight Operations—Reductions based on
improved operational efficiency without
impairing readiness.
Total Operational Efficiencies
Total FY 1978

4.
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–101
Washington, February 18, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The U.S. Representative to the United Nations
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Net Assessment and Military Force Posture Review (U)
I hereby direct that a comprehensive examination be made of over-
all U.S. national strategy and capabilities. This examination will consist
of two parts to be done concurrently.
One part of the examination will be conducted by the Policy
Review Committee under the chairmanship of the Secretary of Defense.
It will define a wide range of alternative military strategies and con-
struct alternative military force postures and programs to support each
of these military strategies. Among other topics, this segment will con-
sider: military force levels; technological developments with regard to
new weaponry; alternatives to our reliance on foreign bases; deterrence
at reciprocally lowered strategic levels; viability and desirability of the
“triad” posture. This portion should also evaluate the relative ability
of the U.S. and its allies to achieve U.S. objectives in specified military
contingencies. It will identify the key issues for Presidential decisions,
including the budgetary implications of each of these postures.
The other part will be a dynamic net assessment conducted by
the Special Coordination Committee under the chairmanship of the
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs. It will consist
of review and comparison of the overall trends in the political, diplo-
matic, economic, technological, and military capabilities of the United
States, its allies, and potential adversaries. It will evaluate the objectives
and national strategies that may be pursued by our principal potential
adversaries and examine the alternative national objectives and strate-
gies appropriate to the United States.
This two-­part analysis should identify for Presidential decisions
alternative national strategies and the major defense programs and
other initiatives required to implement them. The two parts should be
carefully coordinated with one another. In order to achieve this, I have
directed the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs to
develop additionally more detailed terms of reference for this analysis.
These terms of reference will be presented for my review by
­February 24.2 I also want interim reports to allow further guidance as
the study progresses. A summary of the entire report, not to exceed 70
pages, should be submitted for NSC consideration not later than June 1,
Jimmy Carter
2 See Document 5.
5.
Terms of Reference1
Washington, undated
Comprehensive Net Assessment and Military
Force Posture Review
I. PURPOSE AND STRUCTURE
A. The purpose of this undertaking is to provide a comprehensive
examination of overall U.S. national strategy and capabilities, partic-
ularly in relation to potential adversaries. This examination will start
from U.S. foreign policy as it exists at the present time. While recogniz-
ing that U.S. relations with potential adversaries involve elements of
cooperation, this study will concentrate on overall U.S. national strat-
egies for achieving U.S. objectives in the face of foreign competition,
opposition, and hostility. The study will identify alternative military
and non-­military strategies as well as military force postures for imple-
menting current national objectives. The analysis will also identify
alternative national strategies and their implications for military strat-
egy and force posture planning.2
B. The examination will be conducted in two parts, to be done con-
currently and cooperatively. Data and analysis should be made avail-
able to and between both parts of the study.
II. MILITARY STRATEGY AND FORCE POSTURE REVIEW
A. Purpose. The purpose of this part of the analysis is to define a
wide range of alternative military strategies, to construct force postures
to support these strategies, to analyze the ability of these strategies to
achieve U.S. objectives in certain key military contingencies, and to
identify the key decisions required for the selection and implementa-
tion of the alternative military strategies and force postures.
B. Substance
1. An examination will be conducted of a broad range of alterna-
tives to the current overall U.S. military strategy. This examination will
consider the foreign policy, arms control, and force structure implica-
tions of a range of such strategies. The alternative strategies will high-
light key strategy issues (such as criteria for deterrence, NATO warning
time, etc.) and will include such general variations as a shift toward
a “one war” strategy, a “short war” strategy in Europe, less reliance
on forward-­based ground forces, changes in the current objective of
essential equivalence in strategic forces, and alternatives to the present
“triad” posture.
2. The study should specify a limited number of key military con-
tingencies involving U.S. strategic and/or general purpose forces and
should assess for each the current relative capabilities of the U.S. and
its allies to counter potential adversaries. The contingencies should
include, but not be limited to:
—A major U.S./Soviet strategic nuclear exchange;
—A limited U.S./Soviet strategic nuclear exchange;
—A NATO/Pact war limited to Central Europe;
—A war in Central Europe plus a limited conflict on the flanks of
Europe involving Soviet forces;
—A war in Europe plus a conflict with the USSR in other areas,
including the Pacific, as part of an overall NATO/Pact war;
—A conflict in the Middle East involving limited Soviet
participation;
—Intervention by the Soviet Union in relatively remote areas (such
as Southern Africa); and
2 For purposes of this study, national objectives, national strategy, military strategy,
and force posture will be defined as indicated at Appendix A. [Footnote is in the original.]

—Conflict with third countries without Soviet forces involved
(such as in Korea).
For each of these contingencies, the study should examine each side’s
capability to bring military power to bear. Included should be relative
capabilities to mobilize, transport, sustain, and command and control
forces in the combat area.
3. For each alternative military strategy, alternative force postures
will be developed, with cost data provided for each one. These alter-
natives should again highlight key force structure issues (for example,
alternative bomber forces, degree of reliance on land-­based versus sea-­
based tactical air) and should include the current FYDP and postures
fundamentally different from that plan; for example, postures involv-
ing a strategic dyad or quadrad and those making extensive use of
land-­based aircraft for sea control.
4. Alternative military strategies and force postures must be con-
sidered in the context of overall U.S. fiscal policy and the competing
demands of non-­defense programs and alternative government tax
policies. The study will project future overall federal receipts and
expenditures, and will explore potential tradeoffs between defense and
non-­defense programs.
5. The final report prepared for National Security Council review
will not recommend any specific military strategy or military posture.
It will provide options for each, and will indicate pros and cons for
each based upon considerations such as military threat, foreign policy,
arms control, political sufficiency, costs, technological risks, and spe-
cific capabilities in the contingencies outlined in paragraph 2 above.
Detailed analyses of the areas studied will be included in annexes to
the summary report.
C. Organization
A PRC Military Strategy and Force Posture Group will be created,
chaired by DOD. A PRC Working Group for Military Strategy and Force
Posture will also be created. It will be chaired by OSD/ISA and will
have members from the NSC Staff, State Department, CIA, the Joint
Staff, OMB, ACDA, and such other members as the Chairman or Assis-
tant for National Security Affairs may request. Interagency task forces
will be organized as directed by the Working Group, and will develop
the alternative military strategies to be examined in the study. Among
these task forces will be a task force to carry out military contingency
assessments, as defined in paragraph 2 above (NSC chaired, to be coor-
dinated with regional net assessment groups).
D. Schedule
an interim report:

—Outlining the military strategies being examined;
—Outlining the alternative force structures under consideration;
and
—Providing a status report on the military contingency assess-
ments (specified in Part II, paragraph B (2)).
2. Each task force should submit a preliminary version of its final
ing Group will submit its final report to the PRC by May 25, 1977.
III. COMPREHENSIVE NET ASSESSMENT
A. Purpose. The purposes of the net assessment are:
—To review and to analyze past, present, and probable future
trends in the evolution of the principal capabilities of the United States,
its allies, and its principal potential opponents;
—To analyze the objectives and strategies of our principal oppo-
nents; and
—To develop and make recommendations concerning alternative
national objectives and strategies for the United States.
B. Substance
1. General Questions. The overall net assessment will include topical
and regional net assessments. Each of these will attempt to answer the
following general questions with respect to its subject:
—What have been the most significant trends for this topic or
region in the evolution of the relative capabilities of the U.S. (and its
allies, as appropriate) and the Soviet Union (and the Warsaw Pact and
other potential adversaries as appropriate) over the last 15 years?
—What is the present situation with respect to these capabilities
for the topic or region?
—How do our principal opponents appraise U.S. capabilities and
objectives with respect to this topic or region? How do they estimate
their own strengths and weaknesses?
—What are the recent, current, and most probable future objectives
and strategies of our principal opponents for this topic or region? What
threats do these pose to U.S. national interests?
—What factors are most likely to affect the evolution of the capa-
bilities on both sides during the next five years; the next 10 years?
—What are the alternative national strategies which the U.S. might
reasonably follow with respect to the topic or region? What are their
costs, risks, and benefits?
—What will be the probable impact of these alternative U.S.
national strategies on the relative capabilities of the U.S. and its prin-
cipal opponents over the next 10 years and on the ability of the U.S. to
achieve its national objectives?
2. Regional Net Assessments. Net assessments will be undertaken
to provide answers to the general questions listed above with respect
to specified regions. Each regional net assessment will involve a com-
prehensive analysis of the goals, strategies, position, influence, and

strengths and weaknesses of the United States and its principal allies
and opponents in that region. It will include analysis of the political,
diplomatic, economic, and military trends which will affect the rela-
tions between the United States and its principal allies and opponents
in that region. For each region, the net assessment will deal with:
—National objectives and strategies;
—Military strategies and capabilities (including allied forces and
the ability to project force into the region;
—Alliance cohesiveness and diplomatic support;
—Political influence and covert action capabilities; and
—Economic presence and influence.
As appropriate, the regional net assessment will draw upon the
analyses prepared for the military force posture review of the ability of
the United States and its principal allies and opponents to apply mili-
tary force in the contingencies specified in Part II, paragraph B–2 of this
memo. Regional net assessments (to be chaired by either State or NSC)
will include the following regions:
a. Europe
b. Middle East
c. Africa
d. South Asia
e. East Asia
f. Western Hemisphere
3. Topical Net Assessments. Net assessment will be undertaken to
provide answers to the general questions specified above in Part B–1 for
each of the topics listed below. These net assessments may encompass,
as appropriate, comparisons of the United States and the Soviet Union,
NATO, and Warsaw Pact countries, or other selected groups of countries.
The topical net assessment may also draw on regional net assessments
in putting together the global assessment. The topical net assessments
will include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following topics:
a. Strategic nuclear policy and forces (DOD chaired, to draw on
material developed in the military force posture study);
b. Technology including both military-­relevant technology and
general technological capability (NSC chaired);
c. Economic strategy and capabilities (NSC chaired);
d. Intelligence capabilities (DCI chaired): and
e. Political institutions, leaderships, and national psychology (NSC
chaired).
C. Organization. An SCC Net Assessment Group will be created,
chaired by the NSC. An SCC Working Group for Net Assessment will
be also created. Its chairman will be appointed by the Assistant to the
President for National Security Affairs, and it will have members from

the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the State Department, CIA, the
Joint Staff, OMB, ACDA, and other agencies as the Assistant to the
President may designate. Task forces with members from the appropri-
ate interested agencies will be organized to undertake the topical and
regional net assessments.
D. Schedule. The Working Group should submit to the SCC by
April 1, 1977 an interim report summarizing its work to that date and
outlining the principal conclusions it expects to reach. Each task force
should submit a preliminary version of its final report by May 1, 1977
and the final version on May 15, 1977. The Working Group will submit
its final report to the SCC by May 25, 1977.
IV. THE FINAL REPORT
A summary of the entire report, not to exceed 70 pages, should be
submitted for NSC consideration not later than June 1, 1977; the final
version should be completed by June 15, 1977.
Zbigniew Brzezinski

Appendix A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council3
Washington, undated
NATIONAL OBJECTIVES—Those fundamental aims, goals,
or purposes of a nation—­as opposed to the means for seeking these
ends—­toward which a policy is directed and efforts and resources of
the nation are applied.
Example: The continued freedom and security of our Western Euro-
pean allies.
NATIONAL STRATEGY—The development and use of the polit-
ical, economic, military, and psychological powers of a nation during
peace and war, to secure national objectives.
Example: Pursue a strong NATO alliance. Support economic growth
and strength of individual members, through various economic agree-
ments (investments, tariffs, credits, etc.) and through combined defense
programs and U.S. military force commitments.
MILITARY STRATEGY—A statement of the ways in which we
intend to handle the various combinations of military contingencies
that could arise in the pursuit of our national strategy.
3 Secret.

Example: Maintain conventional forces capability to halt a major
Soviet/Warsaw Pact attack in Central Europe without major loss of ter-
ritory. Maintain nuclear forces sufficient to deter Soviet use of nuclear
weapons and, failing deterrence, guarantee an amount of economic and
military damage to the Soviet Union at least equivalent to that inflicted
on the U.S. and its allies.
FORCE POSTURE—The composition, basing, and readiness for
combat of our military forces.
Example: Seventeen Army divisions, of which five are deployed in
Western Europe, plus 26 tactical air wings, of which six are deployed in
NATO, plus designated naval task force.
6.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
JCS Briefings: NSC Action Implications
This memorandum is a summary of my reaction to the JCS brief-
ing.2 It is not urgent but, depending on your comments, it could lead
to some important reviews. I have tried to reduce my concern to nine
basic points which now follow:
1. Rigidity of SIOP. I was struck by the relative rigidity of the SIOP
options and by the limited choice that they leave you in the event of
a major conflict. You are, in effect, left with the option of initiating a
response which, irrespective of the version, amounts to at least the
first phase of a massive central war. I am also struck that there seems
to be limited integration between the SIOP and the proposed LNO’s
(limited nuclear options) and RNO’s (regional nuclear options). More-
over, unless I misunderstood, retargeting for effective LNO or RNO
Box WI–22, Mahley Box, FRG Nuclear Control. Secret. Sent for information. Carter
initialed the memorandum in the upper right-­hand corner. An unknown hand wrote
2 On February 11, Carter and Brzezinski flew from Andrews Air Force Base to
­Warner-Robins Air Force Base aboard the National Emergency Airborne Command Post
(NEACP); onboard, they participated in a briefing with Brigadier General A.W. ­Atkinson
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily
Diary). No minutes of the briefing were found.

responses would take a certain amount of time. And planning for your
advance understanding and timely selection of LNO’s is non-­existent.3
2. Deterrence and Parity. I am also struck by the fact that the SIOP
provides no explicit option [7 lines not declassified].
[1 paragraph (17 lines) not declassified]
Accordingly, I would favor encouraging the Defense Department
at least to evaluate the strategic consequences of adding such an addi-
tional option to the SIOP.
3. Crisis Communication. I was struck by the question you raised
concerning our ability to make the Soviets understand the more limited
character of an eventual nuclear response by us. An assessment of our
ability to communicate effectively with the Soviets in the context of a
crisis should be undertaken, and consideration should also be given to
the possibility of a broader mutual notification of missile test firings.4
4. Planning Integration and Innovation. I was left with the impres-
sion from the briefing that regional command plans, as well as perhaps
service plans, are not adequately integrated in relationship to possi-
ble crises. For example, the inter-­relationship between our Atlantic
war planning and our Central European war planning seems to me to
be inadequate, on the basis of the evidence provided in the briefing. I
also did not sense that there has been significant adjustment in our war
planning and deployment because of the termination of our involve-
ment in the Southeast Asian conflict.5
6. Length of Decision-Procedures. I wonder whether the short
decision-­time available (only about 5 minutes) in the event of a Soviet
depressed trajectory attack on D.C. would permit you and others to
follow the requisite decision-­procedures.6
7. Deterrence of Lower Strategic Levels. I was impressed by your
emphasis on the need to scale down the deterrence levels in the
US-Soviet strategic relationship. You were very explicit in urging an
aggressive attitude towards this issue, and I feel that a review of the
inter-­relationship between effective deterrence and lower strategic lev-
els should be urgently undertaken.7
3 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this paragraph: “Work on this. Keep me
informed.”
4 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this sentence: “Pursue this.”
5 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this paragraph: “This is true. Set up with
Brown a schedule of 2-­hour briefings for me.”
6 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this sentence: “Alternative?”

8. Impact of New Weaponry. You also stressed the need for a long-­
term assessment of defense expenditures, and particularly of the trade-­
offs between new weapons and their possible consequences on the
strategic as well as conventional US-Soviet equation.8
The above are simply my initial reactions. Perhaps you could indicate
on the margins whether you wish me to pursue any of them in a more system-
atic fashion. I would then propose NSC initiatives for your approval.
9. Attached you will find additional material which was left out of
the JCS briefing.9 It was forwarded to you by Harold Brown.
7 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this paragraph: “ok. An early brief analysis
is needed—(2 or 3 days).”
8 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this sentence: “Proceed—CM’s, B1,
MX, etc.”
9 Not attached.
7.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Assistant
for Domestic Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to
President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
A National Integrated Telecommunications Protection Policy2
As you know, the Soviets are using their Embassy and other instal-
lations in Washington, New York and San Francisco, and Cuba to con-
duct an extensive and growing microwave intercept program targeted
against US government agencies, government defense contractors, and
US business and industry. The information collected by this intercept
program is exploited by the Soviets to gain insight into critical US
­Government developments in military weapons, intelligence systems
2 For the Ford administration’s approach to telecommunications security, see Foreign

and proprietary military technology as well as to exploit the US in
international trade, commodity and monetary transactions.
Some counter actions have been underway for some time. The
Ford Administration took action which denied the Soviets access to the
communications of some government agencies, but nothing was done
about the private sector where the Soviets are increasingly focusing
their intercepts.
As a result you are faced with addressing politically sensitive
and potentially long-­term decisions on telecommunications protec-
tion efforts. These decisions, coupled with previous actions taken and
actions currently underway, have significant ramifications on the future
course of (1) protecting the privacy of US citizens, business and indus-
try; (2) denying sensitive national security information to the Soviet
Union; (3) nonetheless, maintaining US intelligence gathering efforts,
particularly SIGINT efforts; (4) our diplomatic relations; (5) accelerat-
ing US plans for protecting up and down link satellite transmissions as
well as mobile radio-­telecommunications systems and networks.
A national telecommunications protection policy is needed. Insofar
as current leadership, guidance and direction are concerned, the entire
program is at an impasse. Fractious, piecemeal ongoing actions con-
tinue out of their own inertia. The resolution of who’s responsible for
deciding those issues is as profound as deciding the issues themselves.
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve and sign the PRM at Tab A3 which directs devel-
opment of an integrated National Telecommunications Protection
Policy and a framework for its implementation under the SCC. (It has
been reviewed at the senior working level within the Executive Office,
within the Intelligence Community, including Stan Turner personally,
and at the State Department.)4
4 Carter approved this recommendation and initialed below it.

8.
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–221
Washington, March 24, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Attorney General
The Director, Office of Telecommunications Policy
The Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs and Policy
The Director-­designate, Office of Science and Technology Policy
ALSO
The Secretary of Commerce
The Chairman, Federal Communications Commission
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
SUBJECT
A National Integrated Telecommunications Protection Policy (U)
I am concerned over the Soviet Union’s clandestine intercept activ-
ities of our telecommunications systems and the lack of a well defined
protection policy to deal with these activities in a comprehensive man-
ner. I, therefore, direct that the NSC Special Coordination Committee
undertake a thorough review of prior and contemplated U.S. counter-
actions to the Soviet activities, and to examine all the legal, diplomatic
and technology issues involved.
1. A subcommittee of the SCC under the chairmanship of the Direc-
tor, Office of Telecommunications Policy shall:
—Consider for disposition the segments of NSDM 266,2 “Improved
Security of Telecommunications,” NSDM 296,3 “Improved Communi-
cations Security,” NSDM 296 Follow-Up, “Telephone Security” and
NSDM 338,4 “Further Improvements in Telecommunications Security.”
Document 176.
Document 177.
Document 180.

—Review the unimplemented NSDM 346,5 “Security of U.S. Tele-
communications” within the scope and framework of this PRM.
—Develop an integrated National Telecommunications Protec-
tion Policy and propose the necessary governmental framework for its
implementation.
The foregoing should include, but not be limited to considerations
of existing law, diplomatic factors, economics, technology social impact,
executive-­legislative relations, and government-­industry relations.
2. The Secretary of State and Director of Central Intelligence should
consider the diplomatic and Soviet reaction factors including:
—Soviet reactions to the various options of the OTP Plan or if the
U.S. were to adopt a policy of retaliation in kind through the use of such
techniques as “jamming.”
—U.S. denial of further Soviet requests to purchase additional U.S.
property e.g., the Valeria Estate, the Mountain View apartment com-
plex, etc.
3. The Secretary of Defense shall review the technology under
research and development, in testing or procurement. Protected Radio
Modulation for terrestrial microwave, methods for satellite link protec-
tion and critical mobile radio-­telephone systems shall be included as
well as:
—A complete review of the entire DUCKPINS project.
—Existing or potential legal, management or budgetary problems
with the foregoing.
—Considerations of Soviet denial of U.S. intelligence “windows”
in retaliation to U.S. countermeasures.
4. The Attorney General shall review Executive and Legislative
authority, existing laws and National Security Council Directives
including:
—The Justice Department’s anti-­trust suit against AT&T.
—The government’s exclusionary dealings with AT&T in planning
and technology development.
—Legal ramifications of continuing DUCKPINS and the MCI
­service offerings.
Recommendations for implementing a countermeasure program
must include considerations for an implementing or program manager.
The derived assessments, conclusions, recommendations and policy
should include alternative options for dealing with the issues by the
SCC, which shall evaluate these and make recommendations to me.
Until such time the findings and recommendations are reviewed and
Document 182.

acted upon by the Special Coordination Committee, the Director, OTP
will be the Executive Branch’s focal point for all telecommunications
protection and related programs either recommended or ongoing. New
initiatives and plans will be submitted to the Director, OTP for consid-
eration as they may affect or interrelate with the objectives of this PRM.
The review and recommendations should be completed by July
Jimmy Carter
9.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 31, 1977
SUBJECT
Our Nuclear War Doctrine: Limited Nuclear Options and Regional Nuclear Options
Our investigation of the White House Emergency Procedures for
short-­warning nuclear attack has thrown up the question of our nuclear
war doctrine. The SIOP, as you know, offers retaliatory options short of
a full response, but they remain massive in both direct and collateral
damage. NSDM 242, issued in January 1974,2 prescribed new guid-
ance for nuclear weapons employment—­limited nuclear targeting—­
and led to considerable controversy over the design of “limited nuclear
options” (LNOs). In principle, the new doctrine was to provide the Pres-
ident with options short of all-­out nuclear war in crises. In practice it
produced several problems and no solutions:
—Policy guidance justifying planning for each LNO: The rationale for
particular LNOs has yet to be satisfactorily developed. Technically, an
LNO is easy to design, but choosing purposes for specific LNOs is not.
Progress in this area has apparently been nil although a few LNOs have
received JCS approval.
Box 47, Nuclear War Doctrine: Limited Nuclear Options (LNO) and Regional Nuclear
the top of the memorandum.
Document 31.

—Limited nuclear war fighting procedures: How and from where does
the President conduct such a war? From the White House? The NEACP?
The Pentagon? The underground alternate National Command Center?
—Coordination of intelligence and operations: Does the DCI manage
post-­strike assessment and other intelligence for the National Military
Command Center’s conduct of limited nuclear operations? How? With
whose assets? What command authority?
—Vulnerability of the National Command Authority: The Blue Ribbon
Defense Panel of 19703 presented a disturbing evaluation of the surviv-
ability of our command and control. The National Command Authority
and political succession were among the weaker links. The situation
today is not appreciably different.
In view of these issues, I suggest that you ask the Secretary of
Defense and the Chairman, JCS, to:
a. Explain what they understand as our present nuclear war doc-
trine. They should comment on the advisability of retaining or cancel-
ling NSDM 242 and limited nuclear options.
b. Explain the procedures they envisage for actually conducting a
nuclear war, limited or total, beyond the initial attack phase.
c. Set forth the objectives we would hope to achieve through LNO’s
and the system we have for thinking through the political and military
implications for executing specific LNO’s.4
4 Beneath this point, Brzezinski wrote: “If approved, I will prepare an appropriate
memorandum to SecDef. ZB.” Brzezinski then wrote three options: “Approve”; “Disap-
prove”; and “Comment.” Carter checked the “Approve” option and initialed the bottom
of the memorandum. He also wrote “draft” after the word “appropriate” in Brzezinski’s
handwritten sentence.
10.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, March 31, 1977
The President has directed me to ask you and, to the extent appro-
priate, the Chairman of the JCS, to provide:
Box 47, Nuclear War Doctrine: Limited Nuclear Options (LNO) and Regional Nuclear
randum and wrote “ok.”

(a) A succinct statement of our present nuclear war doctrine. In so
doing, you should comment on the advisability of retaining or cancel-
ling NSDM 242 and limited nuclear options.
(b) A brief statement of the procedures for actually conducting
a nuclear war, limited or total, beyond the initial phase. This should
include an indication of the command procedures for the conduct of
such a war, including such operational aspects as the location and pro-
cedures for effective exercise of control. In addition, please provide
your assessment of the survivability of our command and control sys-
tems. The Blue Ribbon Defense Panel of 19702 reached some disturbing
conclusions regarding this matter.
(c) A short statement of the basic objectives to be achieved through
our various LNO options, and some indication of the assumptions,
both political and military, regarding the specific LNOs.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
11.
Interim Report Prepared in the Ad Hoc Interagency Net
Assessment Group1
Washington, April 1, 1977
PRM/NSC–10
COMPREHENSIVE NET ASSESSMENT
I. INTRODUCTION
PRM/NSC–10 directs that a “comprehensive examination be made
of overall U.S. national strategy and capabilities.” The net assessment
conducted by the Special Coordinating Committee is specifically asked
to “evaluate the objectives and national strategies that may be pursued
by our principal potential adversaries and examine the alternative
national objectives and strategies appropriate to the United States.”
In keeping with this mandate, the main body of this Interim Report is
designed:
to Brzezinski under a covering memorandum of April 1.

(1) to outline the context of this net assessment and strategic review;
(2) to elaborate some of the general issues with which the net
assessment is concerned; and
(3) to present some considerations involved in formulating national
strategy.
Attached to the main body of the report are:
(1) a brief summary of the work completed to date (Tab A);
(2) an outline of the organization of the net assessment (Tab B);
II. THE CONTEXT OF THIS REVIEW
Every eight years the advent of a new Administration provides the
United States with the opportunity to reconsider its national strategy
and goals in relation to those of its potential opponents. The events of
the past eight years—­in the United States, with our opponents, and in
the world at large—­lend a peculiar urgency to the reconsideration this
year.
This reconsideration is the latest in a series of efforts to formulate
comprehensive national strategies which include:
—NSC 68, prepared in 1950, in the wake of the Soviet nuclear
explosion and the Communist conquest of China, which recommended
a major U.S. political economic, and military effort to combat commu-
nist expansion, including a tripling of military expenditures;4
outlined the New Look with its stress on nuclear weapons (strategic
and tactical), massive retaliation, and cut-­backs in conventional forces
to insure U.S. ability to maintain an adequate defense for “the long
haul;”5
—­the Kennedy Administration reassessment of strategy in 1961–
62, which led to a rapid build-­up of the ICBM force and a substantial
expansion of U.S. general purpose forces, reflected in the concepts of
“flexible response” and “mutual assured destruction;”6
2 Attached but not printed. See Document 4.
3 Attached but not printed.
4 See Foreign Relations, 1950, vol. I, National Security Affairs; Foreign Economic
­Policy, p. 234.
6 Upon becoming Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the
Department of State in November 1961, Walt W. Rostow supervised the preparation
of a series of draft studies, all entitled “Basic National Security Policy.” A February 7,
1962, draft was circulated within the Department of State only. (Department of State, S/P

—NSSM 3, in the first year of the Nixon Administration, which,
while not challenging the basic approach of the Kennedy and Johnson
Administration, shifted the planning assumption from a “2½ war” to a
“1½ war” strategy;7
—NSSM 246, in which the Ford Administration, in its last months,
provided useful analysis but no fundamentally new conclusions with
respect to strategy.8
The strategic reviews of the last two Administrations focused
almost entirely on military strategy and force posture. Yet the world
has changed greatly since the early 1960s and the strategic assumptions
and concepts of that decade are not necessarily relevant for this one.
The times now require a broader reconsideration of national strategy,
comparable to that undertaken in NSC 68, involving political, eco-
nomic, technological, and diplomatic factors as well as military ones,
and a new effort to define our overall national goals in relation to our
potential opponents.
This reformulation of US strategy thus proceeds in the context
of many constraining parameters that were largely absent during the
Cold War of the 1950s and 1960s:
(1) The relationship with our potential adversaries is now not sim-
ply competitive but also in part cooperative.
(2) The concerns of U.S. foreign policy are now more diverse and
complex, involving not simply issues of security vis-­a-­vis the “Soviet
threat,” but also questions of North-South relations, finance, trade and
investment, nuclear proliferation and arms sales, global resources, and
human rights.
(3) The relative capabilities of the U.S. compared to those of other
states—­allies and neutrals, as well as adversaries—­have declined sig-
nificantly from the days of overwhelming U.S. predominance in the
1940s and 1950s.
(4) The domestic claims on public resources are far greater, abso-
lutely and proportionately, than they were before the mid-1960s.
Now, as in the past, the central threat to U.S. national security
comes from the Soviet Union. Aspects of that threat, however, have
changed. In the 1940s and 1950s, the Soviet Union was seen as the cen-
ter of a hemispheric bloc reaching from the Elbe to the Mekong and also
as the center of a global network of communist parties dependent upon
Moscow for direction and support. Since this early postwar period, sig-
nificant changes have occurred in the distribution of power and in the
Document 2.
Document 102.

alignments of power. The Sino-Soviet split has seriously weakened the
Soviet alliance system. In part as a result of this, Soviet leadership of
the worldwide communist movement is no longer unchallenged. For
the United States, China remains in one sense a potential opponent,
but in another sense parallel interests have made it almost a de facto
ally. China’s low capabilities, however, limit its role in either respect.
The broader diffusion of power is reflected in the ability of other coun-
tries or groups of countries to act independently on the world scene. In
most cases, such as in the Group of 77, these blocs may raise significant
questions of economic policy, but thus far they have lacked the coher-
ence and the resources directly to challenge American security inter-
ests. The growing western dependence on imported oil, particularly
from the Middle East, has, however, increased the vulnerability of the
U.S. and its principal allies to potential adversaries, such as OAPEC,
which on one occasion demonstrated that they did have the coherence
and the resources to impose significant costs on the U.S. and its allies.
In addition, recurring secondary threats, such as terrorism, have arisen.
Nonetheless, the central but not exclusive focus for this reconsideration
of strategy, as for its predecessors, must be U.S. relations with the Soviet
Union.
Significant changes have taken place in those relations in the past
decade. On the one hand, a relaxation in the tension which character-
ized that relationship in the 1950s and 1960s has made it possible to dis-
cuss and, in some cases, reach understandings with the Soviet Union
on matters of mutual concern, among which the SALT agreements are
clearly of central importance. On the other hand, the past eight years
have also seen the steady growth of Soviet military power. Since the
mid-1960s the USSR has moved from a position of marked inferiority
in nuclear capabilities to one of rough equivalence with the United
States. Depending on the outcome of SALT negotiations and American
decisions on strategy and procurement, the Soviets have the poten-
tial to increase and improve their nuclear forces to the point where
they could exceed the quantity, quality, and net destructive power of
American forces. Whether or not such a measure of superiority could
be exploited usefully in war or in diplomatic confrontation is debat-
able; equally uncertain—­and more significant—­is whether the Sovi-
ets, our allies, other nations, and ourselves will believe that it could
be so exploited. In recent years, the Soviet Union has also strength-
ened, modernized, and enhanced the readiness of its forces in Eastern
Europe. At the same time, it dramatically increased its deployments in
the Far East and, in effect, prepared for its own “2-­war” contingency.
The Soviet navy has matured from a weak coastal defense force into
a modern global maritime power, increasingly capable of threatening

U.S. and allied sealines, challenging U.S. naval forces in the Mediterra-
nean, and gradually achieving the capability to project military power
abroad.
These changes in the Soviet-American military relationship
come at a time of major new uncertainties in international political
alignments. Significant changes could occur in the European balance,
given the potential impact of Eurocommunism, of political unrest in
Portugal, Spain or post-Tito Yugoslavia, and of the difficulties in form-
ing effective governing majorities in democratic states. Africa faces
the challenge of several new self-­styled Marxist-­Leninist regimes,
the threat of racial conflict in Southern Africa, and the appearance of
secessionist, revolutionary, and interventionist forces. Regional con-
flicts continue in much of Africa, the Middle East, South and South-
east Asia, and trends toward political fragmentation exist throughout
the world. These instabilities could provide new opportunities for
influence for a stronger Soviet Union. Yet the Soviet leadership also
faces major domestic constraints—­persistent economic problems,
nationality discontent, and shifting demographic trends, which
should limit both their ability to exploit their increased strength, and
their inclination to become directly involved in new, costly foreign
adventures.
III. MAJOR ISSUES IN THE NET ASSESSMENT
In accordance with the Terms of Reference, the overall net assess-
ment will be broken down into a number of regional and topical net
assessments. Cutting across these efforts, however, are a number of
general issues which the overall assessment, as well as the regional
and topical assessments, must consider. Five of these issues are iden-
tified here.
1. The Balance of Influence. As indicated above, the strength and the
reach of Soviet power have increased significantly. To what extent does
this increase in the resources of power lead to expanded political influ-
ence? The net assessment will consider:
(1) Trends in the expansion and contraction in Soviet and ­American
influence abroad and the costs and benefits of these changes to both the
USSR and the U.S.
(2) Regional priorities and targets. What is the relation between
U.S. commitment or neglect and the Soviet propensity to enter a region?
In which regions is the USSR likely to make the greatest gains and to
suffer the greatest losses?
(3) The probable extent, timing, and strength of Soviet expansion.
Is the threat greatest in the long or short term? Is there likely to be a
period of “maximum danger” or a period of “maximum opportunity”
in the next five to ten years?

(4) Factors that could cause the contraction of Soviet influence. Will
Soviet presence provoke a backlash in the areas that they penetrate?
What impact would alternative U.S. responses have?
(5) Ways in which Soviet military power determines or facilitates
their involvement and influence abroad.
(6) Competing Soviet interests such as the stake in detente or non-­
military economic goals. How might these constrain Soviet expansive
tendencies?
2. National Psychology and Frames of Reference. Soviet leaders do not
necessarily perceive international conflict, negotiation, and accommo-
dation in the same way as Western leaders. Both Marxist-Leninist ide-
ology and the historic Russian legacy influence the thinking of Soviet
policy makers. These influences contrast markedly with traditional lib-
eral democratic ways of looking at the world. They have implications
which affect, among other things, the prospects of success in negotia-
tions. Relevant issues include:
(1) Soviet doctrine for nuclear and conventional war. How far do
their categories of analysis and measures of significance correspond
with those of the U.S. and its allies?
(2) Soviet perception of the strategic balance, Western posture and
intentions, and judgments of the trends. How can we influence these?
In what respects are their concepts determined by the conflict with
China?
(3) Soviet views of the role of force in current and future circum-
stances, their understanding of the concepts of “parity” and “superior-
ity,” and the value they place on them. How do their concepts compare
with those of American leaders?
(4) Soviet views on the distinction between “internal affairs” and
international relations.
(5) The adequacy of our evidence on Soviet attitudes. How well
do we know what they think, and what are the consequences of
uncertainty?
(6) Conditions under which the use of force, or the threat to use
force—­at nuclear, conventional, and diplomatic levels—­will become
more or less appealing to the USSR’s leadership.
3. Potential Threats. The growth in Soviet power poses increased
military threats to the U.S. and its allies in the event of war, could raise
problems for the stability of deterrence, and provides a firmer basis on
which the USSR could attempt to exert political leverage in a diplo-
matic crisis. In addition, there are economic threats, such as might stem
from dependence on imported oil. Among the most salient threats are:
(1) Strategic attack. The central threat depends on the present
strategic balance, actual and perceived changes in the balance, and

prospects for change in Soviet and American nuclear doctrine. What
is the significance, both to the U.S. and USSR, of asymmetries in force
structure? What responses would the USSR probably make to alterna-
tive U.S. postures?
(2) Political uses of strategic forces in diplomatic confrontations.
In what ways and in what types of crises might the Soviets attempt to
exact leverage from nuclear capabilities or threats?
(3) Military and political uses of conventional forces, in the context
of strategic parity, in regions where the USSR or the PRC can deploy
substantial conventional power either directly or through proxies.
(4) Covert operations. What is their scale and effectiveness? Where
are the Soviets likely to be most active?
(5) Economic threats. To what extent will the U.S. and its allies be
vulnerable to acts of “economic warfare,” such as resource embargoes,
boycotts, debt leverage?
4. Regional Goals and Global Competition. The U.S. has a global inter-
est in the balance of power with the Soviet Union. It also has other
interests specific to countries and regions, such as political stability,
economic development, and amicable diplomatic relations. In different
regions these two sets of interests may either be complementary, contra-
dictory, or unrelated. To assess the interaction of these aims on general
strategies and specific policies, the regional net assessments consider:
(1) Which local goals are caused by global competition with the
USSR; which need to be modified by global strategic considerations;
which are irrelevant to US-Soviet competition?
(2) In which regions and in what dimensions—­political, military,
economic, and diplomatic—­is it more and less important to counter
Soviet influence?
(3) The impact of specific U.S. policies such as those on human
rights, arms transfers, and nuclear proliferation on the Soviet-­American
interaction at the regional level.
(4) Costs and benefits with respect to the global balance of alterna-
tive American options for involvement in regional conflicts. For exam-
ple, what are the costs and benefits of U.S. alignment with one side
(blacks in Southern Africa); diplomatic involvement with both sides
(Middle East); military supply to neither side (South Asia), one side
(Zaire v. Angola), or both sides (Greece-Turkey and Middle East)?
5. Consequences of Increasing Interaction. As the cooperative element
in US–USSR relations has become more significant in recent years, it is
particularly important to assess the extent to which increased economic
interaction may be desirable, and the ways in which it would affect the
competitive aspects of American-Soviet relations. Trade, credits, and

technology transfer are salient issues. Topical net assessments address
the following questions, among others:
(1) Overall costs and benefits, short and long term, of increased
interaction. Will more transactions reduce conflict and aggressiveness,
or sell the Soviets the rope with which to hang us, or have no effect
at all? How would greater interdependence affect the Soviet system?
Should the U.S. government encourage, subsidize, ignore, or discour-
age certain types of interchange?
(2) Types of exchanges most and least advantageous to the U.S.
Which transactions have highly uncertain outcomes; how predictable
are the results of increased trade? Which areas of exchange should, in
these terms, be expanded or contracted?
(3) Criteria for evaluating changes of policy, especially in regard to
issues such as computer technology, food sales, and production licens-
ing and investment in the USSR or Eastern Europe.
(4) Mechanisms for control. How effective are current ones such as
COCOM? Are additional mechanisms needed?
(5) How should the U.S. government deal with the private sector in
regard to issues such as general or selective export policies and banking
and credit policy controls?
6. Transformation of alliances. Major changes appear to be underway
in the East-West alliance systems. Issues of relevance for the future are:
(1) What are the trends in the transformation of Soviet and Ameri-
can alliances and the costs and benefits of these for relative Soviet and
American power?
(2) What impact do these changes have on Soviet and American
war-­fighting capabilities, especially a conflict limited to Central Europe?
(3) Which Soviet strategies might lead to the accelerated loosening
of Western alliances? What would be the risks/benefits of a parallel
American effort in Eastern Europe?
(4) Which factors, domestic or international, might lead to a tight-
ening of alliances in the West as well as the East?
(5) How would broadened alliance membership or changes in the
central alliance institutions affect the central US-Soviet relationship?
(6) To what extent will conflicting economic interests and national-
ist demands within both alliances affect their cohesiveness for security
purposes?
IV. REQUIREMENTS FOR NATIONAL STRATEGY
The fundamental purposes of the United States are spelled out in
the Declaration of the Independence and in the Preamble to the Consti-
tution. A basic national strategy delineates the ways of realizing those
purposes in the face of foreign threats and hostility. It would be pre-
mature at this point to present specific strategies before the task force

analyses that should underpin them have been completed. Any realistic
national strategy, however, must consider how to mix the following ele-
ments of policy:
1. Cooperation and Competition. A national strategy must set forth
the extent to which the United States will attempt to achieve its objec-
tives through cooperative arrangements (for example, arms control,
increased trade) with its potential adversaries, and to what extent it
will adopt a competitive posture (weapons buildup, trade restrictions).
2. Power and Values. National security requires maintenance of a
balance of power, but national purpose requires the promotion of
American values. A national strategy must provide an effective combi-
nation of both these considerations.
3. Military, Economic, and Political Instruments. A national strategy
should provide for varying emphases on these three instruments.
4. Structure and Flexibility. A national strategy requires a general
framework to provide structure and coherence, but it should also
allow policy to evolve in phases and permit flexible adaptation to new
contingencies.
5. Self-Reliance and Cooperation with Allies. Certain goals require
strong unilateral commitments and capabilities, and others require mul-
tilateral undertakings and collective efforts with our allies. A national
strategy must encompass both of these needs.

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the Ad Hoc Interagency Net Assessment
Group9
Washington, March 28, 1977
PRM/NSC–10
COMPREHENSIVE NET ASSESSMENT
SUMMARY OF WORK TO DATE
1. The Presidential Review Memorandum itself was prepared, cir-
culated among the interested agencies, revised, and approved by the
President on February 18th. Terms of Reference was drafted, circulated,
revised, and approved by the Assistant to the President for National
Security Affairs on March 10.
2. A Net Assessment Group was created composed of senior offi-
cials from the interested agencies. This group met on March 11th and
discussed the major cross-­cutting substantive issues which will be con-
sidered in the context of the net assessment.
3. A Net Assessment Working Group was created, which at its three
and procedures of the assessment, task force terms of reference, and the
draft interim report.
4. Eleven regional and topical task forces have been organized as
follows:
(1) Europe
(2) Middle East
(3) South Asia
(4) Africa
(5) East Asia
(6) Western Hemisphere
(7) Strategic nuclear policy
and forces
(8) Technology
(9) Economic strategy and
capabilities
(10) Intelligence (including
covert action)
(11) Political institutions,
leadership and national
psychology
Chairmen and associate chairmen have been appointed, and the
membership constituted of individuals nominated by the interested
agencies. All the task forces have formulated terms of reference to
guide them in the preparation of their reports due May 15th. In almost
all cases, work has started on the drafting of the papers which will be
included in these reports.
5. A four-­person central staff at the NSC has been created to direct
and coordinate the activities of the net assessment and to draft the over-
all report. Thirteen other members of the NSC staff are participating in
the assessment in one capacity or another.
6. Extensive discussions and consultations have been held with
officials in State, Defense, the intelligence community, and elsewhere
on the substantive issues and methodologies to be employed in the net
assessment. The DOD Office of Net Assessment has been particularly
helpful in this connection.
7. Efforts have been made to maintain close liaison with the Mili-
tary Force Posture portion of the PRM/NSC–10 review. Several people
are involved in both aspects of the review, and persons connected with
the net assessment have taken advantage of the opportunity to sit in on
meetings of Force Posture groups.

Tab B

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council10
Washington, undated
PRM/NSC–10
COMPREHENSIVE NET ASSESSMENT
ORGANIZATION
I. NSC CENTRAL STAFF
Samuel P. Huntington
William Odom
Richard Betts
Catherine Kelleher
II. NET ASSESSMENT GROUP
Zbigniew Brzezinski, NSC, Chairman
David Aaron, NSC
Anthony Lake, State/SP
Bowman Cutter, OMB
Richard Lehman, IC
Leslie Gelb, State/PM
William Y. Smith, JCS
Samuel P. Huntington, NSC
Sayre Stevens, IC
David McGiffert, OSD
Paul Warnke, ACDA
III. NET ASSESSMENT WORKING GROUP
Samuel P. Huntington, NSC, Chairman
Richard Anson, JCS
Andrew Marshall, OSD
Reginald Bartholomew,
State/PM
William Odom, NSC
Robert Behr, ACDA
Edward Sanders, OMB
Richard Betts, NSC
James M. Thompson, OSD
Leslie Brown, State/PM
Victor Utgoff, OSD
Edward Jayne, NSC
John Whitman, IC
Jerome H. Kahan, State/SP
IV. TASK FORCE CHAIRMEN AND ASSOCIATE CHAIRMEN
Chairman
Associate Chairman
Europe:
Robert Hunter, NSC
Warren Zimmerman,
State/EUR
Middle East:
Michael Sterner,
State/NEA
William Quandt, NSC
South Asia:
Adolph Dubs,
State/NEA
Thomas Thornton,
NSC
Africa:
William Lewis,
State/AF
Thomas Thornton,
NSC
East Asia:
Robert Miller,
State/EA
Michael Armacost,
NSC
Western Hemisphere:
William Luers,
State/ARA
Robert Pastor, NSC
Strategic Nuclear
Policy and Forces:
Walter Slocombe,
OSD
Roger Molander,
NSC
Technology:
Jack Ruina, OSTP
Charles Stebbins,
NSC
Economic Strategy
and Capabilities:
David Evans, CIEP
Robert Hormats,
NSC
Intelligence
Capabilities:
[2 names not
declassified]
Paul Henze, NSC
Political Institutions,
Leadership and
National
Psychology:
William Odom, NSC
John Whitman, IC
12.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
New Technologies
Attached is a memorandum from the Secretary of Defense which
summarizes some recent, important technological advances being
for information. Printed from an uninitialed copy. Stebbins and Utgoff sent the memo-
randum to Brzezinski for his signature under cover of an April 11 memorandum. (Ibid.)

sponsored by ARPA, the Advanced Research Projects Agency.2 Six areas
are discussed: space warfare and surveillance, anti-­submarine warfare,
armored and air vehicles, and C3 (command, control and communica-
tions). All six represent very interesting technological advances; how-
ever, two—­space warfare and air vehicles—­represent technologies with
truly far-­reaching policy planning and force structuring implications:
Space Warfare: ARPA is to demonstrate in 1980 a very high-­power
laser which could be transported into space and used as an anti-­satellite
(ASAT) system. Impact: The US has no effective ASAT system at pres-
ent. ARPA estimates that two of these high-­power lasers, mounted in
maneuverable satellites, could destroy the entire Soviet satellite popu-
lation in less than 24 hours. Such a device, in orbit, would apparently
not violate the 1967 space treaty which bans placing weapons of mass
destruction in space.
Air Vehicles (sensitive): This fall, ARPA plans to fly an advanced
design, relatively high performance aircraft which is essentially invis-
ible to all known and projected radar systems and which cannot be
tracked by heat-­seeking missiles. Impact: Potentially enormous, both
tactically and strategically. ARPA envisions using the aircraft in the bat-
tlefield area either to “roll back” enemy surface-­to-­air missile (SAM)
launch systems or to act as “spotter” aircraft to direct fire against
ground targets. Other possible applications might be in development of
a new generation of “spy” aircraft or, more importantly, in substantially
improving cruise missile penetrability against highly defended targets.
This latter application could, for example, have a substantial bearing on
future decisions regarding the B–1. (We are seeking additional, detailed
technical data and will report our findings shortly.)
2 Attached but not printed is an April 1 memorandum to Carter from Brown, under
which he forwarded a March 7 memorandum from the Defense Advanced Research Proj-
ect Agency on “Some Current Technological Initiatives and their Related Mission Oppor-
tunities for the 1980s.”

13.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the Chairman of the Special Coordination Committee
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Soviet ICBMs with MIRVs
1. At the SCC meeting on 7 April the question was raised whether
the Soviets would exceed a US-­proposed SALT limitation of 550
launchers of MIRVed ICBMs in the next few months.2 The answer to
the question depends on what rules for counting launchers as MIRVed
are agreed between the two sides.
2. Judging by the recent pace of the Soviet program, the number
of ICBM launchers actually equipped with MIRVed missiles is likely
to grow fairly slowly, in part because the Soviets have developed and
are probably deploying both MIRVed and single-RV versions of their
new generation ICBMs. [3 lines not declassified]. As you know, the US
has proposed counting rules [less than 1 line not declassified]. These rules
would credit as MIRVed all boosters and launchers of types which have
been associated with MIRVs in testing or deployment. The US has also
proposed that ICBM launchers be counted as MIRVed when conversion
is in initial stages.
3. Our current estimate of Soviet MIRVed ICBM deployment this
year, together with the number of launchers which would be credited
with MIRVed missiles under the US proposals, is summarized in the
attached table.3 The table shows that we expect the number of launch-
ers actually equipped with MIRVed ICBMs to remain well short of 550
through 1977. However, under the combination of US proposals (i.e.,
the launcher and booster type counting rules plus the proposal to count
launchers under conversion) the Soviet ICBM launchers credited as
MIRVed would exceed 550 by October 1977. With the counting rules
alone, the number would remain below 550 through the year, although
it would be considerably larger than the probable actual Soviet total.
Stansfield Turner
Admiral, U.S. Navy
members.
2 For Brzezinski’s undated memorandum to Carter summarizing this meeting, see
3 Attached but not printed.

14.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 25, 1977
SUBJECT
Single Integrated Operational Plan (SIOP) Targeting Philosophy
This memorandum responds to your question2 regarding Soviet
fatalities if population were attacked directly in the SIOP rather than
following current policy, which targets industry. The estimates pro-
vided are the result of manual calculations using data bases which were
not designed to allow precise computation of the results of a popula-
tion attack.
In the most recent dynamic Soviet/U.S. wargame simulation, the
largest option in the current SIOP ([less than 1 line not declassified]—­
primarily an industrial targeting plan) is estimated to produce Soviet
estimated effects from fallout). If we were to directly target Soviet popu-
lation with today’s SIOP weapons, including the POSEIDON weapons
committed to SACEUR and several hundred weapons now targeted on
military objectives, the estimated fatalities would increase to about 44
percent (115M).
The above estimates do not reflect the range of uncertainty about
fallout-­related fatalities nor do they consider the possible effects of
varying blast and fallout shelter postures. Preliminary analysis has
indicated that direct population attacks are less sensitive to assumed
population sheltering postures than are economic attacks. However,
available intelligence does not permit high confidence analysis in this
area.
Harold Brown
2 Not further identified.

15.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 2, 1977
SUBJECT
Sea-Launched Cruise Missiles
The Navy has prepared a briefing on the Tomahawk—­our sea-­
launched cruise missile. Harold Brown forwarded a copy of the brief-
ing to me noting that the flight profiles and the test program indicate
many important facts about the nature and verifiability of cruise mis-
siles that have not received enough attention to date. As you know, the
Tomahawk is designed to fit a standard submarine torpedo tube, but it
is also capable of being launched from a variety of platforms (see Tab
A).2 A few highlights from the briefing follow:
—At Tab B3 is a graph depicting comparative cruise missile devel-
opment for the US and the Soviet Union. Cruise missiles, by the way, go
back to the German V–1 “buzz bomb”.
—The Navy’s approach to ensure Tomahawk’s ability to penetrate
enemy defenses was to make it fly as low as possible and to reduce its
visibility to enemy radars, visual and infra-­red detection devices. Here
are a few results from the Navy’s test program:
• The Tomahawk has flown in actual flight at less than [less than
1 line not declassified] above the terrain.
• Ground observations on the flight path were unable to see the
missile until about 10 seconds before overflight. In addition, neither the
ground nor air observers at the target could detect exhaust smoke from
the missile.
• The ability of the Tomahawk’s anti-­ship missile to attack an over-­
the-­horizon target has been successfully demonstrated (Tab C).4
• An SSN in the Mediterranean simulated Tomahawk’s attacks
against Soviet ships (Tab D).5 The tests were successful.
• The Tomahawk land-­attack missile has demonstrated a range
capability in excess of [less than 1 line not declassified].
2 Attached but not printed.
3 Attached but not printed.
4 Attached but not printed.
5 Attached but not printed.

—According to the Navy, the principle threats to the Tomahawk
missile in the early 1980s will be advanced low-­altitude SAMs and
look-­down, shoot-­down interceptors. Results of the Navy’s survivabil-
ity study based on these threats are found at Tab E.6 Harold Brown sug-
gests we should reserve judgment on the vulnerability question since it
depends in detail on defenses.
6 Attached but not printed.
16.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, May 19, 1977
SUBJECT
Meeting on the Force Posture Study (PRM/NSC–10) (C)
(S) This memorandum is for your information and provides a
brief description of the work to date in the force posture part of PRM/
NSC–10.
(S) The basic US national security objective is to preserve the US
as a free nation, maintaining the nation’s economic, institutional and
social well-­being. Fundamentally, the US must be able to deter war or,
should it occur, terminate it favorably in terms of that objective. This
requires deterring, in conjunction with our NATO Allies, a Warsaw
Pact attack or coercion in Europe; maintaining a balance of power in
Asia among the US, China, Japan and the Soviet Union; in other areas,
supporting the integrity of Allies, ensuring freedom of movement in
international seas and air space, and promoting access to raw materials
and markets. Agreement on these general objectives, however, does not
translate directly into agreement as to what US military strategy would
best advance those objectives or what mix of forces best supports such
a strategy.
(S) The purpose of the final PRM–10 report will be to highlight
­critical issues and to define alternative military strategies and force
postures to assist you in the formulation of policies to guide the Depart-
ment of Defense in developing its future programs and establishing a
peacetime posture.
(S) Shaping an overall military strategy requires judgments about
how the world is evolving politically, economically and technologically.
The other part of PRM–10 (Net Assessment) is addressing this broad
setting: the sources, nature and severity of threats; the political and eco-
nomic health of the West; the degree and forms of competition with the
Soviet Union; and the extent of instability in the Third World.
(C) Our approach to formulating alternative integrated military
strategies (AIMS) is through substrategy building blocks that are
interest-­oriented, focusing on what the US wants to achieve as well as
the threats to that achievement. Five analytical areas were defined:
TAB A: NATO-Warsaw Pact Conflict in Europe
TAB B: Non-European Operations During a NATO–WP War in
Europe
TAB C: East Asia
TAB D: Peacekeeping Activities and Potential Local Wars
TAB E: US–USSR Homelands Nuclear Conflict2
(C) Military substrategies were chosen to provide a range of alter-
natives. Each needs to be considered as an individual, potential element
in the design of overall US military strategies. The areas were chosen as
sufficiently distinguishable to be analytically useful, though obviously
they are interdependent. Resultant overlap will be eliminated as inte-
grated strategies and force postures are evolved. For example:
Nuclear Forces: A major nuclear exchange between the United States
and the Soviet Union is addressed in the context of US–USSR Home-
lands Nuclear Conflict (TAB E), but strategic and theater nuclear forces
are also addressed in the context of linkage to NATO (TAB A), political
perceptions in China and Japan (TAB C), and nuclear proliferation in
the Third World (TABS C and D).
Forces in Peacetime: Requirements for military forces are derived
from wartime functions; i.e., what forces are needed to accomplish
specific tasks in battle. However, military forces also serve a variety of
peacetime functions, such as reassurance of allies and demonstrations
of commitment. It is unlikely that forces need to be procured for those
purposes that would not serve important wartime purposes. However,
the peacetime functions can require some forces being deployed in dif-
ferent postures from those dictated by a pure warfighting perspective.
Thus the peacetime functions of military force are analyzed not only in
2 Tabs A–E are attached but not printed.

peacekeeping activities and potential local wars (TAB D), but also as a
backdrop to diplomacy in Europe (TAB A) and in East Asia (TAB C).
Forces for Asia: Military forces in Asia are addressed in the context
of maintaining a balance of power in East Asia (TAB C), of providing
a capability to counter the Soviets in a worldwide war (TAB B), and of
providing for peacekeeping activities or intervention in potential local
wars (TAB D). If the US pursues a strategy in East Asia requiring a
major military presence, the US would then have the ability to intervene
in most potential conflicts, including conflict with the Soviets in Asia
during a war in Europe. Conversely, if a strategy involving reduced
peacetime presence in Asia were to be chosen, the US might still want
to acquire deployable military forces for intervention in potential con-
flicts, including those in Asia.
(U) Included in the descriptions of the substrategies for each
analytical area is a brief discussion of the likely political and military
force implications. Unless explicitly indicated otherwise, it has been
assumed that the military objectives and programs of both hostile and
friendly nations will remain as described in existing intelligence pro-
jections. Thus, allied contributions and enemy threats have been taken
as constant, across the spectrum of US strategy alternatives. This is an
approximation that needs to be refined in subsequent study.
(U) The final chapter (TAB F)3 describes current US military strat-
egies (or postures) and capabilities; the latter does not always corre-
spond to the former. The next steps in the PRM–10 study will be:
—To integrate the substrategies into a representative set of alterna-
tive worldwide military strategies (the AIMS).
—To estimate a reasonable range of force postures, phased pro-
grams and funding, appropriate to each overall strategy. It should be
recognized that the uncertainties or differences in judgment about what
forces and programs are appropriate for which strategies are likely to
be as great as the variations between adjacent strategies in the tabula-
tion of alternative strategies.
—To assess the adequacy of alternative strategies and forces in
terms of the ability of each strategy to achieve objectives. In this regard,
the non-­military components of national strategy (economic, diplo-
matic, etc.) are of major importance in determining such adequacy.
—To describe the domestic, economic, foreign policy, and arms
control implications for each alternative strategy, as well as likely allied,
Soviet, and third country reactions.
3 Attached but not printed.

Key Questions:
(S) Prior to the meeting, you may find it useful to focus on the fol-
lowing key questions which govern the development of military strat-
egy and force postures. (Additional questions are presented at the end
of the discussion of each analytical area.)
(1) NATO-Warsaw Pact: Should the US continue the current policy
of urging NATO to improve its capabilities for conventional response
to conventional attacks, or consider policies which would place greater
reliance on nuclear weapons?
(2) NATO-Warsaw Pact: Should the US consider policies under
which NATO would take the offensive against Warsaw Pact territory in
response to aggression?
(3) NATO-Warsaw Pact: How much divergence should the US be
willing to accept between its policies and those of its NATO Allies?
(4) Worldwide War: In a worldwide war with the Soviets, should
the US be prepared to engage in operations outside of the European
theater, recognizing that current strategy calls for the redeployment of
some forces from the Pacific to reinforce NATO?
(5) East Asia: Should criteria for the selection of US military strat-
egy in East Asia emphasize global containment of the Soviet Union or
regional stability, which would presumably allow the Soviets more
initiative?
(6) Local Wars: Should the US have military forces available to
intervene in a crisis or local war situation, such as in the Middle East,
without drawing down on forces dedicated to other purposes, such as
reinforcing Europe?
(7) Homelands Exchange: To what extent should the US procure
strategic nuclear forces, above and beyond those required to achieve
other US objectives, in order to respond to major US-Soviet force asym-
metries? In other words, should we insist on perceived parity?
Harold Brown

17.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 6, 1977
SUBJECT
An Analysis of Your Upcoming Decision on Production of the B–1
This memo identifies the key factors that you should keep in mind
as you think about Harold Brown’s paper on the B–1.2 It is based on
an investigation of this issue carried out over several months by Victor
Utgoff, a member of my staff. While I am not an expert on some of the
more technical points raised, I support its conclusion.
The Decision
As you know, Rockwell International Corporation is tooling up for
production of the B–1 at an initial rate of two aircraft per month. This
effort is being made under an unusual contract in which the Air Force
releases the money to the contractor on a monthly basis pending a final
commitment by you to go ahead with production. This contract was
written in anticipation of a decision by June 30, and contains a limit
on the government’s liability to the contractor if the decision is made
before this date. If the decision is not made by then, the government’s
liability to the contractor in the event of termination might have to be
determined through litigation.
While a decision could be put off further, it probably should not be,
since the political and economic costs of terminating the program are
rapidly increasing.
The Alternatives
There are four broad alternatives open to you:
(1) Terminate the B–1 program completely;
(2) Put a moratorium on production for perhaps two years;
(3) Build up production slowly to a rate of two aircraft per month; or
(4) Go ahead with production, building up to a rate of four aircraft.
corner of the first page of the memorandum: “Susan hold. J.” Reference is to Susan
Clough, Carter’s personal secretary.
The Analysis
There are many interacting factors bearing on your choice of an
alternative. In order to make the structure of Harold’s analysis and the
key points as clear as possible, we have set out the high points with a
minimum of detail.
Harold begins his argument by noting that the residual target
destruction capability on both sides following a Soviet pre-­emptive
counterforce strike is projected to shift in favor of the Soviets before
ting that the real wartime significance of this advantage is uncertain,
he says that perceptions of this Soviet advantage could have adverse
effects, that we should do something about it, and that improvements
in our bomber force are the only realistic near-­term solution to the
problem.
I believe that Harold is making too much of this measure. First,
an assessment of the balance should compare similar things. A more
appropriate assessment of the overall strategic balance would thus
compare the situations in which the Soviets strike first to those in which
we strike first. The Soviets’ impression of the balance is undoubtedly
strongly influenced by this second situation. In fact, our best estimate
projections suggest that the ratio of U.S. to Soviet bomber and ICBM
weapons remaining after a first strike by the U.S. is in our favor now
and will be increasing in the early 80’s.
Second, I question how meaningful “target destruction potential”
is at higher levels. At the levels considered by Secretary Brown, we and
the Soviets have long since run out of worthwhile targets. Should we
spend vast sums to “make the rubble bounce?”
Finally, it doesn’t seem appropriate to use any single measure as
an indicator of the perceived balance. Perceptions of the balance are
molded by many indicators and given current intelligence projections,
we will be ahead in enough of them to be able to claim strategic par-
ity or even some superiority for at least the next five to seven years,
whether or not we modernize the bomber force.3
I would therefore argue that any need to modernize our bomber
force with the B–1 requires an argument that the force we have is
becoming unsatisfactory and that the B–1 is the right answer.
Harold continues by arguing that the bomber force plays an import-
ant role by hedging against possible reductions in the effectiveness
of our ballistic missile forces, and by creating severe planning prob-
lems that can frustrate Soviet attempts to destroy both our bombers
and ICBMs at the same time. Further, while the B–52 force is currently
3 Carter wrote “?” in the left margin next to this paragraph.

estimated to be very effective, the improvements projected for Soviet
air defense by the mid to late 1980’s are likely to reduce its effectiveness
significantly. Thus, a significant improvement over the current B–52
force is probably required. I agree.
Examination of the backup study supporting Harold’s memo indi-
cates that arming the B–52 force with cruise missiles would significantly
improve it.4 In particular, it would extend the period during which the
B–52 can be expected to remain effective against projected Soviet air
defenses. In addition, since all of the study’s preferred alternatives for
modernizing the bomber force include arming at least some portion of
the B–52 force with cruise missiles, I conclude that we should extend the
B–52’s usefulness in this way whether or not we proceed with the B–1.
The result, however, is to also extend the period available for the pro-
duction of the B–1 or the development and production of a different system.
Thus, unless you believe there is a pressing need to buy the B–1 in order
to improve perceptions, there is no argument forcing your hand; your
decision can be made on the basis of the relative economic and political
costs of the alternatives.
If you are reasonably certain that we are eventually going to build
a significant force of 150 or more B–1’s, the smallest political costs
would probably be realized by going ahead now and building up to a
production rate of two aircraft per month.
On the other hand, if you have doubts about whether or not we
will eventually build a significant force of B–1’s, you should probably
accept the short-­term penalties involved in choosing a delay. Clearly
the political and economic losses involved will be much larger if we
proceed with production only to discover that the B–1 will not handle
the threat or that another alternative would have met our needs at con-
siderably less cost.
Dealing with the Uncertainties
Obviously, there are large uncertainties on both scores, and a delay
of several years could provide an opportunity to resolve some of them.
Moreover, it is more likely than not that we will find during such a
delay that building the B–1 is not a good idea.
—Specifically, we will know more about how the strategic balance,
SALT, and Soviet air defenses are going to evolve. A slowdown in the
evolution of the Soviet threat would militate against the B–1.
—We can also have a better idea of whether the electronic counter-
measures—(ECM) that the B–1 is crucially dependent on—­will work.
I have reason to believe that the Soviets can build air defense systems
4 Not found attached.

that ECM cannot beat.5 At the least, we should test the B–1’s ECM
systems (which will be available in the fall of 1979) against our own
AWAC’s and look-­down/shoot-­down fighters, as well as against our
best low altitude SAM systems.
—We can also get a better idea of how well our current cruise mis-
siles might stand up against future Soviet air defense by testing them
against our best air defense systems.
—Finally, we will know whether or not a promising new Air Force
concept for building essentially invisible aircraft or cruise missiles will
work.6 If it does, the arguments in favor of penetrating bombers may
also disappear.
SALT
Another issue bearing on this decision is how it interacts with
SALT, and clearly we have recognized an interaction in our efforts to
preserve the option for a 2500 km ALCM. If you decide to deploy this
system, we should make every effort to avoid having to count heavy
bombers with long range ALCM’s as MIRV’s. Further, if we want to
be able to eventually build a new long range cruise missile carrier, we
must make certain that we have the right to define the new aircraft as
a heavy bomber.
The announcement of your decision could conceivably impact on
the ongoing SALT negotiations. However, the Soviets seem to have
accommodated their thinking to the deployment of a long range ALCM
or the B–1. Thus, unless your decision is accompanied by a claim that
its purpose is to allow us to significantly raise our overall strategic
capability, it probably won’t have much impact on SALT.
A third conceivable interaction involves the Senate. Specifically a
delay in B–1 production could raise further problems for ratification of
a new SALT treaty. On the other hand, Senator Jackson recognizes that
Boeing has a very good chance of winning a contract to produce cruise
missiles and/or the replacement for the B–1. (He came close to oppos-
ing the B–1 during the campaign.)
One final point concerns costs. In particular, will delay of the B–1
program significantly increase its costs if we do end up building it?
Harold’s study suggests otherwise by showing that it is cheaper to
delay production a year and then catch up by building four aircraft
per month, than it is to start now and build at a rate of two aircraft per
5 See Tab A. [Footnote is in the original. Tab A, an undated one-­page evaluation of
Soviet air defense capabilities against the B–1’s electronic counter measures, is attached
but not printed.]
6 See Tab B. [Footnote is in the original. Tab B, an undated one-­and-­one-­half page
description of stealth cruise missiles along with an artist’s rendering and a graph, is
attached but not printed.]

month. Further, if during a delay we do find that the B–1 is not the right
choice, we may avoid a 25 billion dollar mistake. A sum of this magni-
tude could go a long way toward buying a new Navy, or dramatically
strengthening our conventional capabilities in Europe and thus reduc-
ing our dependence on nuclear weapons.
While Harold does not make a definite recommendation, he has
favored the B–1 in the past, and his analysis points toward continu-
ing with B–1 production. In view of the considerations I have outlined
above, I believe that a delay in the production of the B–1 deserves the
most careful evaluation.
The analysis relating to the ECM and the invisible cruise missile
given at Tabs A and B is not included in Harold’s memo.
18.
Memorandum From Samuel Huntington of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Political-Strategic Consequences of US Adoption of No-First-Use of Nuclear Weap-
ons Posture
This is in response to your request for my comments on this topic
by COB today.
The U.S. could assume a no-­first-­use of nuclear weapons posture
either unilaterally or bilaterally.2 A posture may also be either general
or qualified. The following comments are directed to four possible pos-
tures (one general, three qualified) in first their unilateral and then their
bilateral versions.
ject File, Box 47, Nuclear War Doctrine: Limited Nuclear Options (LNO) and Regional
memorandum, Richard Betts of the National Security Council Staff contributed to the
memorandum.
2 In theory there could be a multilateral assumption of such a posture involving
the US, SU, and one or more other nuclear powers, but that does seem too far-­fetched to
discuss. [Footnote is in the original.]

A. Unilateral Postures
A1. General No-First-Use
The importance of declaratory policies and the consequences of
changing them are often overemphasized. This could be true in this
case. It is conceivable that a general US renunciation of first-­use of
nuclear weapons would not have much affect, for good or evil, on the
actions of men and governments. Yet such a renunciation would clearly
be the extreme instance of underlining the unimportance of declaratory
policy. It is much more likely that US adoption of a general no-­first-­use
posture would have significant political-­strategic consequences. Pre-
sumably there would be some benefit in terms of a somewhat nebu-
lous world public opinion concern with nuclear dangers. The principal
consequences of such a posture, however, would be overwhelmingly
undesirable.
(1) It would erode the credibility of the US deterrent posture in
Europe and East Asia, which now benefits from benign ambiguity as to
whether the US would or would not use nuclear weapons in response
to major attacks on its allies.
(2) As a result, it could encourage and it certainly would do noth-
ing to dissuade the Soviets and the North Koreans from pushing out.
(3) It could well lead to an increase in U.S. general purpose forces
and a skyrocketing military budget as a result.
(4) It would produce a most unsettling “Carter-­shock” for our
European allies and Japan, confronting them directly with the hard
choice which they have been so desperate to avoid of:
(a) engaging in a major strengthening of their conventional forces;
(b) modernizing (UK, France) or developing (FRG, Japan, ROK,
ROC) their own nuclear weapons capabilities; or
(c) accommodating to the Soviet Union; or
(d) engaging in some combination of the above.
(5) It would raise doubts in the minds of PRC leaders as to U.S.
willingness to oppose the Soviets in the crunch.
(6) It would generally encourage countries throughout the world
to consider more seriously the development of their own nuclear
capabilities.
(7) It would, presumably, remove any option for limited nuclear
strikes against military targets in the context of a European conflict or
otherwise.
(8) It would encourage the political forces in the US and among our
allies who wish the US to take the unilateral initiative in reducing our
nuclear capabilities to a minimum deterrence level. (If we’re not going
to use them—­except in retaliation, why do we need so much?)

All-­in-­all, in short, a unilateral, general no-­first-­use pledge would
encourage our enemies, frighten our friends, and frustrate our purposes.
A2. No-First-Use of Strategic Weapons
The US could, conceivably, declare that it would never be the first
to initiate use of strategic nuclear weapons. This would require weaving
into the declaration a careful definition, contrived to fit our policy, of
what systems or targets are “strategic” rather than tactical.
Such a posture could have certain advantages in terms of propa-
ganda value. It would show that the U.S. is “responsible,” sees a mid-
dle ground between capitulation in conventional war and apocalyptic
conflagration, and realizes what many believe has become obvious in
the last decade: the coupling of the US strategic deterrent to European
defense, when exercising it would entail the otherwise avoidable utter
destruction of American society, has indeed lost much of its credibility.
The disadvantages of such a posture are, however, still major.
(1) It detracts from deterrence. By making explicit and official that
the US recognizes the incredibility of strategic coupling, it gives away
the advantage of the “irrationality” factor, i.e. the disincentive for a
Soviet attack which flows from the possibility that the US might indeed
respond to such an attack spasmodically or suicidally.
(2) It would preclude use of LNOs to counter limited conventional
initiatives ([less than 1 line not declassified]). To define away such strikes
as “unstrategic” would be unconvincing.
(3) Our allies and friends would still be greatly alarmed. NATO
allies continue to prefer the coupling of the strategic deterrent to Euro-
pean defense and place substantial weight on retention of the US
“irrationality” factor in deterrence. Moreover, the PRC might see such
a pledge as weakness in American will, or a gratuitous gift to Soviet
planners.
(4) The disadvantageous effects on our nuclear force-­posture
would be comparable to those of a general no-­first-­use posture.
A3. No-First-Use Except in Defense of Self and Allies
The US could declare that it would never use nuclear weapons first
unless the territory or forces of the US or its allies were attacked.
This has several advantages.
(1) Who could object? Only those who seek more limitations on
first-­use, and this would make them no more unhappy than the present
US stance.
(2) It would counter some of the propaganda advantage that
accrues to the Soviets from their requests for a no-­first-­use pledge, and
their portrayal of the US as more trigger-­happy than they.

(3) It puts the onus on our adversaries. By making clear that we
would initiate use of nuclear weapons only for defensive purposes, it
highlights the fact that only Soviet (or North Korean or Chinese) aggres-
sion could ignite the nuclear powder keg. By giving our adversaries the
“last clear chance,” it throws the burden of nuclear responsibility onto
them.
(4) It does not detract from deterrence. Such a declaratory strategy
does not constitute any concession that could be exploited in scenar-
ios of crisis or escalation, since it does not really differ from our action
policy, and because there are no plausible scenarios left uncovered in
which we would want to use nuclear weapons first.
Its major disadvantage is that it doesn’t mean much. Precisely
because of the last point, the pledge would seem to signify no change
or compromise in our policy. Thus it could be beneficial in terms of the
reactions of the uninformed, but to others it might seem to be empty
rhetoric, at best, and a cynical ploy at worst.
A4. No-First-(or otherwise) Use Against Non-Nuclear Weapons States
The US could adopt the position that it would not use nuclear
weapons against non-­nuclear weapons states. This would maintain
the deterrent against the SU and China and hence not upset our major
allies. It might give some encouragement to Kim Il Song to be nasty and
to President Park to wonder about his own nuclear needs. But presum-
ably the likelihood of our actually ever using nuclear weapons in Korea
has never been all that great. As our current policy [1 line not declassi-
fied] to defend South Korea against North Korea without recourse to
nuclear weapons. A pledge of this sort would also reap certain public
relations advantage. In addition, of course, it would in general tend
to bolster rather than to undermine our efforts to discourage nuclear
proliferation. On the other hand, the probability that we would again
use nuclear weapons against a non-­nuclear weapons state has not been
very great for many years, and consequently this option also suffers the
disadvantages of the previous one in being seen as a somewhat crude
public relations ploy.
In general, no-­first-­use declarations if meaningful are undesirable
and if desirable are not meaningful.
B. Bilateral Versions of the Above
Conceivably the US and the SU could jointly adopt one of the pos-
tures identified above. Since the adoption of any no-­first-­use posture
involves some self-­imposition of restraints, the benefits to the US of
adopting any particular posture on a bilateral basis with the SU would
generally be greater than going it alone. In addition, the bilateral adop-
tion of a particular posture would furnish a commendable example
of declaratory restraint on the part of the superpowers and would be

viewed as a commendable sign of improvement in SU–US relations.
A bilateral approach does not, however, necessarily override the disad-
vantages inherent in particular no-­first-­use postures.
B1. A bilateral general no-­first-­use posture would still pose virtu-
ally all the problems for the US of a unilateral statement in terms of
deterrent credibility, reassurance of allies, and nuclear proliferation. It
would in fact be and would be viewed as a highly asymmetrical conces-
sion on the part of the US.
B2. A bilateral no-­first-­use of strategic weapons would be impos-
sible to negotiate given the difficulties of defining what a strategic
weapon is.
B3. A bilateral no-­first-­use except to defend self and allies would
not have serious disadvantages from the US point of view, but it might
give the Soviets the occasion to extend nuclear protection to other coun-
tries (e.g., Cuba, Mozambique, Iraq, Libya) thereby raising the possi-
bility of a Soviet escalatory response if these countries were subject to
conventional attack by the US or by other powers.
B4. A bilateral no-­first-­use against non-­nuclear weapons states
would be generally harmless and could represent a significant joint
effort by the US and the SU to reduce incentives towards nuclear
proliferation.
ously considered as possible alternatives to current US constructive
­reticence on this subject.
19.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Some Additional Observations On The B–1 Production Decision
In the analysis of the B–1 production decision that I sent you last
week,2 I sketched out what I see as the most important issues bear-
ing on your decision. Since then, my staff has developed some
2 See Document 17.

additional observations which are summarized below. I hope you find
them helpful.
Political Factors
There are at least two major political considerations bearing on this
decision. First, as difficult as it might be to halt production now, halt-
ing now has got to be a far easier decision than trying to halt the pro-
gram later if events unfold in such a way as to make you want to stop.
Currently, we have about 35,000 people working on the B–1 and three
aircraft behind us. Two years from now, if we continue, we will have
behind us.
Second, a decision to halt the B–1 production program will be a
tough one to sell to the Congress and the public given the current slow
rate of progress in SALT and the enormous publicity that has been given
to the Soviets’ efforts to build up their strategic capabilities. Thus, it
might be much easier to halt the B–1 production program if such a halt
were accompanied by other actions designed to offset public concerns.
One package of actions that might have the desired effect was
recently suggested by an OMB staffer. It consists of three elements: (1)
Return the B–1 to an R&D program pending further test and evalua-
R&D program on a follow-­on cruise missile carrier.
This package would suggest that we are responding to Soviet
improvements in their overall capabilities by not only arming the
B–52’s with cruise missiles, but also by starting immediately on a com-
pletely new bomber system based on the ALCM. The R&D program for
the new aircraft could be pursued at a relatively low and inexpensive
level for several years, which might help to balance the 81 budget. This
program could look at aircraft that are smaller than the 747 and would
thus spread the eggs across more baskets. It could also examine the
applicability to a cruise missile carrier of some of the more recent ideas
for reducing radar cross section and IR signature. Finally, a more imme-
diate prospect for a large aircraft contract in place of the B–1 might win
some extra support from states with large aerospace concerns.
The Basis for the OSD Study of the B–1
In evaluating the large backup study sent over by Harold Brown,3
you should keep in mind the basis of some portions of that study. Spe-
cifically, while Harold’s study is a very honest effort, it is nonetheless
likely to be somewhat biased. This is because the relatively short time
available for the study forced it to depend on significant portions of
the analytical work done for its predecessor, the Joint Strategic Bomber
Study (JSBS).4
The JSBS was done over three years ago by DOD at the request of
the Congress. That study made a number of critical assumptions that
tended to favor the B–1, and assumed the worst for the cruise missile.
In fairness, this looks worse now than it did then because the cruise
missile has now largely met or exceeded what were then only design
goals. Nonetheless, the JSBS was sharply criticized by the Congress
and by outside reviewers in the systems analysis community as being
extremely biased.
Since then, various portions of the JSBS have been reexamined and
in the process a great deal of bias against the cruise missile has been
removed. We should not assume, however, that the cruise missile has
now been given a completely fair shake. A really fair look at the rela-
tive cost effectiveness of the B–1 and the cruise missile would probably
require a completely fresh start by a study team as impartial as this last
one, and would probably require a year to do (the JSBS took slightly
over a year). It would reexamine every assumption and would attempt
to assess previously untreated effects such as the ability of large num-
bers of cruise missiles to attack in loosely spaced clusters and thus sat-
urate the Soviets’ air defenses.
Midcourse Threats
The OSD study argues that large cruise missile carriers could be
particularly vulnerable to extended area defenses that would attempt
to attack them before they launch their cruise missiles. The particular
threat envisioned by the study is based on AWACS type aircraft and
long range fighter interceptors.
This concept deserves careful study, particularly to determine why
such a threat would have significantly more capability against a force
consisting of perhaps 60 cruise missile carriers than it would against
a force of perhaps 150 B–1’s. (Note: Both forces carry about the same
number of nuclear weapons.)
The study argues that a large cruise missile carrier would be diffi-
cult to mask with ECM; we would argue that an AWACS aircraft will be
able to see either aircraft well enough to vector fighters out the bearing
to the target at very long ranges.
The study also argues that because the large cruise missile carrier
would present fewer targets it would be more vulnerable than the B–1.
This argument implicitly assumes that 150 B–1’s will be sufficient to
Document 104.

saturate the defenses. However, this does not seem likely if the Sovi-
ets do develop the capability to build systems similar to our AWACS
and look-­down/shoot-­down fighters. Our AWACS is designed to track
100 targets simultaneously. Further, it is hard to believe that the Soviets
would not produce enough look-­down/shoot-­down fighters to insure
that our force of B–1’s will not saturate the defenses.
If our concept of this threat is valid, and saturation is thus not likely
to be a significant problem for Soviet extended area defenses of this
type, at best this type of defense will extract a percentage of whatever
force attacks. In this case its impacts on the B–1 and the cruise missile
carrier forces would be identical.
There are other midcourse threats that also deserve a more careful
examination. As an example, the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency is currently sponsoring a program that is looking into the feasi-
bility of using some new developments in [1 line not declassified]. If this
concept proves feasible, and we should have some indication [1 line not
declassified], it could eventually become the basis of a severe threat to
any of the strategic bomber systems considered in the OSD study.
In summary, we believe that the possibility of midcourse threats
that could cut short the useful life of a new bomber force deserves a
closer examination. Further, if worrisome threats of this type do look
feasible, they may work just about as well against the B–1 as against the
large type of cruise missile carrier considered in the OSD study.

20.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Mobile M–X Land Requirements
Secretary Brown has sent you a memo (Tab A) describing the status
of the land on which a mobile M–X system might be deployed.2 You
will note that he calls attention to the politically-­volatile environmental
impact issue as well as the question of whether a mobile M–X is tech-
nically feasible.
Since the memo did not appear to be time urgent, my staff delayed
sending it forward in order to include some additional perspectives on
the M–X land requirement issue based on analyses done as part of NSC/
PRM–10.3 Unfortunately these analyses were very contentious and led
to the long delay in forwarding Secretary Brown’s original memo.
Secretary Brown’s memo provides a conceptual layout of 200 seven
nautical mile long trenches at the Luke Gunnery Range and Yuma Prov-
ing Ground in Arizona. Each trench would contain one M–X. Analyses
of M–X survivability undertaken as part of PRM–10 indicate that if the
Soviets attacked this system (and the US silo-­based ICBM force) with
their projected 1986 ICBM forces in an attack designed to minimize sur-
viving missiles, the number of surviving US ICBMs would be:
Fraction of Soviet
ICBM Force
Expended
Approximate ­Number
of Surviving M–X
ICBMs
Approximate Number
of Surviving
Silo-Based ICBMs
[3 columns, 3 rows not declassified]
orandum. Molander and Utgoff sent the memorandum to Brzezinski for his signature
under a June 13 covering memorandum.
2 Attached but not printed is a May 5 memorandum to Carter, from Brown, who
wrote: “Here is some information on possible basing of M-X, which puts the ‘trench’ prob-
lem in context. The technical workability still needs to be argued convincingly. Moreover,
environmental concerns will still exist. My evaluation: not impossible (as thousands of
miles of trench in an extended publicly used area would be) but the feasibility, technical
and political, is by no means proven.”
3 See Document 3.

These results assume that: (1) Soviet ICBM reliability is about 80
percent, (2) the Air Force is able to meet its goal of a [less than 1 line not
declassified] hardness level for the encapsulated missile, and (3) an effec-
tive method can be found for nullifying the “shock tube” effect that will
occur if the blast waves “get into” the tunnel. (If this occurs, the tunnel
will act as a classic shock tube and propagate overpressure levels to
substantially greater distances than would otherwise be possible.)
Subject to these uncertainties, the surviving ICBM forces in the
above table would still have the capability to do substantial damage to
the Soviet Union, but not nearly the level of damage we would prefer
in each leg of the strategic Triad. Thus we will probably need more than
the 1400 nm of trenches at Luke/Yuma if a trench-­based M–X system is
to guarantee a significant survivable ICBM force.
21.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to President Carter1
Washington, June 20, 1977
SUBJECT
B–1 Decision
I would like to add the following points to your deliberations on
the B–1:
1. Attached is a memorandum from Congressman Les Aspin, pre-
pared privately at my request.2 As you remember, he briefed you before
the second debate in San Francisco on defense matters.3 He is a respected
defense expert with a generally liberal reputation on defense matters.
For that reason his recommendation to build 90 B–1s is interesting.
in the source text, Carter wrote, “Susan—­w/ B–1 file. J”.
2 Attached but not printed is a June 18 memorandum prepared by Aspin, who con-
for any reasonable security requirements.” (Ibid.)

2. During the course of other conversations with Governor
­Harriman Sunday,4 he made the following points:
a) the B–1 is an unnecessary weapons system which he has long
opposed.
b) the decision on the B–1 should not be made until after the cur-
rent SALT talks conclude because it can be effectively used as a bargain-
ing chip to achieve a reduction in Russia’s SS–20 missiles, because of
the B–1’s own throwweight.
c) the B–1 is viewed by Brezhnev as a “new weapons technol-
ogy” which the U.S.S.R. would want to match, and Brezhnev’s pride
in achieving technology parity with the U.S. might lead him to trade
postponement of the B–1’s development for reductions in SS–20s. (The
Soviet Backfire bomber is not a comparable plane to the B–1.)
3. As for my personal views, they were made evident during the
campaign in the position we then took against the B–1. There is little
reason for me as a non-­military person to attempt to set forth military
and cost implications with which you are more familiar. At this point
I would urge you to oppose the B–1 to help maintain the credibility of
your campaign promises (now extraordinarily high)—­unless there are
overriding national security implications which do not appear readily
present to me.
If it is necessary to go ahead, I would hope you might consider a
very low buy with a stretched out schedule, for use as a bargaining chip
in SALT.
4 June 19. Reference is to W. Averell Harriman.

22.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 22, 1977
SUBJECT
Budgetary and Strategic Implications of the B–1 Production Decision
This memorandum responds to your request for a brief analysis
of the budgetary and strategic implications of alternative options for
modernizing the strategic bomber force. It was produced by a small
working group of NSC and OMB staff members.
In moving this fast, we were forced to make some rough estimates.
The information should be accurate enough to realistically appraise the
relative merits of each of the options, however.
The Alternatives
Four general alternatives for modernizing the strategic bomber
force were considered. These range from going ahead with B–1 produc-
tion at the four aircraft per month rate that the Air Force wants, to com-
plete termination of the B–1 program. The rationales for these options
are summarized below.
—Option 1. Continue production of the B–1, building up to a max-
imum production rate of four aircraft per month by 1982. This option
equips the B–52Gs with cruise missiles at a modest rate of 20 aircraft per
year starting in 1981. The objectives of these conversions are to compli-
cate the Soviets air defense problem, and to extend the effective lifetime
of the B–52Gs. These objectives are not pursued vigorously, however, in
view of the rapid and extensive deployment of the B–1.
—Option 2. This is an elaboration of Harold Brown’s tentative rec-
ommendation. It slowly builds up the B–1 production rate to a max-
imum of two aircraft per month. It also equips first B–52Gs and later
B–52Hs with cruise missiles. These conversions are pursued more vig-
orously than in Option 1 in order to offset the slower rate of acquisition
of the B–1.
—Option 3 (Variant A). This is an elaboration of the two-­year delay
concept I suggested in my previous memos. It cuts off the current pro-
duction program for the B–1, buying only three aircraft over the next
three years for test and evaluation purposes. In addition, it begins an
R&D program for a new cruise missile carrier. Under this variant, we
corner of the memorandum: “The President has seen.”

assume that events unfold in such a way as to make the B–1 clearly
undesirable. Thus this variant assumes a shift toward a pure standoff
bomber force starting in 1981. This shift is accomplished by equipping
proceeding at a fairly high rate. Under this variant, the new cruise mis-
sile carrier is procured at a relatively slow rate which builds up the
overall capability of our bomber force and allows eventual replacement
of our oldest B–52s.
—Option 3 (Variant B). This is the other half of Option 3 and is iden-
tical to 3 (Variant A) through 1980. However, this variant assumes that
events unfold in such a way as to make the B–1 clearly desirable. Thus,
in 1980 it begins a buildup to a high production rate of four B–1s per
month. In addition, given the high rate of procurement for the B–1, it
equips B–52Gs with cruise missiles at the same slow rate assumed for
Option 1.
—Option 4. This option terminates the B–1 program completely. As
an offset, it equips the B–52Gs and some B–52Hs with cruise missiles
at the same relatively high rate assumed under Option 3 (Variant A).
The numbers of forces procured or equipped with cruise missiles
each year under each of these options are given in Table I. All four
options retain most of the current B–52 force over the 10-­year period
considered. Thus, Options 1 through 3 increase the overall size of
our strategic bomber force. In fact, in order to stay within the strate-
gic nuclear delivery vehicle limit of 2400 specified in the Vladivostok
equivalent number of missiles.
Given the prospects for reductions below 2400 in SALT II, even
greater numbers of older strategic systems might have to be destroyed
during the next 10 years. We did not delve into the details of what
might have to be eliminated; however, such reductions do not appear
to impact significantly on the relative advantage of any of the four
options we consider here; we carry out all the calculations given below
in terms of the Vladivostok agreement.
Budgetary Implications
The investment costs for each of these options are given in Table
II. These costs are reported in budget (inflated) dollars in the first four
columns. The last column gives the investment costs for each option
over the next 10 years, in constant dollars. These last figures reflect the
real resource costs to our economy of each option.
In my view, Options 2 and 3A/B are the most practical choices.
Both have considerably lower near-­term costs than Option 1.

Comparison of Option 2 with Option 3A/B shows that either of
the Option 3 variants will be significantly cheaper over the next five
years. Further, if you choose Option 3, and by 1980 find that the cruise
missile path (Variant A) is the way to go, you save a great deal of money
any way you look at it. In addition, if you choose Option 3 and find you
sought by the Air Force by 1987 at little or no increase in real costs.
Finally, in budget dollars, although Option 3 (Variant B) will be
will produce 35% more B–1 bombers over this period.
Strategic Implications
The two most important contributions that a strategic bomber
force conceivably makes to our security are:
(1) It provides an objective capability to cause great damage to
anyone we attack; and
(2) it contributes to subjective impressions of the state of the
US/USSR strategic forces balance.
In terms of the first contribution, the differences between the four
options we are examining are not significant, at least for the next 10
years. Over that period, no matter which option is chosen, we will have
far more than enough deliverable weapons to give us very high confi-
dence in our ability to destroy virtually all of the significant targets in
the Soviet Union. This will be true even if we have absorbed the most
effective counterforce strike that the Soviets can make against us and
even if we are caught completely by surprise.
The options may differ significantly in their impact on subjective
impressions of the strategic balance, however. In order to assess this
possibility, we have constructed the attached plots showing the relative
numbers of deliverable inventory warheads, and amounts of deliver-
able inventory equivalent megatonnage and throw weight, for both
the Soviets and ourselves—­plots are given for each of our four bomber
modernization options.
These three measures are probably as reasonable a set of determi-
nants of the perceived strategic balance as any others. My own view
is that number of deliverable warheads is probably the single most
important determinant; amount of deliverable equivalent megatonnage
is slightly less important. Inclusion of throw weight seems somewhat
redundant since this measure is really only an indicator of each side’s
ability to deliver nuclear weapons or equivalent megatonnage, an abil-
ity that is included to a large degree in the first two measures. I have
included throw weight, however, because it has become the focus of so
much attention in recent years.

Examination of the plots yields the following observations:
—For the next ten years, we can expect to hold a considerable edge
over the Soviets in numbers of warheads; they can expect to hold an
advantage over us in total equivalent megatonnage; they will have
an advantage over us in total throw weight unless we increase the size
of our bomber force dramatically—­i.e., build up to the level of 2400
strategic nuclear delivery vehicles.
—Our advantages in warheads can be preserved pretty much
equally well by either of the compromise options (2, 3 A/B).
Variant B) prevent the Soviets from widening their advantage in equiv-
alent megatonnage.
—While the Soviets’ advantage in throw weight is reduced by the
B–1 add-­on options, aggressive deployment of the cruise missile as
done by Option 3 (Variant A) can keep this advantage from increasing
significantly.
—To the extent that perceptions are satisfactory in the very near
term (79), and to the extent that they are determined by these mea-
sures, perceptions of the strategic balance should remain acceptable or
improve under either of the compromise options (2, 3 A/B).
—Though the delay option (3 A/B) falls somewhat behind Option
2 (Harold’s tentative choice) by the very early 80s, if we decide that we
need the B–1 after all, Option 3 (Variant B) can catch up and surpass
Option 2 by 1984.
In summary, it appears that any of the compromise options should
at least preserve current perceptions of the strategic balance; purchase
of the B–1, or pursuit of even more aggressive cruise missile options
than considered here, could begin to shift perceptions of the balance in
our favor.
Modernization of US Strategic Forces
One argument commonly made in favor of producing the B–1 now
is that if we don’t, we will have no immediate answer to the modern-
ization programs the Soviets are currently pursuing. This argument
ignores several modernization programs that the US currently has
underway—­the Trident program, the modernization of the MM III
force, and the Navy and Air Force cruise missile programs.
This argument also ignores the fact that the initial deployments of
ALCMs on B–52s can be made just as rapidly as the initial deployments
of B–1s even if we continue with the current B–1 production program.
Interactions with the M–X
An argument can be made that failure to go ahead with the B–1
would increase pressures to build the M–X. Perhaps so, but by the time

the Soviets deploy ballistic missile systems good enough to destroy
the Minuteman force (and they have not yet), we could have a cruise
missile carrier developed and ready for deployment. To the extent that
improvements in our strategic bomber force can alleviate pressures to
deploy the M–X, deployment of either the B–1 or a new cruise missile
force should work about equally well.
A Bureaucratic Problem
Our final observation concerns the ongoing competition between
the B–1 and the cruise missile advocates in the Pentagon. Because of
this competition, the cruise missile programs have taken a back seat
to the B–1 program, at least within the Air Force. Thus, if you choose
Option 3, and thereby continue the perceived competition between the
B–1 and the ALCM, the cruise missile programs will probably continue
to receive less than enthusiastic support. To avoid this, you and Harold
would have to show strong personal interest in these programs.
Continued Support
Your decision on the B–1 production question is clearly not an easy
one—­a fact that has become quite obvious to me as I have carried out
my investigation of it. Though the three memos I have sent you cover
what I see as the major factors bearing on your decision,2 I would be
more than willing to provide additional analysis if you would find it
helpful.
If you would like me to subject some additional bomber modern-
ization options to the sort of analysis presented in this memo, I can
probably turn your requests around in a single day. I could also set
up a small meeting to discuss the issues involved in this decision, and
answer any questions you may have.
Finally, the presentation to the Congress and the public of what-
ever decision you make will be important not only in terms of accept-
ability but for what it will convey to our allies, the Soviets, the Chinese
and the world at large. I believe it would be the occasion for an authori-
tative statement by you on how we view the strategic relationship with
the USSR and how we plan to respond to the Soviet strategic programs.
In this connection, let me reiterate my strong feeling that Option
4—­if that is your choice—­should be related to a US-Soviet SALT bar-
gain. Option 3–A can also be related to SALT in that it could be made
clear to the Russians that as part of the three-­year interim protocol we
are deferring the deployment of the B–1, subject to later agreements
with regard to the issues covered by the protocol. In particular, Option

3–A or 4 could ease the differences we have with the Soviets regarding
ALCMs and the MIRV limits.
In any case, I do feel that either a completely negative or partially
negative decision on the B–1 ought to be exploited by us in our negoti-
ations with the Soviets, given the openly stated Soviet concern over the
B–1. Otherwise, your critics in Congress will have another argument
against your decision.
Operationally, the above would mean postponing any public
announcement of Option 4 or being imprecise as to the duration of the
stretchout in Option 3–A, pending talks with the Soviets.

Table I

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council3
Washington, undated
ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIC BOMBER MODERNIZATION PROGRAMS
(Yearly Production/Conversion)4
1. Continue current B–1 plan;
Maximum rate 4/month
B–1’s
B–52’s with Cruise Missiles
Cruise Missile Carrier
2. Slow B–1 production buildup;
Maximum rate 2/month
B–1’s
B–52’s with Cruise Missiles
Cruise Missile Carrier
3A. Two year delay in further B–1
­production; Initiate R&D on cruise
missile carrier (CMC). Assumes
B–1 terminates in 1980 and
production commences on CMC
B–1’s
B–52’s with Cruise Missiles
Cruise Missile Carrier
3 Top Secret.
4 Note that the forces procured or converted in any given year appear on-­line perhaps 18 months later. [Footnote is in the original.]

3B. Two year delay on further
B–1 production; Initiate R&D
on CMC. Assumes B–1 production
resumes in 1980 at maximum rate,
and no CMC production
B–1’s
B–52’s with Cruise Missiles
Cruise Missile Carrier
4. Terminate B–1 production; Plan no
new aircraft
B–1’s
B–52’s with Cruise Missiles
ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIC BOMBER MODERNIZATION PROGRAMS
(Yearly Production/Conversion)

Table II

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council5
Washington, undated
STRATEGIC BOMBER INVESTMENT OPTIONS
($ BILLIONS)
5 Years
(Current $)
(Constant $)
1. Continue Current B–1 Plan; maximum
rate 4/month.
TOA
Outlays
2. Slow B–1 Production Buildup;
maximum rate 2/month.
TOA
Outlays
5 Secret; Sensitive.

5 Years
(Current $)
(Constant $)
3A. Two-­year delay on further B–1
­production; initiate R&D on cruise
missile carrier (CMC). Assumes B–1
terminates in 1980 and production
commences on CMC.
TOA
Outlays
3B. Two-­year delay on further B–1
­production; initiate R&D on CMC.
Assumes B–1 production resumes
in 1980 at maximum rate, and no
CMC production.
TOA
Outlays
4. Terminate B–1 production; plan no
new aircraft.
TOA
.7
.9
Outlays
.6
.6

Plot 1

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council
Washington, undated
[No classification marking. 1 page not declassified.]

Plot 2

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council
Washington, undated
[No classification marking. 1 page not declassified.]

Plot 3

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council
Washington, undated
[No classification marking. 1 page not declassified.]
23.
Editorial Note
On June 30, 1977, President Jimmy Carter held a news confer-
ence which he began with a prepared statement: “During the last few
months, I’ve done my best to assess all the factors involving production
of the B–1 bomber. My decision is that we should not continue with
deployment of the B–1, and I am directing that we discontinue plans
for production of this weapons system.” Carter noted that the United
States would continue the existing B–1 research and development pro-
gram to learn more about the potential of the bomber and its systems,
such as electronic countermeasures techniques, as well as assess the
implications of the ongoing strategic arms limitations negotiations for
future nuclear weapons delivering system investments. He continued:
“In the meantime, we should begin deployment of cruise missiles using

air-­launched platforms, such as our B–52’s, modernized as necessary.
Our triad concept of retaining three basic delivery systems will be con-
tinued with submarine-­launched ballistic missiles, intercontinental bal-
listic missiles, and a bomber fleet, including cruise missiles as one of
its armaments. We will continue thereby to have an effective and flex-
ible strategic force whose capability is fully sufficient for our national
defense.” For the full text of Carter’s remarks, see Public Papers: Carter,
24.
Memorandum From Samuel Huntington of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 6, 1977
SUBJECT
I. Purpose of the Meeting
Our goals are to get SCC
1) approval for the submission of the Net Assessment (minus the
strategies, if necessary) to the President;
2) agreement on the desirability of a follow-­on SCC meeting, after
the PRCs on PRM–10, for further discussion of the framework elaborat-
ing national strategies.
To achieve these two outcomes, it would be useful to guide the
discussion toward:
1. Consensus on the current shape of the US–SU balance as
described in the Net Assessment (static);
2. Agreement on the trends in the balance which should be of
concern for the US in the overall competition with the Soviet Union
3. Common understanding of the opportunities and strengths on
which the United States can capitalize in the competition.
are in the original. The June 29 Overview Report prepared by the Comprehensive Net
Assessment Group in response to PRM/NSC–10 is ibid.

The discussion at the July 7 meeting should provide an important
framework for the later consideration of both national strategy vis-­a-­
vis the Soviet Union and the key military and force posture issues to be
presented to the PRC.
II. Issues For You to Focus On
A. The profile of the present balance. The Net Assessment concludes
that at present (Era II), the US–SU competition shows a rough overall
asymmetrical equivalence exists in military capabilities and significant
American advantage in most non-­military aspects of national power.
This represents a shift, however, from the previous pattern (Era I) of
US dominance in all areas. It results from the growth of Soviet military
power, strategic and conventional, in the 1960s and early 1970s.
The assessment notes five key developments within the Era II
balance:
1. The new incongruence in US–SU capabilities, given increased
Soviet military strength.
2. The changing role of military force under rough parity, with con-
ventional strength achieving added significance.
3. The certainty of political uncertainty, particularly in European
politics (East and West), in Chinese relationships, and in the Third
World.
4. The rise in the importance of the Middle East to US–SU
competition.
5. The emergence of regionally influential Third World states which
are also active in the global arena.
B. The direction of present trends. Current and foreseeable trends
are generally less favorable to the United States. Trends in the political
sphere (political institutions and leaderships, capacities for political-­
ideological action) and in economic productivity favor the U.S. In some
other areas, such as intelligence capabilities and core alliances, the
trends are mixed. And in many key areas, the dynamics either favor
the SU or are against the US: strategic forces, conventional forces in
Europe, mobilization and force projection capabilities, short-­run eco-
nomic interaction payoffs, and the diplomatic balance, especially in
Africa and Latin America.
C. The significance of present trends. These adverse and mixed trends
vary widely in significance. Categories for discussion are:
1. Trends which will be halted/reversed if planned US and allied
improvements are carried out (e.g., in strategic forces, military balance
on the Central Front).
2. Trends which do not yet pose significant challenges to the US
(e.g., in force projection capabilities, Latin America).

3. Trends which could prove more troublesome in the next five
years, without US action (e.g., in mobilization capabilities, erosion of
US diplomatic position [especially if ties to local leviathans are eroded],
a “one-­way-­street” in transfers of technology and capital to the East,
covert action capabilities, Soviet action in Africa).
4. Trends on which US direct impact is limited (e.g., political uncer-
tainty and weakness in Europe, China, Third World).
D. The advantages on which the United States can capitalize. There are
five general areas in which the United States can exploit its opportuni-
ties to further advantage in the US–SU competition:
1. Economic strength—­the general level of US productivity as well
as the attraction it possesses for the East, the regional influentials, and
the more developed states of the Third World.
2. Diplomatic resources—­the large number of stable relationships
the US has and can continue to have with the trilateral states, the local
leviathans, and its regional clients.
3. Technological capacity—US technological dynamism and broad
across-­the-­board lead in areas relevant to both the Soviet’s and Third
World states.
4. Political-­ideological action—­the US ideological initiative and
overall capacities—­both public and private plus those of our allies—­for
influencing political attitudes and processes in other societies.
5. Force projection capabilities—­the superior “global reach” of the
US.
E. Outcomes and strategies of Era II. Given the existing balance, the
possible outcomes of Era II US–SU competition can be analyzed in
terms of two basic questions:
1. Whether US–SU relations become more competitive, more coop-
erative, or stay about the same.
2. Whether the global power balance shifts toward the SU or the
US, or remains about as it is now.
The nine possible outcomes are presented in the following chart.
Outcome A1 would be most desirable but probably impossible. Out-
five outcomes could be feasible and could be reached by one of the
alternative strategies outlined: condominium, cooperative, status quo,
initiatives and preeminence.
Any discussion of these outcomes and strategies in detail is clearly
premature. It is, however, appropriate to elicit agreement now on the
desirability of attempting to develop a national strategy; presumably at
a SCC meeting to follow PRC consideration of the force posture ques-
tions and packages.

III. Pitfalls to be Avoided
1. Extended discussion of DOD’s key questions or AIMSes.
2. Specific details of the Assessment (every specialist will find
something wrong in his area).
3. Queries as to why report does not cover:
a. Specific policy recommendations
b. Specification of policy options
c. Other global issues beyond US–SU competition
d. Evaluation criteria
e. Overlap with DOD effort.
4. Controversy about specific break-­points between Era I and Era
II, and relationship of these to detente.
5. Premature discussion of, and rejection of, national strategies.
CHART 12
POTENTIAL OUTCOMES OF ERA II
US–SU COMPETITION AND RELATED US STRATEGIES
2 Secret.

IV. Objections and Agreements to Expect
DOD/ISA
Harold Brown’s position is unclear but recent protest within both
OSD and the JCS has apparently caused second thoughts about press-
ing ahead with the AIMS concept for the PRM–10 PRC meeting. There-
fore, Brown and McGiffert may be more reserved or defensive than we
originally anticipated in objecting to the Net Assessment.
JCS
The JCS line will be that the Assessment is too optimistic on certain
military judgments, especially the Central Front and in naval issues,
but these objections are less important than their fundamental approval
of the Net Assessment. They will probably agree that it should go to the
President.
STATE
The State objective is to reduce the Net Assessment to ­insignificance
and perhaps to emphasize the AIMSes of the DOD side of PRM–10.
Their tactic is grudging approval of the Assessment as “useful” but
complete rejection of the “outcomes and strategies” (and implicitly, the
study itself) as being too narrowly focused on the US–SU competition.
They will again argue the need to consider 1) other issues of global
concern and 2) the need for more attention to US–SU cooperation. Ref-
erence to the PRM and to the TOR should put this to rest once again.
Portions of State (PM, SP) believe that the assessment is too gloomy in
its judgment of Soviet military capabilities and that the study may, if
widely publicized, further exacerbate present US–SU tensions.
OMB
Basically they approve the Assessment but will probably recom-
mend that the discussion of national strategies be omitted until these
are further developed.
CIA
They will probably approve the Net Assessment and call for fur-
ther work on the strategies.
ACDA
Warnke’s view is unclear. He is doing his own homework and
apparently is intrigued by the methodological inadequacies of the
­AIMSes. He should not be allowed to divert the discussion from the Net
Assessment to a critique of the AIMSes. That is for the PRC on Friday!!3
3 July 8.

V. Where You Would Like to Come Out
1. General consensus on the balance and pattern of trends described
in the Net Assessment.
2. Agreement on the submission of the Net Assessment to the
­President once minor modifications are made.
3. Agreement on a follow-­on SCC meeting, after the PRC consider-
ation of the force posture study, to discuss national strategies.
25.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
PRM/NSC–10 Comprehensive Net Assessment
PARTICIPANTS
State
Minutes of the meeting were not found.
Secretary Vance
Leslie H. Gelb
Defense
Secretary Brown
Charles W. Duncan
Lynn E. Davis
JCS
Gen. George S. Brown
Lt. General William Y. Smith
CIA
Adm. Stansfield Turner
Robert R. Bowie
OMB
Bert Lance
Edward R. Jayne
ACDA
Paul C. Warnke
Spurgeon Keeny
NSC
Zbigniew Brzezinski
David L. Aaron
Samuel P. Huntington
Catherine M. Kelleher
Col. William E. Odom
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The first meeting of the SCC on PRM/NSC–10 focused on the
general conclusions of the Net Assessment. Three basic issues were
discussed:

1. What is the present balance of power between the US and the SU?
—All present agreed with the conclusion of the Net Assessment
that there is a rough overall asymmetrical equivalence in military capa-
bilities and that the US remains significantly ahead of the SU in most
non-­military aspects of national power.
—With respect to strategic forces, it was agreed that the current
situation is one of relatively stable essential equivalence, but that uncer-
tainties exist with respect to increasing Soviet accuracy, Soviet civil
defense, and the apparent asymmetry in the protection of command
and control capabilities.
—On the Central Front, Warsaw Pact forces exceed those of NATO,
but neither side can be confident that it will be able to achieve its objec-
tives in a major conflict, with the principal Soviet uncertainty being
whether NATO will use nuclear weapons.
—In terms of naval and force projection capabilities, the US is
superior, but uncertainties exist in the eastern Mediterranean and the
US and the SU have about equal ability to project forces into the Per-
sian Gulf. The Soviets have also demonstrated their ability to support
Angola-­like proxy interventions.
—With respect to non-­military capabilities, US advantages could
even be somewhat greater than indicated in the assessment.
2. What is the direction of current trends and how significant are these
for the balance? There was general agreement with the Net Assessment
findings that:
—Soviet theater nuclear capabilities in Europe are improving sig-
nificantly, and only concerted Western efforts to fulfill present improve-
ment programs would halt (but not reverse) current trends in their
favor in the military balance on the Central Front.
—The US retains a political-­ideological attraction for the Third
World as well as the ability to provide economic and technological ben-
efits. Some uncertainty was expressed as to whether, as the Assessment
indicates, there had been erosion in the US diplomatic standing in the
past decade as a result of the increased autonomy and assertiveness of
Third World countries. The point was also made that this Administra-
tion was identifying itself with a broad segment of world opinion on
issues such as human rights and Africa.
The discussion also highlighted two dangerous trends which
might tempt Soviet action:
—­increasing political and economic uncertainties in Western and
Eastern Europe which could lead Soviet leaders in the midst of a suc-
cession struggle into cautious adventurism;
—­the increased dependence on the West on the Persian Gulf oil
supplies.

3. How can the United States and the Soviet Union exploit their present
advantages to affect the future balance? All agreed with the Assessment
that the Soviets would now be more prone to use military power for
political ends, although there was some disagreement as to:
—­whether the Soviets had already been able to use their new mili-
tary standing for political compellance;
—­whether increased Western European (particularly German)
attentiveness to Soviet concerns was a direct result of new Soviet influ-
ence, and thus represented a form of Finlandization.
All supported the judgment of the Assessment that:
—­the primary US advantage lay in economic and technological
assets;
—­these could yield little direct leverage over Soviet behavior or
influence over internal political development;
—­these could be best used to constrain Soviet opportunities or
reduce Western vulnerabilities in key regions (e.g., Middle East, PRC,
Yugoslavia).
In addition, it was argued that the large American technological
and industrial base allows the US to put competitive pressure on the
USSR which could encourage Moscow to seek relief through arms
control.

26.
Summary of Conclusions and Minutes of a Policy Review
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
PRM–10 Military Strategy and Force Posture
PARTICIPANTS
The Vice President (first hour)
A. Denis Clift
Defense
Secretary Harold Brown, Chairman
Charles W. Duncan
David E. McGiffert
Lynn E. Davis
JCS
General George S. Brown
Lt Gen William Y. Smith
State
Deputy Secretary Warren
Christopher
Leslie H. Gelb
CIA
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Robert Bowie
OMB
Bowman Cutter
Edward R. Jayne II
ACDA
Spurgeon Keeny
Robert Behr
NSC
Zbigniew Brzezinski
David L. Aaron
Victor Utgoff
James Thomson
Samuel Huntington
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
In a meeting to discuss the general purpose force issues high-
the PRC reviewed the following issues:
1. US Strategy for Europe. Dr. Brzezinski stated that it is not possible
in the current political environment to gain support—­in the US or espe-
cially in Europe—­for procurement of the conventional forces required
to assure that NATO could maintain territorial integrity if deterrence
failed. Most participants agreed. Dr. Brzezinski proposed a “stalemate”
strategy, under which NATO would fall back and stalemate the Soviets,
leaving the Soviets to face the political consequences of their aggres-
sion, including a mobilized US. These potential consequences would
help deter the Soviets. General Brown, however, thought that NATO
could move in the direction of preventing territorial loss by maintaining
White House Situation Room.
2 The July 6 Military Strategy and Force Posture is ibid.

the 3% per year growth in real defense spending agreed to at the May
NATO Defense Ministerial meeting. All agreed that strategy for NATO
must continue to rely on a combination of strategic nuclear, theater
nuclear, and conventional forces for deterrence, and that we wanted
first to emphasize conventional force improvements. After current
efforts at improved conventional capability have succeeded or failed,
we may want to turn to theater nuclear policy, especially the potentially
critical role of the land-­based cruise missile. The group agreed that a
distinction between declaratory strategy and actual capability was
necessary; for example, we cannot—­for political reasons—­announce a
strategy that includes any loss of West German territory.
2. Operations outside of Europe during a NATO/Pact War. There was
general agreement that taking initiatives against the Soviet Union,
especially Soviet territory, could have important consequences in a war:
they might provide trading material, hurt the Soviets’ ability to prose-
cute war in Europe, or divert Soviet forces. Secretary Brown, however,
did not see any opportunities that would worry the Soviets enough to
help in the context of a war in Europe. Mr. Aaron suggested that it may
be more important to defend our access to the Persian Gulf than to take
initiatives.
3. Crisis Management and Local Wars. The participants generally
agreed that forces procured for this purpose should be added to
those required for a NATO/Warsaw Pact war. The Middle East, the
Persian Gulf and Korea would be the most important areas. Forces
acquired for these purposes would be ample to handle contingencies
that might occur elsewhere. Dr. Brzezinski suggested the creation of
a highly responsive, global strike force; the Second Division might
become available for this purpose after its withdrawal from Korea is
complete.
4. East Asia. All agreed that, beyond the ground force withdrawals
from Korea, the US should make no further changes in its military pos-
ture in the Far East for the time being. Some thought that a few small
steps towards increasing our presence—­such as filling out the fighter
wing in Korea or undertaking some exercises with ground force units—­
might help assure Far Eastern nations that we intend to remain a Far
Eastern power.
5. Forces and Costs. There was concern, expressed particularly by
Mr. Aaron and Mr. Jayne, that the large range of forces estimated for
the alternative integrated military strategies (AIMS) made it difficult
to understand the cost constraint on the choice of strategy. Secretary
Brown agreed to do further work on that aspect.

Minutes
Secretary Brown: I want to start with some introductory remarks.
This part of the PRM–10 effort was not designed to produce specific
force postures. Rather, the approach was based on creating analytical
building blocks for various geographical areas of the world or fields
of conflict. These were put together to create illustrative strategies, or
AIMS, to see what the overall strategy would look like and the kinds of
forces that would be required.
The study did not define national objectives. It did not investigate
theater nuclear forces. It did not look into the problems of mobilization
and industrial bases.
A set of questions emerged from the study that I want to discuss
here today and that I hope to use to elicit guidance from the President. I
don’t believe this study provides a basis for overall military strategy and
force posture decisions. We in DOD will be taking a look at where we
are today, where we want to be, and what sorts of incremental changes
we should be making, depending on what emerges in the future.
Let’s turn to the first question. Zbig, would you like to begin?
Dr. Brzezinski: First, I would like to ask: How do the AIMS relate
to the questions? I noticed that on page two the study leads off with a
description of the AIMS.
Secretary Brown: Well, let’s take Europe as an example. AIMS E,
F and G all have the property of blunting a Soviet attack but losing
territory. H and I would be more demanding; in these AIMS we would
recover lost territory and would be able to sustain conflict for 90 days.
In AIMS J we would sustain conflict indefinitely. And in AIMS M
we would counterattack on the flanks. AIMS E, F, and G correspond
roughly to what we can do today. AIMS F Variant corresponds to what
we say we can do today. The rest of the AIMS are more than we can do
today.
Dr. Brzezinski: Just to get things going, I think that US military
strategy for Europe ought to be neither intimidation nor deterrence but
some degree of ambiguity so that Soviet military planners can’t calcu-
late precisely what would happen if they attack. This implies the main-
tenance of our strategic forces and the current relationship of theater
nuclear forces to conventional forces and strategic forces. If deterrence
fails, our posture ought to be to blunt the Soviet attack. It is unreason-
able to hope to restore boundaries. The Europeans simply won’t spend
the money to accomplish that.
Secretary Brown: How would you handle this policy with West
­Germany? Our present declaratory posture is forward defense.
Dr. Brzezinski: What matters is how the Soviets view this posture.
If we can blunt them and stalemate the conflict, then the Soviets would

have to deal with a massive adverse political reaction, both in America
and throughout the world. They would be put on the political defen-
sive. This range of uncertainty about what would occur, including the
consequences of a stalemate, is likely to deter the Soviets.
General Brown: I don’t understand how you feel that a stalemate
strategy will deter the Soviets. If we can’t get back territory, then they
would simply be able to grab it.
Dr. Brzezinski: But they would have to deal with the long-­term polit-
ical consequences of such an act. I’m not saying that I like this strategy,
but it’s the best we can do: the Allies are a problem—­they won’t do
more—­and I’m not sure we can afford a buildup, either.
General Brown: That’s saying that we can’t match the Soviets
militarily.
Secretary Brown: We cannot match them in building up a massive
military establishment.
Dr. Brzezinski: Okay. Look at AIMS H and I and see what they
cost. Congress won’t fund that. We simply have to hope that the long-­
term consequences of a potential stalemate will act as a restraint on the
Soviets.
General Brown: The restraint will act on us, not them.
Secretary Brown: If we hope for a stalemate, then what do we do
about sustaining capability? Zbig seems to be talking about a situation
where we would rely on a massive mobilization base. We need advance
planning for that and don’t have it.
Dr. Brzezinski: How about 60 days? I don’t like 90 days because that
means a long destructive war in Europe. But 30 days is just simply too
short; it’s risky. Sixty days is obviously an arbitrary intermediate num-
ber. But we need some time to put pressure on the Soviets.
General Brown: The JCS starting point is NATO strategy—­the mili-
tary strategy that has been developed in MC 14/3. We commit forces on
that basis to NATO every year. The US and the FRG are the two strong
partners of the Alliance. I fear that if we begin now to take a dramatic
step in new directions, we are going to have problems, especially with
the Germans and especially if we appear to back off NATO strategy.
The JCS think: we have to be able to stop a Warsaw Pact attack; we have
to throw the Soviets back to the pre-­war boundaries.
Dr. Brzezinski: But how many forces do we need for that?
General Brown: Options I, J, and M are about what we think NATO
needs. Zbig’s options are F, H, and I.
Secretary Brown: Zbig is talking about F Variant with 60 days.
Mr. Aaron: General Brown, what could we do today?
General Brown: The JCS judgment is shown in the study itself.

Dr. Brzezinski: Is that orderly withdrawal?
General Brown: Between just us and the Germans we could do
­better than that.
Secretary Brown: Essentially it’s the “limit loss” strategy. Look at the
chart on page III-3.
General Brown: But we don’t have 90 days of sustaining capability.
Secretary Brown: But we have more than 30. We plan to keep 30 in
the theater.
Admiral Turner: I want to re-­emphasize David Aaron’s point. The
Allies can’t even last for 30 days.
Mr. Aaron: NATO is like Victorian society: it’s built on hypoc-
risy. We say we want to do one thing but we all know we can only do
another. But we can’t go back to a 30-­day sustaining capability, nor can
we talk about territorial loss because of the consequences for Germany.
We might want to look at other options. For example, maybe we want
to have nuclear forces in the theater that can strike the USSR. With the
conventional situation being what it is, should we not put GLCM in the
theater?
General Brown: That’s going the other way. We want to improve
conventional forces and raise the nuclear threshold.
Mr. Aaron: We are faced with a choice: more theater nuclear forces,
or more conventional capability.
Mr. McGiffert: You are not describing alternatives; we can do both.
Secretary Brown: Yes. You can continue to try to improve conven-
tional capability. Stan, what about the warning question?
Admiral Turner: We are working now on an estimate on warning, so
I don’t want to say more about that now, [2 lines not declassified]. Also,
I worry from an historical standpoint about the idea of a short war.
That’s what everyone thought before World War I and World War II.
Secretary Brown: But, if you know that the other guy is going to run
out of materiel, all you need to do is outlast him.
Mr. Bowie: I do not understand how a stalemate strategy will deter
him.
Secretary Brown: That’s what we do in Korea.
Mr. Bowie: Korea is a situation where the forces on both sides are
equal. The stalemate strategy postulates weakness, however.
Secretary Brown: Because it is widely held that the defense has an
advantage.
Dr. Brzezinski: George, what would it cost to do what you want to
do in Europe?
General Brown: We can move toward what we want to accomplish
with actions such as our current initiatives program in NATO. The

agreement with the Allies to maintain 3 percent real growth in spend-
ing, better Allied reserves, etc.
Dr. Brzezinski: You say that we can pursue H at the cost of F. I’m
pleased.
General Brown: I’m optimistic that we can do much better than
today if we stick with the 3 percent growth.
Secretary Brown: All these arguments rest on the premise that Bob
Bowie has challenged: that the defense has an advantage.
Mr. Bowie: This takes us back to yesterday’s discussion; we have a
technological advantage. Let’s be inventive and see if we can’t counter
the Soviets militarily without maximizing forces.
Mr. Jayne: How long can the Soviets sustain conflict?
Admiral Turner: [2 lines not declassified] It is obvious from this paper
that we need to do a good deal more work here. I don’t know how
much we have done in the past.
Mr. Duncan: We need to move toward the 90-­day goal in lock step
with NATO. We must increase conventional capability. If we move
from the goal of improved conventional capability, we will have politi-
cal problems; and we will harm our deterrent, too.
Dr. Brzezinski: Are we talking about constructing a wish list for the
President, or are we going to devise a strategy that we can accomplish?
Mr. Jayne: We already went to the President with a wish list. We
can’t do that again. The President said he wanted to get into the details,
but the study’s cover memo implies that we want to go over the gener-
alities again.
Secretary Brown: But we need costs to be able to do what you pro-
pose, and the ones in the report aren’t good enough.
Mr. Duncan: I wanted earlier to emphasize the importance of the
first 7 to 14 days of a conflict. That means that improvements in readi-
ness and early reinforcement come before sustaining capability.
Mr. Aaron: I endorse that.
Mr. Christopher: I want to focus on foreign policy. First, it’s desir-
able to confirm NATO strategy as it exists today. We can’t talk about
giving away the FRG. But we can’t talk about holding out for a year,
either. I’m one of David’s Victorians. It is also important not to over-
state the threat. Otherwise, the analysis creates a high level of demand
that appears to make the strategy unattainable. We need to keep work-
ing on the conventional deterrent.
Secretary Brown: Let’s turn now to areas outside of Europe. Is it
possible to hurt the USSR outside of Europe?
Mr. Christopher: We want to emphasize ambiguity. Make the Sovi-
ets think that we might do something to them.

Mr. Duncan: I agree.
Secretary Brown: However, it’s not so obvious what we can do to
the Soviets.
Dr. Brzezinski: You need to relate this area to the first one. Since I
favor stalemate in Europe, I favor an activist strategy in other areas. For
example, if there are states allied to the USSR, we can capture them and
perhaps hope for a territorial trade. Cuba is an easy target.
Mr. Gelb: Would you want to buy forces for that?
Dr. Brzezinski: Yes. I think we need a global strike force. The Second
Division might become part of that when it comes out of Korea.
Secretary Brown: Why not put the same capability in Europe?
Dr. Brzezinski: That’s not the point where conflict is most likely to
occur.
Mr. Christopher: What are the most attractive targets?
General Brown: Perhaps Soviet territory in the northwest Pacific.
But that is very risky in response to something like Berlin.
Mr. Aaron: This must be seen in terms of what sort of force multipli-
ers you can create to help yourself—­northwest Asia maybe. However,
we would be better off sizing our forces to help out in the Persian Gulf,
which is important because of the oil. Why not size forces for Europe
plus what we need for the Persian Gulf?
Secretary Brown: What would worry the Soviets most? Why would
they care about Cuba, if they were fighting in Europe?
Dr. Brzezinski: It would be a political defeat.
Admiral Turner: [1 line not declassified]
Dr. Brzezinski: We cannot anticipate [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] help in such a situation. They would prefer to sit tight and watch
the two giants fight it out. We might consider such actions as naval
blockades.
General Brown: Yes, and we could take action against their fishing
fleets.
Secretary Brown: How does this help in the context of a war for
Europe? Let’s move now to a discussion about local wars and crisis
management. Are there specific regions of the world that we should
worry about?
Dr. Brzezinski: I agree with David. The Persian Gulf, in addition to
the Middle East, is an important area.
Secretary Brown: Is it likely that we need no special capability for
Africa or Latin America?
General Brown: The most likely problem in Latin America might
result from a failure to ratify a Panama Treaty.

Secretary Brown: The Middle East is probably the most demanding
scenario, so if we have enough for that, we will have enough for any-
where else.
Mr. Aaron: There are two places we need to project our power:
Korea and the Persian Gulf. The basic force sizing question has to do
with splitting the difference.
Secretary Brown: But in Korea we plan to be ambiguous about
deployment of ground forces.
Mr. Aaron: What is the Pacific fleet for? Ought we move it into the
Indian Ocean?
Mr. Jayne: Let’s look at East Asia. Why don’t we get the Japanese to
do more in terms of their air and naval capabilities?
Dr. Brzezinski: Japanese politics won’t permit. Either we will get
incremental improvements or, if there is a great political shock (such
as the loss of Korea), we might get a big jump. But that shock might
separate us from the Japanese.
Admiral Turner: We need crisis management forces to maintain free
use of the seas and in the event of terrorism.
Secretary Brown: Divisions don’t help you there. You need a rapid
reaction capability.
Mr. Aaron: The problem is to maintain secrecy.
Secretary Brown: The military can maintain secrecy.
General Brown: The problem with maintaining secrecy occurs
during the planning stages here in D.C. We can move a battalion out of
Fort Bragg without a problem.
Dr. Brzezinski: We are talking about two kinds of force: (1) a small,
long-­range, rapidly deployable strike force; and (2) a larger force for
intervention.
Mr. Jayne: Why does the overall Navy structure appear insensitive
to the strategy?
Secretary Brown: The Navy is not immediately identifiable with any
of these strategies. It’s sort of an infrastructure. Also, we didn’t include
a war-­at-­sea scenario.
Dr. Brzezinski: What would it take to reconfigure the Second Divi-
sion into a mobile versatile strike force for Korea, the Mideast and
Europe?
Secretary Brown: A big expense is lift. Also, forces configured for
one place may not be suitable for another. But it’s worth looking at.
Mr. Christopher: We have not paid enough attention to Africa. It’s a
potential hot spot. What sorts of military forces do we need to protect
the territorial integrity of states in Africa? Look how well the French
did in Zaire.

Secretary Brown: I guess we all agree that these forces must be addi-
tive to the forces procured for other reasons. Let’s turn now to our strat-
egy for East Asia. We’ve covered much of it already.
Mr. Christopher: It’s important that we continue to be an Asian
power, not only for the smaller countries but for the Chinese.
Mr. Duncan: We need to maintain our current status, by, for exam-
ple, staying in the Philippines.
Mr. McGiffert: I would go further and look for a few small steps we
can take in the direction away from reductions.
Secretary Brown: We can fill out the wing of aircraft in Korea. That’s
a small plus, isn’t it?
Mr. McGiffert: Very small, because aircraft can be easily moved out.
Secretary Brown: Could we leave ground forces in East Asia?
Mr. McGiffert: We might consider leaving one of the Second Divi-
sion’s brigades in Okinawa, although there may be real estate problems.
Mr. Christopher: I see an advantage to moving all the ground forces
back here; we might want to use them somewhere else.
Dr. Brzezinski: We must maintain our military presence in East Asia
for now except for the withdrawal from Korea. We need to make some
moves that show that our military commitment to Korea is unaffected
by the withdrawals. I am worried about that recent Chinese statement.
We need to look at some positive steps: perhaps more aircraft or rota-
tional exercises with ground force units.
Secretary Brown: Such things are part of a package that I am send-
ing to the President. I would like to sum up now.
We talked about Europe, in particular the important difference
between declaratory policy and actual capability. Few of us believe that
we can match the Soviets in Europe, although some thought (George
Brown) that we could work toward a strategy of minimum territorial
loss if we maintained 3 percent real growth per year for NATO spend-
ing. Most believe, however, that we would suffer territorial loss in a
conflict. But we must continue to work on improving the conventional
link of what I call the NATO Tripod (to distinguish it from the Strate-
gic Triad). We might have to augment our theater nuclear forces, but
first we want to work on conventional force improvements. After this
attempt has succeeded or failed, we will turn to theater nuclear forces;
land-­based cruise missiles are critical.
We talked about what we might do outside of Europe during a war
with the Warsaw Pact. We agreed that additional forces that could take
initiatives against the USSR to make up for European losses could be
important. But it is not clear exactly what we could do.
We discussed local wars. We agreed that the Middle East and the
Persian Gulf are critical, and also that the forces needed for local wars

must be additive to the forces needed for Europe. The Second Division
might become available for this purpose. We touched slightly on Africa,
Latin America, and war-­at-­sea.
We also talked about East Asia. All agreed that we should make
no further changes now except for the withdrawal from Korea. There is
some thought that we might augment our presence in the area slightly;
for example, we might fill out the fighter wing in Korea or undertake
more exercises. We might also consider stationing more ground forces
outside of Korea; but there is a question of room and whether it would
be better to have them at home available for other purposes.
Our next step is to discuss strategic forces next week. Then I guess
Zbig will synthesize the whole thing. I believe we can take this study
to the President in the present form. We can get his views on the key
questions and on the size of the Defense Budget.
Mr. Aaron: Can’t we get better costs? It’s hard to answer these ques-
tions without understanding that constraint.
Secretary Brown: It’s easy to cost-­out a particular force. Our diffi-
culty is in narrowing the range of estimated forces.
Mr. Jayne: I’m afraid if you don’t narrow the range of forces now,
the President will do it for you.
Secretary Brown: We will work on it.
27.
Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1
Washington, July 13, 1977
Secretary Brown opened the meeting by describing its purpose;
i.e., to review that portion of the PRM–10 Military Strategy and Force
Posture Review that deals with strategic forces. He noted that while the
subject of strategic forces was not quite so sprawling as general pur-
pose forces, it was still not quite so simple as some, included himself,
mary of Conclusions, the meeting began at 2 p.m. and took place in the White House
Situation Room. The participants were Warren Christopher and David Gompert from the
Department of State; Harold Brown, Charles Duncan, David McGiffert and Lynn Davis
from the Department of Defense; George Brown and William Smith from the Joint Chiefs
of Staff; Robert Bowie from the Central Intelligence Agency; Randy Jayne, from the Office
of Management and Budget; Spurgeon Keeny and Robert Behr from the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency; and Zbigniew Brzezinski, David Aaron, Samuel Huntington,
Victor Utgoff, and Roger Molander from the National Security Council. (Ibid.)

pretended. He called attention to the paper prepared on this subject
that focused on US objectives for strategic forces, namely:
—Deterrence of attack on US, its forces, and our Allies.
—The control of escalation and the limitation of damage to the
degree possible if deterrence fails.
—Avoiding the perception of an imbalance in the strategic forces
in order to inhibit efforts at coercion of the US and its Allies.
Secretary Brown noted that consideration of how to satisfy these
objectives and the accompanying illustrative forces had produced a
series of questions for consideration specifically:
—To what extent should US forces be procured to achieve these
objectives; in particular, to avoid perceptions of a US/Soviet asymme-
try that would have no military significance but could have political
significance.
—What is needed to deter Soviet conventional and nuclear
aggression.
—With relation to the first and second of these questions, the
degree to which the US should procure hard target kill capability and
the dangers to stability which might result. This was not simply a ques-
tion of all or nothing, since we could want some hard target kill capa-
bility vice an efficient hard target kill capability (i.e., the ability to put
all Soviet ICBMs at risk).
—How much defensive capability to limit damage should be pro-
cured since offensive forces cannot do this job.
—The need for a strategic reserve force.
—What our declaratory policy should be with respect to strategic
forces.
—The relationship between strategic and general purpose forces.
He noted that we are now talking about parity in overall US/
Soviet military capabilities in contrast to the situation in the early
1960’s where US had a clear strategic advantage. Among the issues that
arise in the current situation are such things whether to have a Dyad
or a Triad, how to respond to certain Soviet advantages, whether we
should match them or somehow compensate for them, and further-
more, whether we should match them in military capability or simply
in perceived capability. He noted that if we look at real scenarios, then
such issues as command and control and attack assessment become as
important, if not more important, than some of the actual numbers of
strategic systems.
He then asked the various agency representatives what their
views were of the current strategic situation and the issues under
consideration.

Warren Christopher responded by focusing his comments on the
political sufficiency question. He said that our goals should be over-
all equivalence in strategic forces, and that as long as we had overall
equivalence, we could tolerate asymmetries in some particular mea-
sures. He said that in looking back to the time when we had true supe-
riority in strategic systems, there was really no great change between
that and today in terms of our ability to conduct foreign policy. This
raised the question of even if we tried to buy superiority, whether it
would justify the expense of buying it in terms of what it did for us.
He said that the Chinese want us to be stronger, but that by and large
as long as we maintain equivalence, we were able to carry out our for-
eign policy effectively. He noted that it was also important not to boast,
but rather to be confident in proclaiming the situation of overall par-
ity, since many countries would become concerned if we became more
modest about our capabilities; therefore, we should speak confidently
about them.
Charles Duncan concurred in this view and emphasized that we
should have rough equivalence not only in perceived capability but
in real capability—­particularly in terms of our retaliatory capability in
a second-­strike situation. Secretary Brown noted that we all probably
could agree on this general approach, but that the disagreement came
in terms of how much insurance to have in some of these situations,
how to count civil defense, etc.
Dave McGiffert indicated that he was particularly concerned about
the question of hard target capability and the implications of our pur-
suing any efficient hard target capability in terms of stability. Secretary
Brown noted that if the Soviets had a hard target capability, it would be
destabilized. McGiffert responded that it would be more destabilizing
if both had an efficient hard target capability. He noted that there were
complications even if we pursued a limited hard target capability, since,
even though it might be seen as limited by the Soviets, third countries
may perceive it as a sign of weakness compared to the Soviets.
Secretary Brown noted that we could obtain a limited ­number
of highly accurate weapons and not have an efficient hard target
capability—­which would complicate the plans of an attacker. He noted
the problem, however, of how the other side might perceive the capabil-
ity. [3 lines not declassified] But if the Soviets behave as we do and end up
calculating 100% reliability and 100% kill probability, then in their eyes
we would have an efficient hard target kill capability against their silos.
Randy Jayne noted that, as Dr. Brzezinski had mentioned with
respect to general purpose forces, there was nothing wrong with hav-
ing some ambiguities in terms of force capability. However, there was
a question of how this was presented both internally and externally in
terms of our saying what capability we do have.

Secretary Brown noted that there was a risk in overstating capa-
bility since the Soviets might respond with what they perceive to be a
capability equal to our puffed-­up capability and then the whole situa-
tion goes unstable. General Brown noted that he had trouble believing
that the Soviets believe everything that they hear about US capabili-
ties since they very closely follow what actually goes on in Congress
and through the newspapers and that in reality we do not fool them
with any public statements that might be exaggerated. Secretary Brown
noted that while we do not fool them with the actual numbers, there
still is uncertainty in their estimates of our capability and, in particu-
lar, how we would use it. General Brown concurred in this noting that
some cases we do not even know ourselves how we would use it.
Secretary Brown then asked Robert Bowie to comment on how the
Soviets see the strategic balance, how the rest of the world and, in par-
ticular, our European Allies see it, and what the Soviets are trying to do
with their strategic systems. Bob Bowie indicated that the Soviets prob-
ably also think there is a rough balance in strategic systems at this time,
and that our chief Allies also see the situation to be a rough equivalence
in strategic systems. However, there is a strong difference of opinion
on just what the Soviets are doing. He noted that the ongoing improve-
ments in Soviet ICBM capability did not appear to us as reflecting an
attitude of seeking assured destruction, but rather that they were seek-
ing war-­fighting capabilities; however, this is not necessarily how they
see it. We assume that they should go for the types of weapons suitable
for strategic objectives similar to ours; however, it is not clear just how
they see the strategic situation.
Secretary Brown noted that if it is their idea that one must have
war-­fighting capability for deterrence, then they might not be deterred
unless we also have war-­fighting capability.
Bob Bowie noted that there are differences of views on this ques-
tion. Some believe they might take more risks in their behavior if we do
not counter such things as their improved war-­fighting capability. Even
if the Soviets achieve some superiority, they are still unlikely to see
nuclear war as a desirable thing; nevertheless, from a political stand-
point, they might see less risk in other activities. He noted that there are
a fair number of people in the intelligence agencies who see the current
situation in these terms.
Spurgeon Keeny noted that he agreed that the real purpose of stra-
tegic forces was to deter nuclear war, and the key to this was having
assured retaliatory capability. At the same time, there was also a need
to maintain a perceived balance in strategic forces such as currently
existed. Secretary Brown injected that Soviets today had more capabil-
ity in some areas. Keeny responded that both sides do—­that no one is
ahead in all individual categories. With respect to the Soviets’ obsession

for improving their ICBM forces, he noted that some of the questions at
issue went beyond assured destruction and into war-­fighting capability
on the US side as well. He noted that some of the Soviet talk and think-
ing about what we perceive as dangerous can also be found reflected in
our own military forces and thinking.
Secretary Brown said that we have in our current defense guidance
a directive that if deterrence fails, we should limit damage to the extent
possible. He noted that our plans for damage limitation were based
almost entirely upon the objective of limiting escalation. The objective
is to give the Soviets an incentive not to wipe out population. However,
we have no useful plan in military terms for actually limiting damage
to the US. This may be true as well in the Soviet Union, but this is dubi-
ous in light of their large air defense system and their uncertain civil
defense capability.
General Brown noted that the war planners would welcome some
way to limit damage; however, it appears to defy solution to limit
damage through weaponry given what we have and what they have.
Secretary Brown noted that we are staying away from both active and
passive defenses, whereas they are continuing to pursue such defenses
except for ABM. However, there really may not be any significant dif-
ference in the damage limiting capability of the two sides.
Spurgeon Keeny commented that they had much the same prob-
lem as General Brown had described on their side with large yield
weapons opposite them. Secretary Brown noted that our damage lim-
iting capability was confined to limited targeting on the Soviet Union.
General Brown said that the latest C3 study indicated that the
Soviets may not be able to distinguish between the limited attack and a
full-­scale attack on the Soviet Union. Secretary Brown offered the view
that their very hard command and control indicates a concern about
continuity during a war. While this would probably be useless in a
full-­scale war, the question is whether they think so. Spurgeon Keeny
noted that we have an airborne command and control post from which
someone could draw the same conclusions. Secretary Brown said that
this was not meant simply to save the members of the Democratic
Party. The important question was not that the Soviets would be able
to succeed at saving the leadership but rather how they perceive the
situation.
Bob Bowie said that he was impressed by the Soviet civil defense
effort. [3 lines not declassified] the Soviets have a long-­term civil defense
program. [3 lines not declassified]
General Brown indicated that it was not our goal to match Soviet
forces except in some areas, and that we had worked to offset certain
Soviet capabilities and intended to continue to do so. He emphasized
that we needed an adequate number of improved systems in order to

maintain the balance in the light of the Soviet advances in recent years.
On the political sufficiency point, while there was no distinct advantage
in having superiority as opposed to equivalence, if it turns around and
the Soviets achieve preponderance in strategic forces, we might suf-
fer severe consequences. He emphasized that we needed to maintain
the strategic balance, since otherwise the Soviets might ask us to leave
Europe. He also emphasized the importance of a strategic reserve force;
however, the size was debatable in that at present, the JCS had no fixed
notion of what the size of this force should be. He noted that our hard-­
target kill capability is important to respond to selected attacks against
the US and also in terms of the capability it gives us if deterrence fails.
He indicated that there were other key elements that we needed to take
into account such as command and control.
David Aaron indicated that he did not share the assessment that
our superiority was of no use to us in the past. He noted that in the
early 1960’s, we had a situation in terms of ground forces which was
worse than today and, that as a consequence, our strategic nuclear
superiority was an important factor.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that it was also an important factor in Cuba
and permitted us to use our conventional forces with immunity.
­Secretary Brown noted that he was in on the Cuban situation and was
skeptical as to the importance of our strategic superiority in that situa-
tion. Dr. Brzezinski questioned whether we would have gone into Cuba
without such superiority and raised the question of how we would
respond today if, for example, the Soviets took Berlin. Secretary Brown
noted that Curtis LeMay had told the President at the time of the Cuban
crisis that the Soviets would have the capability of killing tens of mil-
lions of Americans. Dr. Brzezinski responded that we could have killed
50 to 60 million Russians. The question was what would happen today if
­Brezhnev said he was going to take Berlin—­would we simply say that
we were going to talk. Secretary Brown said he continued to disagree,
but that for now at least, it was simply an academic question.
David Aaron said that in the early 1960’s, the strategic situation
was a function of two curves that were climbing at different rates. At
the time, they had very little but were increasing in capability. He ques-
tioned whether this was the same as a situation in which both have a
great deal of forces and whether it is deaths that matter on the two sides
or hard-­target kill capability or is it really the capability to limit dam-
age. He indicated that nuclear weapons do not help Clausowitz out
very much since there is very little political utility in a major nuclear
exchange. He said we need to look at specific problems such as:
—What amount of hard-­target capability we should have.
—What the response should be to the increasing vulnerability of
the land-­based ICBM force.

—The question of command and control which could be crucial
and has not been focused on enough as well.
—The question of a reserve force.
He said that once we were through with these questions, then we
should ask whether forces are equivalent on the two sides.
Warren Christopher indicated that what he had questioned was
whether there was enough of an advantage in superiority for it to be
worth the cost.
Secretary Brown noted that a fatality level of 100 million was much
more significant than a fatality level of 10 million. David Aaron said
that he was not arguing about the finite detail of questions such as
these, but rather wondered whether we might still have a perceptions
problem even if we solve our military and strategic problems. Secre-
tary Brown noted that even if one side suffered 10 million casualties
and another 100 million, there still might be deterrence, but deterrence
was not as clear and certain when there was a substantial difference in
fatalities. David Aaron noted that this emphasized the need for getting
a good fix on civil defense.
Dr. Brzezinski, in reflecting on the discussion in the previous two
meetings, noted that while we were generally confident about being
equivalent with the Soviets in a large sense at the present time, we were
concerned about certain trends where we did face some dangers. This
emphasized the need for long-­range force projections. In addition to
the deterrence of Soviet attack on the US, we also wanted to prevent the
Soviets from compelling others. In this sense, we needed an umbrella
under which we could conduct limited military actions. For example, in
the future we might need limited hard-­target kill capability in the event
of some type of nuclear exchange. He noted that it was most important
that we buy an effective and credible countervalue capability and that
we adopt a posture which concentrates on attacking Russian counter-
value targets as opposed to all targets in the Soviet Union. Secretary
Brown noted that this was more selective than even the neutron bomb.
[5 paragraphs (37 lines) not declassified]
David Aaron asked whether the Soviets show any priority for
protecting great Russians as opposed to others. Bob Bowie said it was
hard to say about that. Randy Jayne indicated that he thought the civil
defense activity correlated with new construction. Dave McGiffert said
that it was the situations in which the population walks into the coun-
tryside that really affected the results.
Spurgeon Keeny said that no one had really calculated what hap-
pens in terms of fatalities after the initial exchange. Bob Bowie said that
Herman Kahn had done some assessment of this problem in his Coun-
try A-Country B studies and had indicated the view that he thought

that people could survive. Secretary Brown said that was because Kahn
stores his own sustenance.
Secretary Brown asked that in the time remaining that the group
should talk about certain questions with respect to weapons systems,
such as the question of the Triad versus a Dyad versus an augmented
Triad, as well as the question of how sure we are of how our systems
will actually perform. Dr. Brzezinski asked how sure the Soviets are
about the performance of their systems. Secretary Brown said that both
sides had similar problems in terms of the destruction of systems before
launch, defensive actions, both passive and active, etc. He noted there
was also the question of to what extent the creation of a new weap-
ons system changed perceptions in a way that was favorable to us. Dr.
Brzezinski raised the question whether this depends on what accuracy
new systems might have. Secretary Brown noted that such questions
affect both deterrence and hard-­target capability.
Dr. Brzezinski emphasized that he thought that deterrence should
focus on population and countervalue targets rather than on counter-
force capability. He indicated that he thought that continuing to have
a Triad made more sense since it permitted the US to mix the threat
as well as to provide some selection in terms of lower level responses
where the other side would not know where an attack might be com-
ing from.
David Aaron asked whether the real Triad question was not simply
what we should do about ICBM survivability as distinct from the hard-­
target question. He thought it made no sense to make a great invest-
ment in a force which was increasing in vulnerability. Secretary Brown
said that in this context, a mobile ICBM made sense. In addition, as
long as we get warning, the other side has to account for the possibility
that we might launch under attack—­systems that might not be as good
because of their vulnerability were not necessarily useless. However,
vulnerability does affect stability especially in situations of high ten-
sion. If both sides have good assurance that their systems will survive,
then the situation is more stable.
[1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified]
David Aaron wondered whether we would be satisfied with the
answer of launch-­on-­warning in terms of stability and deterrence.
There was also important command control questions. In any event,
there was some question about whether it made any sense to put M–X
in silos.
Secretary Brown indicated that we use to feel stronger than we feel
now. In terms of Soviet actions, there was some question if the Soviets
would count on us to not fire before they would take out our ICBMs.
David Aaron noted that this is basically a question of the credibility of
our posture.

Sam Huntington noted that our high level of readiness would tend
to increase the Soviet perception that we might fire on warning. Secre-
tary Brown agreed with this, noting that the current low state of read-
iness of Soviet strategic forces indicated that they are going to count
on strategic warning. David Aaron indicated that there would be more
value in putting our resources in better attack assessment capability or
in command and control rather than put any more dollars into a force
that is increasing in vulnerability.
Secretary Brown said that we could fill out the Minuteman II force
with Minuteman IIIs and in 10 years probably do as well as the Sovi-
ets in terms of counterforce capability—­but we are not going that way.
George Brown noted that the M–X gave us advantage of not only an
improvement in throw weight but also an improvement in accuracy.
Dr. Brzezinski indicated that we should look closer at the con-
straints that are currently in existence on US targeting. General Brown
said that we are looking at 242 and the supporting documents, and that
in his view the command and control side needed more emphasis. This
is being done through WMCCS (Worldwide Military Command and
Control System) and that we are making some progress in improving
command and control—­but that it is a very ambitious five-­year plan
that existed. Secretary Brown noted that the strategic part was only a
piece of this.
General Brown indicated that WMCCS does provide some SIOP
support, but that on the warning side, we did need to do more; specif-
ically, we needed to look thoroughly at development of a capability to
see at night from space.
Spurgeon Keeny said that the Soviet hard-­target capability clearly
is disturbing, although somewhat exaggerated. He said that hard-­target
capability does not buy us as much from an arms control or strategic
standpoint and, that although this was a troublesome direction which
Soviet forces were taking, it may be a manageable situation. In the con-
text of the study, he tended to favor Substrategy 2 to be achieved with
an augmented Dyad in which we would keep the fixed Minuteman
sites but put future expenditures into our submarine-­launched and air-
borne capability; in particular, ALCMs on aircraft and general improve-
ments in the SLBM force. He noted that within the existing Minuteman
force, we had available all the hard-­target capability we would need
for unforeseen contingencies and that we had the NS–20 and/or even
the AIRS if we needed it. This would give us a substantial hard-­target
capability but not enough to wipe out the Soviet ICBM force.
Secretary Brown asked what we do when the Minuteman became
11 years old—­whether we would then reopen the Minuteman line.
Spurgeon Keeny responded that it would be better to reopen the Min-
uteman III line as opposed to building the M–X. He argued that to the

extent that the emerging Soviet hard-­target capability was real, it cer-
tainty would be unwise to put M–X in silos and mobile M–X created a
serious problem of acceptability in this country as well as in terms of
its impact on SALT.
General Brown indicated that the alternative basing approach for
M–X might be acceptable. Spurgeon Keeny noted that this approach
raised serious concerns about SALT compliance.
Secretary Brown noted that the M–X mobile question needs a lot
more careful examination. He indicated that he had been of each mind
with respect to mobiles and really did not know where he stood on this
issue right now.
Randy Jayne noted that with respect to the Triad, the three legged
beast had emerged as a result of concerns about vulnerability which
may have been outgrown by now. For example, there was now no
Soviet ABM threat. In addition, we do have potential for developing
accurate SLBMs as well as having an airborne force with a capability
that will keep us comfortable for some time. Thus, it may be that we
will have a mix of forces that does not have requirement for equality
in the Triad.
Secretary Brown noted that if we do go to a Dyad, it is clear that
the force that will be dropped would be the ICBMs. However, this force
had much better command and control than the submarines. Randy
Jayne noted that we might be giving up something in perceptions if
we talk about an augmented Dyad as opposed to a Triad; therefore, we
should not apologize for the capabilities of our Minuteman force.
General Brown emphasized that under the ABM Treaty, while
deployment was severely restricted, there were no constraints on test-
ing and that the Soviet Union had continued a vigorous programming
that was a cause for concern. Secretary Brown asked whether we were
concerned that they might back out of the treaty to which General
Brown replied, in the affirmative.
Dave McGiffert indicated that he was sympathetic with the views
that David Aaron had expressed and that he did not see how from the
Soviet point of view, they would be concerned about the risk of our
launching vulnerable assets on warning as distinct from launching
invulnerable assets on warning. Charles Duncan raised the question
of how long the Minuteman IIIs would be viable. General Brown indi-
cated that we were finding some cracks in the engines. Charles Duncan
asked whether this could be fixed through maintenance to which Gen-
eral Brown answered that he thought so but that in some cases we may
have to build new propulsion systems which could be done.
Duncan then raised the question of what the impact would be in the
future when we would not have the cruise missile advantage we have
today. Secretary Brown indicated that in terms of how things would

look in 1990, the cruise missiles on B–52s would badly undercut the
Soviet expenditure of 15 billion dollars a year on air defenses. Although
cruise missiles do not add that much to existing bomber capability, a
cruise missile force will be viable for a much longer period of time.
In addition, cruise missiles on large cruise missile carriers would even
further counter Soviet air defenses.
Duncan said that in the future, we would become very dependent
on Trident. Secretary Brown noted that we would also be dependent on
getting within 2500 km of Soviet targets with ALCMs. Spurgeon Keeny
noted that these developments did not increase our hard-­target capa-
bility but do increase our threat against the Soviet Union.
David Aaron asked why we don’t think in terms of a five to six
thousand mile cruise missile. Secretary Brown indicated that he had
been looking at this option and had found that with a vehicle of about
50,000 pounds, you could deliver a few megatons to intercontinental
ranges. Such a vehicle could virtually fit in a beer truck, but it is pro-
hibited in the current Geneva Joint Draft Text. General Brown recalled
that we had a couple of squadrons of intercontinental cruise missiles in
Maine, the SNARK. [1 line not declassified]
Secretary Brown indicated that this was just one of the number of
new possibilities that should be looked at carefully and that by 1990
he thought we could come up with a number of new things of interest.
David Aaron noted that in SALT, we were trying to get reductions and
get control of new missile systems. Secretary Brown indicated that this
was because of some concern about foreclosing options that could be of
interest in the future. David Aaron noted that he was impressed by our
ability to backtrack on such issues.
Spurgeon Keeny said that we should look at SALT as a vehicle for
limiting the threat to strategic systems.
Secretary Brown noted there was a fundamental difference between
the US and the Soviet Union with respect to the cruise missiles. The
Soviet Union does not need cruise missiles, whereas the US needs cruise
missiles as a way of negating Soviet air defense advantages; there was
no particular advantage to the Soviets in putting cruise missiles on the
Bison, the Bear, or the Backfire. He noted that improvements in com-
mand and control and targeting doctrine were also additional options
for the 1980’s. He said that these issues were being studied in DOD, but
that we would not try and subvert the process of interagency review of
such issues.
Bob Bowie noted that in the longer term, we should look at the
potential for Soviet actions that could be of concern.
Warren Christopher noted that from a foreign policy standpoint,
that the State Department perceived some risk in moving from a Triad
to a Dyad.

28.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
PRM/NSC–22: Integrated Telecommunications Protection Policy2
PARTICIPANTS
White House:
The Vice President
Denis Clift
Stu Eizenstat
Richard Neustadt
State:
Harold H. Saunders
Mark Garrison
Defense:
Charles Duncan
Adm. Daniel J. Murphy
JCS:
Lt. Gen. William Y. Smith
Justice:
Michael Kelly
Newell Squyres
OSTP:
Frank Press
John Marcum
NSC:
Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
Samuel M. Hoskinson
Robert A. Rosenberg
John Hewitt
CIA
Admiral Stansfield Turner
[name not declassified]
Commerce:
Jordan Baruch
John Richardson
OMB:
Randy Jayne
James Oliver
OTP:
William Thaler
Wayne Kay
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The Vice President opened the meeting by discussing the increas-
ing political concern over the threat to individual privacy posed by
Soviet intercept activities within the U.S. In his view the legal, eco-
nomic, defense, human rights and philosophical aspects of this prob-
lem all require a strong public posture. He recognized that laws exist
to protect individuals from domestic interception and efforts to force
the Soviets to desist could well be counterproductive, but was none-
theless very concerned about legitimate public fears about invasion of
individual privacy by foreign governments. The public, he felt, must
be informed about the basic facts and what the Administration is
­initialed the summary next to the subject heading. Minutes of the meeting were not
found.
2 See Document 8.

doing about this situation. The Vice President also asked Stan Turner
to continue working with the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
to provide them with a better understanding of the actions presently
underway, the complex nature of counteractions, and pros and cons of
their ultimate effectiveness.
The following conclusions were reached:
1. Not enough is known of the threat of Soviet interception to
the “national interest-­government” and especially “national interest-­
private” categories of unclassified information. There is also uncer-
tainty about Soviet intentions and objectives. Stan Turner was, therefore,
asked to assume responsibility for preparation of a risk-­benefit estimate
that assesses more systematically the threat of Soviet telecommuni-
cations intercept to all categories of classified and unclassified infor-
mation, including that solely in the private sector, and the benefit of
similar U.S. telecommunications intercepts abroad. This estimate is to
be given highest priority, with a preliminary report due before the end
of August.
2. The broad outlines of a National Telecommunications Protection
Policy were agreed upon as follows:
—Government classified information relating to national defense
and foreign relations should, as presently required, be transmitted only
by secure means. NSA should continue to have responsibility for provi-
sion of adequate cryptographic security.
—Unclassified information transmitted by and between Govern-
ment agencies and contractors that would be useful to an adversary
(so-­called “national interest: government”) should be protected. Identi-
fication of such communications should be a priority task.
—Non-­governmental information that would be useful to an
adversary (so-­called “national interest: private”) should be identified
and the private sector informed of the problem and encouraged to take
appropriate protective measures. Government R&D information and
protective technology should be made available to the common carri-
ers. The additional provision, however, of government equipment and
funds to the private sector would probably require legislation and raises
some fundamental issues and concerns about government involvement.
—More attention must be given to the threat to strictly private
communications of Americans, especially in view of public concern
about the need to safeguard civil rights and to protect against black-
mail. Specifically:
• The FCC should be requested to work with the common carriers
to determine system capabilities to protect the privacy of individual
private communications. If regulatory directives are needed to ensure

such protection, the necessary legislative changes should be made in
the FCC charter.
• The Attorney General should consider a temporary modification
in his current operating guidelines to permit NSA to analyze the extent
to which the Soviets may be collecting and exploiting individual pri-
vate communications.
3. The technology to protect terrestrial microwave circuits is con-
tinuing to evolve. As a result, protection is a complex problem with sig-
nificant technical and legal aspects and relatively little is known about
the cost-­effectiveness of expensive alternative solutions. Nevertheless,
subject to continuous review of available technology and reassessment
of the foreign intercept threat, the following immediate actions should
be taken:
—An R&D program covering both system and user oriented pro-
tection approaches should be funded at about $15 million per year.
—Phases I and II of the DUCKPINS cable program should be
completed as soon as possible and no later than in 1978. This program
should be funded at a level of about $4 million per year.
—DOD should have an option of selectively installing ESVN sys-
tems if a high priority requirements can be validated.
4. A special interagency National Telecommunications Protection
Board should be established under the NSC Special Coordination Com-
mittee to review, assess and insure implementation of effective protec-
tion techniques for the government and maximum assistance to the
private sector to enhance its protection from interception. The Director,
Office of Science and Technology Policy should chair the Board and
head this program with the assistance of the Secretary of Commerce.
At the request of DOD, the specific longer term functions of the Board
will be given further review by the SCC, but its most immediate tasks
should be the following:
—Develop a possible program for active interference, including
the technical approach, cost and political and intelligence implications
for consideration by the SCC.
—Determine the specific questions Stan Turner should address in
the estimate of the Soviet intercept threat.
—Define subcategories of national interest information and estab-
lish standards for protecting those categories determined to be signifi-
cant (this should go along with decisions in PRM–29).3
Review Memorandum called for a new Executive Order to replace Executive Order
11652 governing the handling and declassification of national security information and
material.

5. Frank Press, in coordination with other appropriate officials, is
to prepare a public announcement for early release.
The SCC will meet on this subject again by the end of August. The
agenda will include: final review of Board responsibilities, report on
preliminary judgments of new threat assessment and resolution of all
other remaining issues on PRM/NSC–22.
29.
Minutes of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
PRM–10
PARTICIPANTS
Defense
Secretary Harold Brown
Dep Secretary Charles W. Duncan
David E. McGiffert
JCS
Lt Gen William Y. Smith
State
Dep Secretary Warren Christopher
Leslie H. Gelb
ACDA
Spurgeon Keeny
CIA
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Robert Bowie
OMB
Bert Lance
Edward R. Jayne II
OSTP
Frank Press
John M. Marcum
NSC
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Samuel Huntington
Victor Utgoff (first half)
James Thomson (second half)
Dr. Brzezinski began the meeting by commenting that the President
had laid down four rules to be followed in subsequent NSC meetings:
1. Attendance at these meetings is limited to the principal plus one.
If additional people are to attend, special arrangements must be made
beforehand.
2. Extensive notes will only be taken by an NSC designated
notetaker.
meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.

3. These notes will be kept on file at the NSC for review when
required.
4. In the event of decisions or directions for follow-­on work, the
notes will be disaggregated and each of the principals will be given that
part of the record on those decisions that affect him.
Mr. Gelb commented that his experience as a reporter suggested
that leaks will not be stopped by these procedures. Because of these
procedures we will pay a very high price: people with legitimate access
to this information will not be able to get it; and the people who have
been on top of the problem with the real technical expertise will be
cut out of the meetings. This was a problem under which the Nixon
Administration suffered.
Secretary Brown indicated that this was a reasonable step and that
in fact we had no choice in the matter. Admiral Turner asked Mr. Gelb
how, given his experience, he would suggest we cut down on leaks. Mr.
Gelb said that in 3½ years as a reporter he never had any trouble getting
any information. Thus, there is no need for extensive restrictions.
In response, Dr. Brzezinski agreed that the price could be high, but
that it is very important that the leaks be stopped; and experience to
date suggests that the probability of leaks is correlated with the size of
the meeting.
Dr. Brzezinski then stated that the purpose of the meeting was to
agree on the basic findings of the PRM–10 study, and on the guidelines
and objectives that it supports. These agreements will form the basis for
a Presidential Directive on PRM–10.
Dr. Brzezinski asked for comments on Section I of the August 2,
1977 Agenda Paper (attached)—Findings. Mr. Keeny felt that the word
“many” in the third tic overstated the trends, and he also wondered
what the word “areas” meant. Secretary Brown indicated that the word
“areas” meant both geographical and military spheres. After some dis-
cussion, Mr. Christopher proposed that the word “many” be replaced
by the word “several.” This was agreed. General Smith indicated that
the Joint Chiefs of Staff were concerned that the statement in the third
tic that adverse trends “can be halted in Europe in the early 80’s if the
appropriate programs are carried out” was probably too strong.
Dr. Brzezinski then turned the discussion to Section II of the Agenda
Paper—Guidelines. Secretary Brown felt that use of the word “overrid-
ing” to modify US interests in Guideline 2 confused the sentence and
gave it an interventionist flavor. Dr. Huntington indicated that, to the
contrary, “overriding” was intended to qualify the statement not make
it an open-­ended advocation of intervention. After some discussion
the guideline was altered to read: To prevent or counter Soviet use of
military force to gain influence over other societies where US interest
dictate.

Mr. Gelb suggested that Guideline 5 was too open-­ended. He won-
dered whether “values” referred to human rights. Dr. Brzezinski and
Secretary Brown both felt that it did. Dr. Brzezinski asked Mr. Gelb if
he understood correctly that State wants us to inform the President that
the State Department does not feel that human rights should be taken
into account in US policy. (Laughter)
Secretary Brown felt that Guideline 6 was too restrictive; it sug-
gested strongly that the goals of meeting our military needs is sub-
ordinate to the goal of staying within desired budgetary constraints.
He said we should be thinking about balancing our military require-
ments against other national priorities. Language along these lines was
accepted.
Dr. Brzezinski then asked whether there was any problem with
the first five of the objectives stated under Strategic Forces in Section
III. Mr. Gelb felt that in addition to reaffirming our goal of promoting
nuclear stability, as in Objective 5, we should also reaffirm US policy
not to acquire a capability for disarming first strike. Secretary Brown
was not sure that the term “disarming first strike” was well defined;
for example, some people might argue that the Mark 12A did not give
us a disarming first strike capability while at the same time they might
argue that the SS–18 gave the Soviets a disarming first strike capability.
Dr. Brzezinski felt that Mr. Gelb’s proposal was not really an objective
but rather should be part of Guideline 1 in Section II. This proposal was
accepted.
Secretary Brown felt that paragraph 6A should be restricted by the
introductory clause “with available forces” so that it would be clear
that this paragraph did not constitute acquisition guidance. He also
proposed ending the sentence with a statement similar to that at the
end of paragraph 6B to the effect that the US would like to maximize
resultant power relative to the enemy in a nuclear conflict. After exten-
sive discussion on the wording at the end of the paragraph, the group
finally agreed to language for paragraph 6A, stating that “if control
of escalation fails, US policy is to terminate the conflict on favorable
terms.”
Dr. Brzezinski then turned to the Guidance Section, paragraph III
B1. Secretary Brown felt that “essential equivalence” means more than
simply balancing certain key indices. He thought the problem was more
than one of numbers. In particular, he felt that the guidance should read
that the US would “exceed or balance the Soviet Union in certain key
indices and capabilities.” This change was accepted.
Dr. Brzezinski then turned the discussion to paragraph III B2, in
which three alternative paragraphs were displayed. Dr. Brzezinski
wondered why [1 line not declassified] for destruction. Secretary Brown
felt that paragraph 2A was too specific. He believed that the President

did not need to be so specific at this stage and that more work needed
to be done on this question. Dr. Brzezinski indicated that paragraph 2B
would be more acceptable if it were more specific: for example, it should
state the sorts of targets that the Secretary of Defense should investi-
gate; also, we should examine the utility of attacking [less than 1 line
not declassified]. Mr. Gelb pointed out that NSDM 2422 does not call for
[2 lines not declassified] targets. Dr. Brzezinski stated that the NSDM 242
guidance was exactly what he wanted to reexamine. Secretary Brown
pointed out that while in the past [2 lines not declassified]. Dr. Brzez-
inski said that, while we are all uncomfortable about this problem, we
cannot avoid thinking about it. He also felt that paragraph 2B should
contain language specifying illustrative percents of damage that should
be studied. The language should not be restrictive, rather it should pro-
vide examples. The Secretary of Defense should consider the relative
strategic advantages of targeting say 70% of the economic targets, [less
than 1 line not declassified] and so forth. Secretary Brown stated that he
was willing to look at soft military targets as well. Dr. Brzezinski and
Secretary Brown agreed that this work would be completed on about
January 1, 1978. Dr. Brzezinski indicated that the NSC would provide
more guidance on this study.
The discussion then turned to paragraph III B3. Secretary Brown
proposed that the last sentence of the paragraph, the one reading
“additional forces should not be acquired for this purpose,” should be
scrapped. General Smith and Dr. Brzezinski agreed; and there were no
objections to its elimination.
On paragraph III B4, Mr. Jayne pointed out that the last sentence,
about maintaining “at least the current level of time urgent hard target
kill capability,” was ambiguous. Secretary Brown interpreted the sen-
tence to mean that if the Soviets can harden their targets more, then we
will be forced to increase our capability to knock them out. In essence
he thought the sentence said “don’t dismantle what you have got, but
don’t make any big increases either.” Dr. Huntington indicated that
that was the intent.
When the discussion turned to paragraph III B5, Dr. Brown
objected to the language of the first sentence, which he felt would keep
us from defending against air attack from Cuba. We want to do more
than surveillance; we want to deny the Soviets a free ride. He proposed
the addition of the words “and control” after surveillance and before
“of US air space.” Mr. Keeny felt the statement was open-­ended. But all
agreed to insert the phrase.
2 National Security Decision Memorandum 242, “Policy for Planning the Employ-
ment of Nuclear Weapons,” was signed by President Gerald Ford on January 17, 1974.
ment 31.

On paragraph III B6, Dr. Brzezinski objected to the complexity of
paragraph 6B. Following a suggestion of Mr. Christopher, the group
agreed to add the phrase “subject to further analysis by the Secretary of
Defense” before the sentence of paragraph 6A.
In discussing paragraph III B7, Admiral Turner proposed the addi-
tion of the words “and targeting capability” at the end of the sentence
“The US will maintain a secure reserve force.” He pointed out that [1
line not declassified] after the first nuclear exchange. Dr. Press asked
Admiral Turner whether he meant that we needed a damage assess-
ment capability. In response, Admiral Turner said that you needed to
know what you have done in your initial attack, what you have not
done, and what you need to do with your reserve force. Dr. Brown felt
that we have not even begun to think about this problem. Mr. Jayne and
Mr. Keeny felt that to insert such language would be to make a major
programmatic decision. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that an analysis was
needed and one should be called for in the document. The NSC Staff
was directed to draft appropriate language.
Having finished the strategic forces section, Dr. Brzezinski then
turned to Section IV, General Purpose Forces. The group agreed to para-
graph A1. Dr. Brzezinski said that paragraph A2 posed a difficult and
serious issue. Dr. Brown explained the problem: do you buy forces sep-
arately for a contingency such as the Persian Gulf; or do you simply
take the forces you need for the contingency from those you bought for
NATO? But if you do not buy the forces separately, you will create a
disfunction in the NATO force: that is, the NATO force will not be con-
figured for a NATO war. In addition, just when you want to send the
Persian Gulf force into action you find yourself drawing down on your
NATO force at the time you least want to do it.
Mr. Gelb wondered whether it was not possible to buy some forces
on a separate basis but not the others—­such as logistical support, tac-
tical air and navies. Secretary Brown felt that if you plan forces that
way, you might not find much of a need for a navy. Mr. Gelb wondered
whether there was not a difference between an add-­on land capability
and an add-­on logistical or tactical air capability because the latter can
be moved around much more rapidly than the former. Secretary Brown
and General Smith agreed with that description but stated that there
would be the risk of drawing down on forces that you required for the
NATO contingency. Mr. Jayne felt that the issue was constrained by
resources: we would like to have a lot of capability, but cannot afford it;
we should take the issue to the President and tell him the price. Secre-
tary Brown and General Smith felt that the price tag was not the whole
story: there is the issue of how the forces are configured; for example if
we want to fight outside of Europe, we don’t want all our Army units
to be heavy.

Dr. Brzezinski felt that a serious issue in the future is the likeli-
hood of our access to foreign bases. He said this might mean we need
a larger air transport and naval capability then we have at present.
Secretary Brown stated that such capability was included in the light
intervention capability of the PRM–10 report. Dr. Brzezinski proposed
that these capabilities be explicitly mentioned in the guidance, because
this is an important issue over the long-­term. Dr. Brown proposed the
phrase “strategic mobility independent of overseas base support.” This
language was accepted.
Mr. Gelb asked again whether we wanted to buy extra forces for
the purposes of local wars. Dr. Brzezinski thought that we did; and he
proposed that the Second Division might be used for this purpose.
On NATO, Dr. Brzezinski suggested that the group agree on points
IV B1 and B2.
Secretary Brown raised an issue with regard to paragraph IV B4.
He pointed out that present planning guidance called for 180 days of
stock. He felt that such numbers as 90 days or 180 days were meaning-
less unless you also specified the consumption rates. He proposed that
the first sentence of paragraph 4 be left vague; “in order for the US to
sustain a worldwide conventional war against the Soviet Union and
its Allies, the planning guidance will be reviewed following . . .” This
proposal was accepted.
Discussion then moved to Section V, Further Studies. Secretary
Brown wondered why all of the further studies must be military stud-
ies, when the PRM–10 report covered political, economic and other
aspects as well. He felt that the whole section should be eliminated.
Dr. Brzezinski proposed that the section simply read “further studies
would be carried out under NSC direction.” Secretary Brown agreed.
Secretary Brown pointed out that many of the studies would occur in
any event since the Departments would want to undertake them. Dr.
Brzezinski said that he took that as a given, but that the NSC may want
to guide the studies. Secretary Brown felt that the studies should be
listed in order of priority. He said that his Department was choking
already on work. Dr. Brzezinski indicated that a working group would
be convened later to discuss the matter.
In closing the meeting, Dr. Brzezinski stated that he believed it had
accomplished a great deal.

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council3
Washington, undated
SCC AGENDA PAPER
I. Findings
The studies authorized by PRM/NSC–10 have found that:
—A rough overall equivalence with some asymmetries exists in
military capabilities between the US and the Soviet Union.
—The US remains significantly ahead of the USSR in most non-­
military aspects of national power.
—The trends in many areas have been against the US, but signif-
icant adverse trends in strategic forces and in conventional forces in
Europe can be halted in the early 1980’s if appropriate programs are
carried out.
—The US can capitalize on its advantages in economic power, dip-
lomatic resources, technology, political-­ideological action, and force
projection capabilities, in countering adverse Soviet influence.
II. Guidelines
In view of these findings, in the current era of US-Soviet relations
US strategy will be:
1. To maintain an overall balance of military power between the
US and its allies and the Soviet Union and its allies at least as favorable
as that which now exists, taking into account the increasing relevance
of conventional forces under conditions of essential strategic nuclear
equivalence.
2. To prevent or counter Soviet use of military force to gain influ-
ence over other societies except where overriding US interests dictate
otherwise.
in collaboration with our allies, through cooperation and agreements
with the USSR when possible and through appropriate actions and pro-
grams when such agreements prove impossible.
4. To enlist the participation of the USSR in international institu-
tions and to secure Soviet cooperation in achieving solutions to global
economic, social, and resource problems.
3 Secret.

5. To take political, economic, diplomatic and ideological initia-
tives in cooperation with our allies to reduce Soviet influence in and
control over other societies where that influence adversely affects US
interests or values.
6. Within approved budgetary constraints, to direct US military
strategy and forces to the following goals.
III. Strategic Forces
A. Objectives
US strategic forces will be designed:
1. To deter nuclear attack on the US, our forces, our allies, and oth-
ers whose security is important to the US.
2. In conjunction with general purpose and theater nuclear forces,
to enhance deterrence of non-­nuclear aggression, particularly by the
Soviet Union against NATO and our Asian allies.
3. To insure that the Soviet Union cannot use strategic forces for
political leverage and coercion and that the state of the strategic balance
will not deter the US from taking conventional military actions where
its interests dictate.
4. To maintain essential equivalence with the Soviet Union.
5. To promote nuclear stability, especially in times of crisis.
6a. If nuclear conflict occurs, to
control escalation, provide
options for flexible and lim-
ited retaliatory responses,
limit damage to the extent
possible and consistent with
the objectives listed above,
and terminate the conflict
quickly on acceptable terms.
6b. If nuclear conflict occurs, to
control escalation, provide
options for flexible and lim-
ited retaliatory responses,
limit damage to the extent
possible and consistent with
the objectives listed above,
and terminate the conflict
quickly on terms which
maximize the resultant polit-
ical, economic, and military
power of the US relative to
the enemy in the postwar
period in order to preclude
enemy domination.
B. Guidance
1. To ensure essential equivalence with the Soviet Union, the US
will maintain nuclear force levels, within the context of any SALT
agreement, that exceed or balance the Soviet Union in certain key indi-
ces. The balance in these indices can be achieved either by matching the
Soviet Union in those measures or by exploiting US advantages which
offset those enjoyed by the Soviets.

2a. The US will maintain the
nuclear forces to destroy
70% of all identified
Soviet economic recovery
resources, [15 lines not
declassified].
2b. The Secretary of Defense will
review current targeting policy
and recommend targeting crite-
ria for NSC consideration and
Presidential decision. Pending
the completion of this review,
the US will continue to employ
forces according to NSDM 242.
2c. The Secretary of Defense will
review current targeting pol-
icy and recommend targeting
criteria and acquisition policy
for NSC consideration and
Presidential decision. Pending
the completion of this review,
the US will continue to employ
forces according to NSDM 242.
3. [2 lines not declassified] Additional forces should not be acquired
for this purpose; forces acquired for other purposes should have the
characteristics necessary to respond flexibly.
4. The specific amount of hard-­target kill capability the US should
maintain and for what strategic purposes should receive further
study by the Secretary of Defense. This review and the recommenda-
tions flowing therefrom should be submitted for NSC consideration
and Presidential decision. Pending completion of this review, the US
will maintain at least the current level of time-­urgent hard-­target kill
capability.
5. The US will maintain the capability to provide attack warning
and assessment and to insure adequate surveillance of US airspace. In
addition, US R&D efforts in the area of active defenses should guard
against possible Soviet technological breakthroughs or abrogation of
the ABM Treaty and maintain those technology programs necessary to
assess and respond to Soviet strategic defense initiatives, as appropriate.
6a. The US will continue to
maintain a diversity of
nuclear forces through the
three legs of a TRIAD.
6b. The US will maintain a high
overall level of invulnerability
in its strategic force posture,
with a diverse mix of systems
designed to provide high con-
dence [confidence?] of surviving
attacks, penetrating defenses,
and guarding against the tech-
nological breakthroughs by an
adversary and unanticipated
failure of one type of system to
perform as required.

7. The US will maintain a secure reserve force. This force will be
taken from those acquired for other purposes pending an analysis by
the Secretary of Defense.
IV. General Purpose Forces
A. General
1. The US will maintain a level of general purpose forces, in con-
junction with those of its allies, sufficient to wage a major conventional
war with the USSR and its allies. Planning will focus on Europe, but
also will provide for the defense of major US and allied interests out-
side of Europe, including the protection of lines of communication and
access to critical raw materials vital to the economies of the US and its
allies.
2a. In addition to the capabil-
ity to prosecute a NATO/
Warsaw Pact war, the US
will maintain a light inter-
vention force with a forc-
ible entry capability (i.e.,
logistical support, moder-
ate naval and tactical air
forces, and limited land
combat forces) for use
anywhere in the world.
These specific forces
will be designed for use
against both local forces
and forces projected by
the USSR and based on
analyses of requirements
in the Middle East, Per-
sian Gulf and Korea.
Forces needed beyond those
maintained for such contin-
gencies will be drawn from
forces in CONUS that are
oriented primarily toward
the NATO/Warsaw Pact
war but have flexibility
for use elsewhere.
2b. The US will maintain a light
intervention force with a forc-
ible entry capability (i.e., logis-
tical support, moderate naval
and tactical air forces, and
limited land combat forces)
for use anywhere in the world.
These specific forces will be
designed for use against both
local forces and forces pro-
jected by the USSR and based
on an analysis of requirements
in the Middle East, Persian
Gulf and Korea. Forces needed
for these contingencies will be
drawn from forces in CONUS
that are oriented primarily
toward the NATO/Warsaw
Pact war but have flexibility
for use elsewhere. Within
these forces the US will main-
tain whatever special capabil-
ity is required for intervention
contingencies.

B. NATO
Deterrence and defense in the NATO areas will continue to rely on a
combination of conventional, theater nuclear, and strategic nuclear
forces. US policy will emphasize the strengthening of conventional
forces for deterrence and defense.
2. Consonant with present NATO strategy, including forward
defense, the US is committed to having the capability, in conjunction
with its allies, to stop a Warsaw Pact attack with minimum loss of terri-
tory and ultimately to restore prewar boundaries.
3. Consistent with the capabilities of the Warsaw Pact, US forces, in
conjunction with those of its NATO allies, will be capable of responding
to a full spectrum of hostilities—­from reinforced attack to war follow-
ing a period of extensive mobilization—­recognizing the need to seek,
within resource constraints, an optimum mix of capabilities along the
spectrum.
4. The US will plan on sustaining a worldwide conventional war
against the Soviet Union and its allies for a minimum of 90 days. The
ninety day planning guidance will be reviewed following (1) an eval-
uation of Warsaw Pact capabilities to sustain combat, (2) consultations
with the NATO allies concerning their acceptance of this guidance goal,
(3) a review of the relative trade-­offs between early combat capability
and capability to sustain extended conflict, and (4) an examination of
the implications of alternative US/NATO mobilization and industrial
preparedness postures.
5. US will meet its commitment to its allies to raise the level of
defense spending by approximately 3% per year in real terms.
C. Asia
With the exception of the withdrawals from Korea directed in PD/
NSC–12,5 the US will maintain approximately the current level of forces
deployed in the Western Pacific in order to preserve regional stability,
to deter aggression in Korea and elsewhere, and to protect US interests
and meet treaty commitments in the event of aggression.
Military Committee’s report, MC 14/3, as an overall strategic concept for the defense of
the North Atlantic Treaty area. MC 14/3 stated that theater nuclear forces were meant to
deter conventional attacks and, if deterrence failed, to respond to attacks and to confront
the enemy with escalation of the conflict. (Gregory W. Pedlow, ed., NATO Strategy Doc-
Presidential Directives, PD–12)

V. Further Studies
To provide additional guidance, further studies will be carried out.
The subjects to be studied will include, but not necessarily be limited
to: nuclear targeting criteria; Soviet Union efficient hard-­target-­kill
capability and the diversity and mutual reinforcement required in US
strategic forces; the strategic implications of civil defense; the require-
ments of a secure reserve force; the purposes and structure of US the-
ater nuclear forces; US force requirements for local wars; Persian Gulf
security; Warsaw Pact and non-US NATO capability to sustain con-
ventional conflict and the relative trade-­offs for NATO between early
combat capability and the capability to sustain extended conflict; US
and Allied manpower and industrial mobilization capabilities; and the
requirements for US maritime forces.
30.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, August 17, 1977
SUBJECT
PRM/NSC–10: Military Strategy and Force Posture Study (C)
(C) As Chairman of the PRC for PRM/NSC–10, I am transmitting
to you the Study on Military Strategy and Force Posture.
(C) The purpose of this memorandum is to provide you with my
views about what has and has not been accomplished in the entire
PRM/NSC–10 effort and to outline my plans for moving forward
within DOD to develop both long-­range planning and more immediate
force posture programs.
(S) General Reactions
The Study is this Administration’s initial broad survey of alternate
national military strategies. Such a broad zero-­based policy review
of the basic elements of the US national military posture provides an
opportunity to challenge old canons and to advance new ideas.
The PRM/NSC–10 Study has made some useful contributions to
this Administration’s thinking on defense policy.
Taken as a whole, PRM/NSC–10 made us pause and take a look at
where we are and where we ought to consider going. It also makes clear
that much remains to be done. The study was broad in scope; some of
its limitations are a result of that. In particular, no single study can sub-
stitute for the detailed analyses that implement our particular policies.
Thus, PRM/NSC–10 should be understood as a point of departure for
thinking about how we should develop and use military forces and
capabilities over an uncertain, complex future.
(TS) Net Assessment
This portion of PRM/NSC–10 focused on the trends in the long-­
term military, economic, and political competition with the Soviet
Union. It is very useful in thinking about the broad, global issues. Its
view of the current military balance in Europe seems to me to be too
optimistic, although I think our NATO initiatives could improve this
situation substantially over the next few years.
I agree with the study’s general thrust that the Soviets are effective
competitors only in the military dimension, and that we need to think
carefully about how to deal with this fact. Further, I strongly agree that,
in developing a national strategy, we should exploit those areas where
we have a competitive advantage, while limiting our competitor’s abil-
ity to take advantage of our vulnerabilities. In particular, we need to try
to exploit our potential technological advantages in both conventional
and strategic forces.
(TS) Strategy and Force Posture Study
This study has focused attention on the value of developing a strat-
egy to guide the evolution of our military forces for the next decade and
has raised a number of key military strategy issues.
I see the study as the first step in a process of refining our strategic
choices and of eliciting initial policy guidance from you on key issues
of military strategy. The study underlines the critical role of our Allies
in implementing alternative US military strategies as well as potential
Allied reactions to changes in US policies. This is particularly true in
Europe where ours must be an alliance military strategy. It emphasizes
the importance of concentrating not only on the early stages of conflict
in Europe, but also on how long we fight and those crucial days of
conflict termination. Explicit recognition is given to the possibility of
a divergence in NATO and US military strategies, given the realities
of NATO defense spending and the fact that NATO can currently sus-
tain a conventional battle at projected consumption rates for less than
30 days. The study raises the question of operations outside Europe in
a US–USSR conflict and highlights the peacetime functions of military
forces in crisis management and local wars. The analysis of strategic

forces begins with recognition that strategic nuclear deterrence is the
cornerstone of US and Allied military security, and defines US objec-
tives and establishes alternative criteria through which they might be
achieved. Specific issues addressed include the requirements for politi-
cal sufficiency, a hard target kill capability, various levels of retaliatory
capability in the face of Soviet offensive and defensive posture, and a
strategic reserve force.
The Executive Summary conveys a picture of the scope and breadth
of the report, and of the issues developed.
(S) Relationship of the Net Assessment and Strategy/Force Posture Study
The two major parts of PRM–10 were performed simultaneously.
The Net Assessment portion was not available for use by the Force Pos-
ture Study group. A major consequence is that the notional AIMS are
not directly related either to an approved set of overall national objec-
tives or to a national strategy derived from the Net Assessment. In fact,
as a consequence of the concurrency of the two portions of the PRM–10
effort, the alternative national strategies and the notional AIMS were
developed on independent analytical frameworks; so there is no sys-
temic interconnect between the two.
(TS) Limitations
There are a number of things which this study does not do, and, for
the most part, never intended to do. These include the following:
a. The breadth and scope of the study effort required a high level
of conceptual abstraction which makes it useful as a vehicle for iden-
tifying and considering military strategy issues. The study is not suit-
able as a basis for definitive selection of any particular strategy. Because
they were selected to illuminate subsets of issues, none of the notional
AIMS was intended to be, nor is, appropriate as an overall strategy to
meet our national security needs.
b. The approach to the force posturing and costing required sim-
plifying assumptions and rough estimates which preclude their use in
definitive program and budget decisions.
c. The complexity of the study prevented in-­depth examination of
some of the significant issues relating to NATO that have been raised
in Congress. Assumptions were made with respect to warning time,
reinforcement and readiness requirements, Soviet build-­up rates and
warning indicators, and “lag time” for NATO decision. The implica-
tions of a full range of these assumptions must be considered because
the differences could be quite substantial in terms of force requirements
and costs.
d. The contingency assessment of our current military capabilities,
summarized in Chapter 11 of the report, deals only with the narrow

measure of relative force build-­ups and is of limited value for predict-
ing which force would prevail in actual combat.
e. The study did not call for the formulation of national objectives,
and the response did not attempt to do so.
f. A wide range of significant military issues was not addressed,
including: theater nuclear forces; strategic defensive and mobility
forces; US–USSR industrial capacity/mobilization potential; and access
to raw materials and energy resources.
g. Neither this study nor the Net Assessment dealt in any depth
with the specific nature of the current and expected challenges from
the Soviet Union. They were unable to deal, moreover, with the many
uncertainties which the future competition will pose for both the US
and the Soviet Union.
(S) Follow-­on Work
Your guidance on the military strategy issues will provide the
framework for my review of specific defense policies in the coming
months. I will have begun within DOD a hard look ahead at the FY 1979
budget and will soon turn to formulate basic guidance for the 1980 bud-
get. I am also looking at ways to strengthen DOD longer range plan-
ning. I believe we should try to add a true long-­range planning function
in the Defense Department. As things stand now, our horizon is limited
to no more—­and often less—­than the service life of the major pieces of
equipment we buy. We have a good idea of the next five years; things
are less certain after that, and, for instance, even though the ships we
buy may last for 20–30 years, we have no real plan approaching that
duration. Doing so would give us the chance to be a bit less reactive
to what happens in the world around us, and instead to think about
where we would like to lead the world, and develop strategies to do
this. We can do a better job of thinking through how we can adapt as
the uncertainty of the future unfolds.
In a similar vein, just as the business world plans strategies for
product markets, I think we may be able to plan strategies for the “busi-
nesses” of the Department of Defense. We will begin to look in the large
for areas where we are (or could be) in a position—­as the economists
put it—­of comparative advantage, and then try to build upon what we
have today to move the competition in that direction.
In addition to initiating follow-­on efforts to address the problems
identified above as limitations, and developing a long-­range planning
function, I will also initiate study efforts to address specific topics
including:

—Roles, capabilities, and vulnerabilities of theater nuclear forces;
—The forces and mechanisms appropriate for crisis management
and potential local conflicts (with particular attention on potential cri-
ses in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf);
—The characteristics of a US Navy appropriate for its contribution
in effective competition with the Soviet Union and management of US
global interests in the future;
—Warsaw Pact capabilities, doctrine, and vulnerabilities associ-
ated with sustaining conventional conflict in Europe;
—Measures NATO could pre-­plan to exploit various amounts of
warning time which might be available; and
—Soviet doctrine, capabilities, and vulnerabilities associated with
our taking initiatives outside Europe during a war in Europe.
(C) Beyond PRM–10
I believe our efforts to date have served to provide the essential
framework for identifying the major military strategy issues on which
your guidance will set the course for our future actions. There are now
being set in motion the necessary activities along the lines outlined ear-
lier in this memorandum to address those areas requiring greater study
before decisions on a comprehensive national military strategy can be
made.
I am prepared to discuss with you in further detail the consider-
ations and implications of each of the military strategy issues.
Harold Brown

Attachment

Final Report of the Ad Hoc Group on Military Force Posture2
Washington, July 7, 1977
[Omitted here are the title page and table of contents.]
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Purpose. The purpose of the PRM–10 Force Postures Study is to
elicit policy guidance from the President on key issues pertaining to
national military strategy. The scope of this study is intentionally broad.
It partakes of most, but exhausts none, of the numerous topics and fac-
tors which enter into the determination of national military strategy. It
is designed to provide a solid basis for further detailed work on defense
force structure and program issues, using either the interagency pro-
cess or the normal PPBS decision process, as appropriate.
2 Secret.

Approach. In order to develop alternative integrated military strat-
egies (AIMS), Substrategy building blocks were constructed to identify
a range of options in each of five analytical areas:
1. NATO-Warsaw Pact conflict in Europe (including the NATO
Flanks and the North Atlantic).
2. Operations outside Europe during a NATO–WP war.
3. East Asia.
4. Peacekeeping activities and potential local wars.
5. US–USSR nuclear conflict.
The major issues in each analytical area, or conflict category, were
isolated. Then, using this building block technique, the substrategies
shown below were developed to focus on what the US should achieve
as well as the threats to that achievement.

Summary of Substrategies
NATO–WP IN
EUROPE
NON-EUROPEAN
OPERATIONS
DURING A NATO–
WP WAR
EAST ASIA
PEACEKEEPING
­ACTIVITIES AND
­POTENTIAL LOCAL
WARS
US–USSR NUCLEAR
CONFLICT
COUNTEROFFENSIVE
OFFSETTING ATTACKS
DIRECT DEFENSE
INITIATIVES
INCREASED
PRESENCE
HEAVY INTERVENTION
CLEAR SUPERIORITY
LIMIT LOSS
LIMITED ACTION
CURRENT
PRESENCE
LIGHT INTERVENTION
RETAIN US FORCE
ADVANTAGES
ELASTIC TRIPWIRE
MINIMAL EFFORT REDUCED
PRESENCE
LIMITED ACTION
MAINTAIN OVERALL
FORCE BALANCE
TRIPWIRE
MODIFIED
WITHDRAWAL
PROXY RELIANCE
ASSURED
RETALIATION ONLY
WITHDRAWAL

Alternative Integrated Military Strategies (AIMS) were formulated
from the analytical area substrategies by excluding unworkable com-
binations of substrategies. Eight final AIMS were selected for detailed
evaluation in terms of their military, economic, political (both in techni-
cal and domestic) and arms control implications. Each AIMS addresses
in a different way the major military issues facing the United States.
The range of AIMS is intentionally broad so that they will provide a
comprehensive analytical framework for evaluation of the major ele-
ments of defense policy.
The composition of the eight final AIMS in terms of their analytical
area substrategies is shown in the table below:

ALTERNATIVE INTEGRATED MILITARY STRATEGIES (AIMS)
AIMS
NATO/WP
Conflict in Europe
Operations
Outside Europe in
US–USSR War
East Asia
Peacekeeping and
Potential Local
Wars
US–USSR Nuclear
Conflict
E
Limit Loss: Hold
86–92 division
threat at
Weser-Lech
w/30-­day
sustainability
Limited Action
Reduced Presence
Limited Action
Maintain Overall
force balance
F
Limited Action
Current Presence
Light Intervention
Retain US Force
Advantages
G
Initiatives
Current Presence
Heavy Intervention
Maintain Overall
force balance
F (Variant)
Limit Loss: Hold
130 ­division
threat at
­Weser-Lech
w/90-­day
sustainability
Limited Action
Current Presence
Light Intervention
Retain US Force
Advantages

AIMS
NATO/WP
Conflict in Europe
Operations
Outside Europe in
US–USSR War
East Asia
Peacekeeping and
Potential Local
Wars
US–USSR Nuclear
Conflict
H
Direct Defense:
Restore pre-­war
line against
Limited Action
Reduced Presence
Limited Action
Maintain Overall
force balance
130 division threat
w/90-­day
sustainability
Limited Action
Current Presence
Light Intervention
Retain US Force
Advantages
J
Direct Defense:
w/Indefinite
sustainability
Initiatives
Current Presence
Heavy Intervention
Assured Retalia-
tion only
K
Offsetting Attacks:
Flank attack
on Pact while
­holding in central
Region against
130+ division
threat w/indefi-
nite sustainability
Initiatives
Increased Presence Heavy Intervention
Clear Superiority

Each of these strategies has a specific rationale for linking building
blocks into coherent AIMS, as summarized below.
AIMS E—This AIMS is based on the premise that US objectives can
be achieved with somewhat reduced reliance on military force, but the
US still would retain the capability to wage a major conventional war of
short duration with the USSR. US strategic nuclear capabilities would
be somewhat reduced; not all US advantages would be maintained, nor
would an extensive, efficient hard-­target kill capability be pursued. The
nuclear threshold would be about the same as it is currently. In conjunc-
tion with NATO Allies, the US would plan to have the conventional
capability to hold a determined Warsaw Pact conventional attack at the
Weser-Lech River line for about 30 days. (A defense which stabilizes
along the Weser-Lech line yields to Pact forces about a quarter to a third
of the FRG territory east of the Rhine River). In addition, the US would
maintain a limited capability to confront the Soviets worldwide in the
event of European war. A reduced presence in East Asia (no US forces
in Korea or the Philippines) would reduce the potential for certain
regional involvements and would reduce, but not negate, the US abil-
ity to influence great power relationships there. Other global interests
would be advanced primarily by diplomatic and economic efforts, and
any limited military intervention would require drawing down forces
dedicated to other purposes.
AIMS F—This AIMS is based on the premise that US objectives can
be met through a strategy achievable by approximately the current US
military forces, but with a capability for sustained combat comparable
to that of our NATO Allies. US nuclear capabilities would be somewhat
enhanced; all present US advantages in strategic nuclear force balance
indices would be retained, with the expectation of a hard-­target kill
capability against all Soviet silos. The nuclear threshold would be about
the same as it is currently. As in AIMS E, the US, in conjunction with
NATO Allies, would plan to have the conventional capability to hold a
determined Warsaw Pact conventional attack at the Weser-Lech River
line for about 30 days, thus involving loss of NATO territory. In addi-
tion, the US would maintain a limited capability to confront the Soviets
worldwide in the event of European war. In contrast to AIMS E, the cur-
rent programmed military deployments in East Asia, less land forces in
Korea, would be retained. Other global interests would be advanced by
a moderate capability for unilateral military action without drawing
down on forces dedicated to other purposes.
AIMS F Variant—This AIMS is based on the premise that US objec-
tives can be met by a modest increase in US military capability and a
substantial increase in sustainability by our NATO Allies. This strategy
is identical to AIMS F except that in a European war, sustainability is
commensurate with that currently programmed for US forces, with a

requisite increase in sustainability by our NATO Allies. In conjunction
with the NATO Allies, the US would plan to have the conventional
capability to hold a determined Warsaw Pact conventional attack at the
Weser-Lech River line for about 90 days, still involving loss of NATO
territory. Both sides are assumed to have the capability to employ addi-
tional forces in Central Europe beyond the first month of conflict, so
this AIMS requires more forces than AIMS F. AIMS F Variant requires
forces at least comparable to those in the current US Five Year Defense
Program, but in excess of those currently programmed by the NATO
Allies.
AIMS G—This AIMS is based on the premise that achievement
of US objectives both inside and outside Europe would be enhanced
by a stronger conventional military capability outside Europe. US
strategic nuclear capabilities would be somewhat reduced; not all US
advantages would be maintained, nor would an extensive, efficient
hard-­target kill capability be pursued. The nuclear threshold in Europe,
however, might be raised because of the enhanced conventional capa-
bilities outside Europe. As in AIMS E and F, the US, in conjunction with
NATO Allies, would have the conventional capability to hold a deter-
mined Warsaw Pact conventional attack at the Weser-Lech River line
for about 30 days, thus involving loss of NATO territory. Contrary to
previous AIMS, however, the US would maintain naval and air forces
capable of taking conventional initiatives outside of Europe against the
USSR. In East Asia, approximately the current programmed military
deployments—­less land forces in Korea—­would be retained. Other
global interests would be secured by a significant capability for uni-
lateral military action without drawing down on forces dedicated to
other purposes. This intervention capability would be capable of direct
confrontation with Soviet forces if necessary.
AIMS H—This AIMS is based on the premise that support of US
objectives requires a raising of the NATO nuclear threshold through
a stronger conventional defense, while reduced reliance on military
force is possible elsewhere. This raised threshold is assumed to per-
mit a slight reduction of US nuclear capabilities; not all US advantages
would be maintained, nor would an extensive, efficient hard-­target kill
capability be pursued. In Europe, and in conjunction with NATO Allies,
the US would have the conventional capability to absorb a determined
Warsaw Pact conventional attack and restore the pre-­war borders
within about 90 days. In addition, the US would maintain a limited
capability to confront the Soviets worldwide in the event of European
war. A reduced presence in East Asia (no US forces in Korea or the Phil-
ippines) would reduce the potential for certain regional involvements
and would reduce, but not negate, the US ability to influence great
power relationships there. Other global interests would be advanced

primarily by diplomatic and economic efforts, and any limited military
intervention would require drawing down forces dedicated to other
purposes.
AIMS I—This AIMS is based on the premise that support of US
objectives requires a raising of the NATO nuclear threshold through a
stronger conventional defense, while maintaining approximately cur-
rent capabilities outside Europe. The raised nuclear threshold would be
accompanied by a slight increase in the current strategic nuclear levels.
All present US strategic advantages would be retained, with assurance
of a hard-­target kill capability against all Soviet silos. As in AIMS H,
the US, in conjunction with NATO Allies, would have the conventional
capability to absorb a determined Warsaw Pact conventional attack in
Europe and restore the pre-­war borders within about 90 days. (Two
excursions, to size US war reserve stocks for 180 days and for an indef-
inite time, but without change to combat forces during those periods,
were evaluated.) In addition, the US would maintain a limited air and
naval capability to confront the Soviets worldwide in the event of Euro-
pean war. In contrast to AIMS H, essentially the current programmed
military deployments in East Asia—­less land forces in Korea—­would
be retained. Other global interests would be advanced by a moder-
ate capability for unilateral military action without drawing down on
forces dedicated to other purposes.
AIMS J—This AIMS is based on the premise that decreased levels
of strategic nuclear forces are desirable. A significant and sustainable
conventional military capability permits such decreased nuclear depen-
dence. Thus, US nuclear capabilities would be reduced to the level of
assured retaliation only—­the capability to substantially destroy Soviet
economic and leadership resources—­and minimal counter-­military
capability would be provided, with no attempt made to match or offset
strategic force asymmetries in the Soviets’ favor. As in AIMS H and I,
the US, in conjunction with NATO Allies, would have the conventional
capability to absorb a determined Warsaw Pact conventional attack in
Europe and restore the pre-­war borders within about 90 days. US war
reserve stocks, however, would be sized to provide for indefinite com-
bat to avoid NATO’s having to resort to nuclear weapons should the
Pact be able to sustain the conflict beyond 90 days. Contrary to AIMS
H and I, the US would maintain naval and air forces capable of taking
conventional initiatives outside Europe against the USSR which would
further enhance deterrence in Europe. In East Asia, approximately
the current programmed military deployments—­less land forces in
Korea—­would be retained. Other global interests would be advanced
by a significant capability for unilateral military action without draw-
ing down on forces dedicated to other purposes. This intervention

capability would be capable of direct confrontation with Soviet forces
if necessary.
AIMS M—This AIMS is based on the premise that significant, sus-
tainable conventional power capable of responding to any Soviet con-
ventional attack combined with clear US nuclear superiority is required
to support achievement of US objectives. US nuclear capabilities and
threshold would be raised to near maximum levels; US strategic capa-
bilities would exceed that of the Soviets in all significant indices—­
forces, modernization, and options for major active defenses. Such a
nuclear posture would be designed to deter Soviet first use and provide
political leverage. Should Warsaw Pact aggression occur in Europe, the
US, in conjunction with NATO Allies, would defend in Central Europe
while the US would initiate an attack against less heavily defended
Warsaw Pact territory on the flanks to secure negotiating leverage.
Major conventional capability is also maintained elsewhere to assure
fulfillment of US global interests with a high probability of success.
This would call for an increased military presence in East Asia and a
major intervention capability in other regions.
The range of general purpose forces estimated to accomplish each
AIMS is shown in the table below:3
ESTIMATED FORCES FOR AIMS
AIMS
Army
Divisions
Air Force
Tactical
Fighter
Wings
Marine
Amphibi-
ous Forces
Navy
Aircraft
Carriers
Surface
Combatants
E
F
F (Variant) 25–27
G
H
J
3 The JCS representative believes that given the limitations of the methodologies
and assumptions used in preparing the illustrative force postures and costs that they
are not appropriate to use in discussion of notional military strategies. Specifically, the
estimate for Pact sustainability, which was used to derive the lower bounds for US land
forces, has a high degree of uncertainty. The substantive issue of non-US NATO sustain-
ability beyond 30 days is avoided by assuming full NATO sustainability. In addition,
naval forces should be structured to provide a balanced, flexible force capable of dealing
with all aspects of naval warfare. [Footnote is in the original.]

End-FY78
Program
The range of estimated five year costs (total obligational authority)
for each AIMS is shown in the chart below.4 The high end of the range
is influenced both by the high range for force estimates but also by the
rate at which the forces are procured. These cost estimates do not show
the total cost to achieve a force posture, only that portion of the cost
which would be obligated in the first five years. Nevertheless, these
costs give an idea of the expense incurred by adoption of an AIMS.
[Omitted here is the body of the report.]
4 Ibid.
31.
Presidential Directive/NSC–181
Washington, August 24, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
U.S. National Strategy
I have reviewed the PRM/NSC–10 conclusions and the discussion
of the Special Coordination Committee.2 It is clear that in the foresee-
able future, US-Soviet relations will continue to be characterized by
Box 47, Nuclear War Doctrine: Limited Nuclear Options (LNO) and Regional Nuclear
2 See Document 29.

both competition and cooperation, with the attendant risk of conflict as
well as the opportunity for stabilizing US-Soviet relations.
In that competition, military aspects aside, the United States con-
tinues to enjoy a number of critical advantages: it has a more creative
technological and economic system, its political structure can adapt
more easily to popular demands and relies on freely given popular
support, and it is supported internationally by allies and friends who
genuinely share similar aspirations. In contrast, though successfully
acquiring military power matching that of the United States, the Soviet
Union continues to face major internal economic and national difficul-
ties, and externally it has few genuinely committed allies while lately
suffering setbacks in its relations with China, parts of Africa, and India.
In this situation I direct that US national strategy will be to take
advantage of our relative advantages in economic strength, technolog-
ical superiority and popular political support to:
—Counterbalance, together with our allies and friends, by a com-
bination of military forces, political efforts, and economic programs,
Soviet military power and adverse influence in key areas, particularly
Europe, the Middle East, and East Asia.
—Compete politically with the Soviet Union by pursuing the basic
American commitment to human rights and national independence.
—Seek Soviet cooperation in resolving regional conflicts and
reducing areas of tension that could lead to confrontation between the
United States and the Soviet Union.
—Advance American security interests through negotiations with
the Soviet Union of adequately verifiable arms control and disarma-
ment agreements that enhance stability and curb arms competition.
—Seek to involve the Soviet Union constructively in global activ-
ities, such as economic and social developments and peaceful non-­
strategic trade.
To fulfill this national strategy, the United States will maintain an
overall balance of military power between the United States and its
allies on the one hand and the Soviet Union and its allies on the other at
least as favorable as that that now exists. In this connection, the United
States will fulfill its commitment to its NATO allies to raise the level of
defense spending by approximately three percent per year in real terms
along with our allies.
To carry out US national strategy, I am also providing the following
initial guidance regarding US military strategy, programs and policies.
Strategic Force Objectives
The purpose of US strategic forces is to deter a nuclear attack on
the United States, upon our forces, our allies and others whose secu-
rity is important to the United States and, if deterrence fails, to inflict

appropriate retaliatory response on the Soviet Union. In conjunc-
tion with general purpose and theater nuclear forces, it is the further
purpose of our strategic forces to enhance deterrence of non-­nuclear
aggression against NATO and our Asian allies.
Strategic Programs
The United States will maintain a strategic posture of essential
equivalence with the Soviet Union so as to insure that the Soviet Union
cannot use strategic forces for political leverage and coercion and so
that the strategic balance will not deter the United States from taking
conventional military action where its interests dictate.
Essential equivalence will require that advantages in strategic force
characteristics enjoyed by the Soviet Union must be offset by United
States advantages in strategic forces. The United States will not accept
a strategic posture inferior to that of the Soviet Union.
The United States will not seek a capability for a disarming first
strategic nuclear strike against Soviet strategic forces so long as the
Soviet Union does not do so against us. Our posture should be designed
to promote nuclear stability particularly in a crisis and to the extent
possible reduce any Soviet incentive to use nuclear weapons. The US
force posture should be capable of inflicting an unacceptable level of
damage on the Soviet Union following a Soviet first strike.
The United States will maintain adequate command and control
capability and forces to execute limited strategic employment options.
The United States will maintain the capability to provide timely
strategic attack warning and assessment and to insure adequate sur-
veillance and control of US airspace. The United States research and
development efforts on active strategic defenses should be sufficient to
assess and respond to Soviet strategic programs as appropriate.
Strategic Targeting Policy
If deterrence should fail and nuclear conflict occurs, US targeting
plans should provide options for limited retaliatory responses designed
to control escalation and flexibly respond to aggression. If control of
escalation fails, US target plans should seek to limit damage to the
United States and its allies to the extent possible, and to inflict unac-
ceptable levels of damage on the Soviet Union (subject to a separate
targeting review), so that the conflict terminates on the most favorable
terms possible.
US target plans should provide for the maintenance of a secure
reserve force to be withheld for possible use subsequent to a major
nuclear exchange.

General Purpose Forces
The conventional forces take on increasing relevance to the defense
of US security interests under conditions of strategic nuclear equiva-
lence. Planning for US general purpose forces will focus on dealing
with the Soviet threat to Europe but will also provide capabilities for
use in the defense of major US and allied interests outside of Europe.
US planning for NATO and for global contingencies must take into
account the heightened significance of conventional capability in the
setting of strategic nuclear equivalence.
NATO
rence and defense in the NATO areas will continue to rely on a combi-
nation of conventional, theater nuclear, and strategic nuclear forces. To
this end it is necessary in the light of advances in the military posture
of the Warsaw Pact to emphasize the strengthening of NATO’s conven-
tional forces for deterrence and defense.
Consonant with present NATO strategy, including forward
defense, the US is committed to having the capability, in conjunction
with its allies, to stop a Warsaw Pact attack with minimum loss of ter-
ritory and ultimately to restore prewar boundaries. To this end priority
should be given to initial combat capabilities.
In this connection, the United States together with its allies shall
maintain capabilities adequate to protect the lines of communication
and access to raw materials that are vital to the economies of the United
States and its allies in the event of a NATO Warsaw Pact war.
Global Contingencies
In addition, the United States will maintain a deployment force of
light divisions with strategic mobility independent of overseas bases
and logistical support, which includes moderate naval and tactical air
forces, and limited land combat forces. These forces will be designed for
use against both local forces and forces projected by the USSR based on
analyses of requirements in the Middle East, the Persian Gulf, or Korea,
taking into account the contribution of our friends and allies in these
regions. US planning should provide that these requirements may be
met by a combination of the light deployment forces, supplemented by
forces in the United States, primarily oriented toward NATO defense.
The 2nd Division will be oriented toward deployment in Asia but avail-
able for global contingencies as described above.

Asia
With the exception of withdrawals from Korea directed under PD/
NSC–12,4 the United States will maintain the current level of combat
forces deployed in the Western Pacific in order to preserve regional sta-
bility, to deter aggression in Korea and elsewhere, and to protect US
interests and meet treaty commitments in the event of aggression.
Additional Studies
The Secretary of Defense will undertake, subject to separate
instructions, a review of US targeting policy, as well as other studies;
recommendations on the appropriate level of US capability to sustain
a worldwide conventional war against the Soviet Union and its allies
should be coordinated by the National Security Council for my deci-
sion, as per additional instructions.
Pending the conclusion of the targeting review, the US will con-
tinue to employ its strategic forces according to NSDM 242.5
Otherwise, this Directive supersedes NSDM 242.
Jimmy Carter
Document 31.
32.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, August 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Follow-­on Studies for PD/NSC–18
Concurrently with the issuance of PD/NSC–18 on US National
Strategy,2 the President has instructed that the Secretary of Defense will
review current targeting policy and recommended targeting criteria
next to the dateline.
2 See Document 31.

for NSC consideration and Presidential decision. This review will con-
sider the relevant political and strategic advantages of several options
including among others:
—­an option which would effectively target 70 percent of all iden-
tified Soviet economic recovery resources, 70 percent of all identified
political recovery resources, 70 percent of all identified military recov-
ery resources and 90 percent of all other identified Soviet military tar-
gets and related commands, control and communications facilities. It
would also consider options which would preclude the Soviet Union
from inflicting more fatalities on the United States than the United
States could inflict on the Soviet Union, also taking into account demo-
graphic differentials. Pending the completion of this review, the United
States will continue to employ forces according to NSDM 242.3
The Secretary of Defense should provide, through the NSC, his
assessment of the specific amount of hard-­target kill capability the US
should maintain into the future, identifying the strategic purposes such
capabilities would serve. No action should be taken to diminish US
hard-­target kill capabilities pending the President’s decision.
The Secretary of Defense, together with the Director of Central
Intelligence, will undertake an examination for NSC review of the war-
time target acquisition capability required for the secure reserve force.
The Secretary of Defense will provide an analysis and recom-
mendations to the NSC for the President’s decision of the appropriate
United States response regarding the future of the US Triad concept.
Recommendations on the appropriate level of US capability to sus-
tain a worldwide conventional war against the Soviet Union and its
allies should be coordinated by the National Security Council for the
President’s decision. This should be based on:
1. an evaluation of Warsaw Pact capabilities to sustain combat;
2. consultations with our NATO allies concerning their willingness
to agree upon a uniform goal for sustained combat capability;
3. the necessity to emphasize early combat capability so as to fulfill
NATO strategy and minimize reliance upon nuclear weapons and the
resultant tradeoff with the capability to sustain extended conflict;
4. an examination of the implications of alternative US–NATO
mobilization and industrial preparedness postures;
5. a review of the interrelationship between US global political
objectives, defense strategy, and naval deployment.
Zbigniew Brzezinski

33.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 3, 1977
SUBJECT
The Issue of Continuing Two ALCM Development Programs
In response to your request (Tab 3),2 Harold Brown has sent you
a point paper (Tab 1) that argues for continuing both the Tomahawk
ALCM (TALCM) and ALCM–B development programs for the time
being.
I have also had some counter-­arguments developed in order to put
forth both sides of the case (Tab 2).
RECOMMENDATION
As the next step, I recommend you ask Harold for some more detail
as to what precisely he envisages as the next stage of development and
testing, the cost implications of possible deployments, and the strate-
gic rationale. In addition, you should ask him for his recommendation
should you decide to consolidate the two cruise missile programs.
Attached at Tab 4 for your signature is a memorandum to Harold
Brown requesting this additional information.
randum to Carter, July 2, in which he wrote: “Now that we have opted for the cruise mis-
sile system in preference to the B–1, I believe that it would be unwise to terminate either
cruise missile program until we have achieved the operational capabilities on whose
prospect the decision was based.”
2 Attached but not printed is an undated, handwritten note from Carter to Brown:
“To Harold Brown, I am not convinced that we need both the Tomahawk and the A
Force ALCM. We certainly cannot afford to waste money on duplicative systems. Please
Comment—Jimmy.”

Tab 1

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense3
Washington, July 20, 1977
POINT PAPER
ON
CONTINUATION OF BOTH ALCM AND
TOMAHAWK PROGRAMS
The principal considerations are:
1. Risk: The risk represented by the ALCM program is different
from that of the TALCM (TOMAHAWK Air-Launched Cruise Missile)
program. The ALCM is less mature in its development and test pro-
gram, having had only six flight tests of which four were successful,
although all tests have been in conjunction with a B–52 bomber. The
TOMAHAWK, on the other hand, has had 22 flight tests, 18 of which
have been successful; however, it is untested and unevaluated in the
context of the B–52 operational weapon system.
The cruise missile will now be crucial to maintaining the bomber
leg of the TRIAD. I am therefore convinced that it is appropriate to
minimize the risk by maintaining both of these programs in parallel
until either or, preferably, both have completed comprehensive tests in
the B–52 environment. Furthermore, cancellation now (or soon) of a
cruise missile program could raise questions about the B–1 decision,
and about our determination to pose a severe air-­breathing threat to
the Soviets into the 1990s. In the long run it may indeed prove to be
economical to pick only one for the inventory, though depending on
the number of different applications (ALCM, GLCM, SLCM—­nuclear
and/or antiship), several different designs may be appropriate for the
inventory.
2. Competition: Continuing both ALCM and TOMAHAWK in
RDT&E will create a healthy competition between the two missile con-
figurations as strategic air-­launched cruise missiles. We expect, as a
result, both programs will achieve better performance and lower cost
than if there were only one program.
At about $1M per missile in recurring costs (for a buy of 3000 to
will realize a savings to the government of $300M to $750M. Such a
savings in procurement costs, together with the importance of reducing
risk by having a back-­up program, is a worthwhile trade for the addi-
tional RDT&E expenditure required to carry both programs at least to
the point of final production selection.
3. SALT Aspects: Dropping ALCM could result in foreclosure of
air launched cruise missile options during SALT as a result of con-
straints on TOMAHAWK. TOMAHAWK, having an identical external
configuration for SLCM, GLCM, and bomber-­launch (including B–52
and cruise missile carrier) application, may create weapon count-
ing complications. Should there be a SALT constraint on GLCM/
SLCM, the bomber-­carried TOMAHAWK may be also constrained.
ALCM, having an entirely different configuration from that of
­TOMAHAWK, and not being launchable from submarines, will avoid
any potential SALT entanglement between sea-­launched cruise missile
and ground-­launched cruise missile from a strategic air launch cruise
missile system. Such an option should be preserved until the SALT
­situation is clarified.
4. Legal Aspects: If signed into law, the Defense Appropriation
Authorization Act, 1978 directs that: “Competitive cruise missile devel-
opment programs shall continue until the Secretary of Defense certi-
fies to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of
Representatives that (1) a single airframe for the cruise missile can be
selected which meets all operational requirements, and (2) cost data
clearly establish that termination of the competitive cruise missile
development programs will result in lower development and procure-
ment costs for the cruise missile.”
5. Asymmetric Strengths: The two systems have different strong
points and, thus, are not 100% comparable:
a. TOMAHAWK:
—Longer range [less than 1 line not declassified]
—Probably cheaper in missile unit cost.
—More matured in missile tests.
—Essentially common missile for SLCM and GLCM missions.
b. ALCM:
—More matured in system test for B–52 Launch.
—Avoiding entanglement with SALT constraint which might be
placed on GLCM/SLCM.
—Single-Service management and thus, better system integration.
—Compatibility with existing SRAM support equipment.
As time goes by, many of these will be resolved one way or the
other, and a decision between them should then be possible for this
application.

Tab 2

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council4
Washington, undated
ISSUE: Whether to Continue Two ALCM Development Programs
Pro Arguments
(From Harold Brown’s Point
Paper)
Con Arguments
(From NSC Staff)
1. Risk
—Neither missile has been ade-
quately tested in the context of
the B–52 operational weapon
system. ALCM–B has been
tested from a B–52, but there
have been only six tests (four
successful), and these were of
the shorter range ALCM–A.
The TALCM has not been
tested or evaluated for deploy-
ment on the B–52, although
it has been tested 22 times
(18 successful) from other
platforms.
—The Tomahawk cruise missile
has been fully tested, including
tests from aircraft. Since both
the guidance and propulsion
systems (the two critical devel-
opment items) are common to
both Tomahawk and ALCM–B,
we can be fully confident about
the basic performance of either
missile. While there are some
changes in transitioning to the
B–52, these changes are well
understood from an engineering
standpoint (the TALCM propo-
nents have been studying them
for several years) and would
not bear on the choice between
TALCM and ALCM–B.
—Cancellation of one of the
ALCM programs at this time
could raise questions about
the B–1 decision and our com-
mitment to maintaining an
“air-­breathing” threat to the
Soviets into the 1990’s.
—This argument is very unper-
suasive. In fact, just the opposite
might be the case—­choice of
a single ALCM program and
direction of all development
funds to this program could
serve to emphasize our commit-
ment to the ALCM program.
4 Secret.

—In the long run, it may develop
that several different designs
may be appropriate for the
inventory.
—While it is certainly the case that
different range/payload combi-
nations are desirable, this does
not argue for having two differ-
ent airframe designs—­the prin-
cipal difference between TALCM
and ALCM–B.
2. Competition and Cost
—Continuing both programs
will result in better perfor-
mance and lower cost than if
there were only one program.
—This seems highly unlikely, since
the basic designs of both missiles
are already well established,
and their critical components
(guidance and propulsion) do
not differ.
—Continuing the competition
could result in a 10–15% per
missile cost reduction. This
translates into a potential
$300–750 million cost saving
on a 3000–5000 missile buy
which would cover the cost of
continuing two programs for
a while.
—Such a cost saving is inconceiv-
able, since there are apparently
no plans for a competitive
bidding on production (which
might bring costs down), and
the missiles differ principally
only in airframe design.
3. SALT Aspects
—Dropping ALCM–B could
result in foreclosure of ALCM
options through SALT; i.e.,
constraints on Tomahawk
SLCMs and GLCMs may pre-
clude a long-­range Tomahawk
ALCM because of its identical
external configuration.
—We are sensitive to this problem
and clearly would not permit
SLCM and GLCM constraints to
impact on TALCM deployment.
If the current common TALCM
and SLCM/GLCM external
configurations are judged to be
a verification problem, we can
easily take a small section out
of the TALCM to make it verifi-
ably different from Tomahawk
SLCMs and GLCMs. [3 lines not
declassified]

—ALCM, having an entirely
different external configura-
tion from that of Tomahawk,
and not being launchable
from submarines, will avoid
any potential SALT entangle-
ment between ALCMs and
sea-­launched cruise missiles
and ground-­launched cruise
missiles.
—While this statement is true for
ALCM vice submarine-­launched
cruise missiles, it is not true for
cruise missiles launched from
surface ships or ground launch-
ers which could have the same
external configuration as the
current ALCM. In addition, as
noted above, the TALCM could
be reduced in length (a minor
engineering modification) if it is
necessary to produce a unique
external configuration. For
example, a one-­foot reduction
would be readily verifiable.
[5 lines not declassified]
4. Service Problems
—Single service management
of both missile and aircraft
argues for the ALCM–B which
is an Air Force program in
contrast to the TALCM which
is a Navy run program.
—The Air Force clearly is not
enamored of deploying an
ALCM originally developed
by the Navy. However, this is
a matter of service rivalry and
not cost/effectiveness. Once
deployment starts and the Air
Force deals directly with the
contractor, the “problem” of
working with a Navy program
manager would disappear. In
fact, the success and acceptance
of the cruise missile can be
traced primarily to the extremely
successful and well-­run Navy
Tomahawk program and not to
the ALCM–A/B program.

Tab 4

Memorandum From President Carter to Secretary of
Defense Brown5
Washington, August 5, 1977
SUBJECT
Choosing a Single ALCM Development Program
I have reviewed the point paper that you sent me on the issue of
whether to continue two ALCM development programs.
Would you provide me as soon as possible a more detailed discus-
sion of the program you would pursue for both versions (TALCM and
ALCM–B), the development and testing schedules, tentative deploy-
ment plans, and cost implications. Additionally, would you provide
your recommendation as to how to proceed should I decide to consoli-
date the two programs.6
Jimmy Carter
5 Secret.
6 Carter wrote at the bottom of the memorandum: “P.S. At what stage, assuming
tests go well, could you certify that the 1978 Authorization Act requirements have been
met? J.”

34.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 2, 1977
SUBJECT
Secretary Brown’s Memorandum on Choosing a Single ALCM Development
Program
Secretary Brown has responded to your request for more informa-
tion concerning his proposal to continue with both the ALCM and the
ALCM–B cruise missile programs. His memo (Tab A) provides infor-
mation on all the questions you raised in your memo (Tab B)2 except
that pertaining to tentative deployment plans, which are still being
worked out.
For your information, however, we have determined at the staff
level that a tentative deployment plan has been proposed—­to convert
earnest in 1981, building to a rate of about three aircraft per month, and
would involve buying about 2400 missiles (which would allow 20 per
aircraft plus an allowance for spare and pipeline missiles).
We have also determined a fact which is not stated explicitly in
Harold’s memo—­current plans are that if we proceed to a fly-­off
between the two ALCM candidates, our choice of a single contractor
for production will be made not just on technical factors, but also on the
basis of firm production price bids.
I believe that the information at hand is as reasonable a basis for
decision as can be expected in the near term; in my view the determin-
ing factors in the decision whether to have one or two ALCM programs
turns on two risks—1) the risk that a technical problem will delay the
program significantly and 2) the risk that production costs will be much
higher than now anticipated. Here is our account of these risks.
Technological Risk. While there may be an occasional short delay in
either of these programs, it seems very unlikely that any of the engi-
neering problems yet to be solved will prove very difficult. Even in
the unlikely event we were to run into serious problems, our strategic
posture will not be so close to the margin that our security would be
affected by a delay of even several years’ duration. The issue, however,
is that the political and corresponding fiscal consequences of failing
memorandum.

to successfully deploy an ALCM in a fairly quick and orderly manner
could be substantial. Specifically, there are abundant signs that the Air
Force and the JCS still do not completely accept your decision on the
B–1. Thus, they might seize the opportunity that would be presented by
a technical problem delaying ALCM deployment to mount a campaign
to get the B–1 decision reversed or push ahead with the FB–111 H.
Cost Risk. The risk that ALCM production costs might be signifi-
cantly higher if a single program is pursued also seems considerable,
particularly in view of the fact that, in the absence of competition, the
environment may be conducive to overpricing. As Harold suggests,
given a production run of 3000 missiles, a reduction of even 10 percent
in the projected production costs would completely offset the addi-
tional costs of carrying both ALCM programs.
RECOMMENDATION
Cutting back on our ALCM efforts might send the wrong signal
both to Congress and the Soviets. Given these considerations, I believe
that we should go along with Harold’s recommendation to support
both programs, at least for now. I would suggest, however, that you
have me instruct Harold that, while he can tentatively plan on con-
tinuing to a fly-­off and cost competition between the two missiles, he
should seek to resolve the major uncertainties in these programs as rap-
idly as possible in order to put you in the best possible position should
you decide to drop one of the programs in the FY 80 budget cycle.3
3 Carter indicated his approval and initialed the bottom of the memorandum. In
a September 9 memorandum to Brown, Brzezinski conveyed Carter’s decision, writing
that “the President has asked me to inform you that while you can tentatively plan on
continuing to a fly-­off and cost competition between the two missiles, you should seek
to resolve the major uncertainties in these programs as rapidly as possible in order to put
the President in the best possible position should he decide to drop one of these programs
in the FY 1980 budget.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,

Tab A

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter4
Washington, August 19, 1977
SUBJECT
Choosing a Single ALCM Development Program
Your memorandum of August 5, 1977, raised questions about our
plans for parallel development of the cruise missiles for the B–52. As
I indicated in our conversation last week, I do not believe that we are
ready to select with confidence one design (and contractor) for the air-­
launched cruise missile mission. Nor could we defend adequately a
selection of either missile and contractor at this stage. The ALCM mis-
sile has yet to be modified to its long range (ALCM–B) version. The
modification is relatively straightforward, (basically “stretching” it by
adding two sections). But a successful flight test of the modified mis-
sile is indicated before this missile could appropriately be selected. The
TOMAHAWK (TALCM) missile has had sufficient flight tests to tell us
about its flight characteristics, but has never been mated to or launched
from the B–52. Again, we believe the mating is a straightforward engi-
neering task. But until it is demonstrated, we cannot convincingly
argue that TALCM is the preferred missile. To arrive at the point where
we could select either missile with the required confidence will take a
minimum of 6 to 9 months of testing to conduct the necessary flight
tests and evaluation of each. Based on such preliminary test results, a
selection could be arrived at by a year from now, in mid-1978. How-
ever, with this much additional effort required for parallel programs,
I believe it will probably make good management sense to carry the
programs in parallel all the way through as a carefully conducted com-
petitive flyoff, with selection by October 1979. The savings that could
be achieved by not carrying the parallel program through a flyoff is
about $200M to $300M, depending on how soon the parallel program
is terminated, and which missile is selected. The benefits to be expected
from maintaining the parallel program through the flyoff are as follows:
(1) The competition can be fairly determined on an objective basis
from the operational tests conducted by SAC crews on B–52s.
(2) The technical characteristics of the successful missile will prob-
ably be superior because each contractor will be working hard to max-
imize his “score” on the indicated performance parameters, including
4 Secret.

radar cross section, reliability, guidance performance (the guidance
systems are only about 70% common), and operational flexibility of
the technique for mounting in the B–52. The merits of a stacked rack
riage are debated. A competitive flyoff will let the competition settle the
argument.
(3) The unit cost of the successful missile will probably be lower
because of each contractor’s motivation to incorporate manufacturing
economies into his design.
In summary, I expect the life cycle cost of the program will be less
with a competitive flyoff in spite of the increased R&D cost; as a bonus
we should get maximum performance and minimum risk of contrac-
tor protests. Finally, we hedge against program disaster in the unlikely
event of one contractor completely failing to meet program objectives.
You asked when we could certify to the Congress that the require-
ments of language in the FY 78 Authorization Bill have been met. The
clearest case for assurance of meeting operational requirements and for
knowledge that the termination would produce minimal cost is at the
end of the flyoff in October 1979. Prior to that we could make the certi-
fication based on our internal estimates at almost any time, conceivably
even before the preliminary development flight tests from the B–52 are
completed for both missiles. I question, however, whether we could be
convincing to the Congress. There is likely to be protracted acrimonious
exchange with the defenders of the missile that was selected out; mak-
ing a choice after flyoff would greatly reduce (though not eliminate) the
points of argument. I have attached answers to the other questions you
asked with the exception of tentative deployment plans.5 I assume you
were asking about numbers, intended utilization, and basing. We are
still sorting these out and I will provide an answer later.
Harold Brown
5 Attached but not printed are three one-­page papers—“Cruise Missile Deployment
and Costs,” “ALCM Program Plan,” and “TALCM Program Plan”—­and a one-­page chart
of an overview of costs for the cruise missile program.

35.
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (Lance) to President Carter1
Washington, September 14, 1977
SUBJECT
The FB–111H Strategic Bomber
Background on the Issue
The Air Force has again proposed to Harold Brown that he ini-
related budget amendment—­a proposal that you considered several
weeks ago but finally rejected.2 This new attempt by the Air Force to
start up the FB–111H program has been briefed to the Congress and has
found some support (Representative Jim Wright, Senators Goldwater
and McIntyre). Further, the Senate Armed Services Committee report-
would only be a small step, it opens the door to a $7–10 billion program
that will be extremely difficult to stop. Unless you and Harold Brown
take a strong stand against initiating the FB–111H, Congress is likely to
include it in the 1978 budget amendment.
The Air Force Proposal
The FB–111H builds upon certain features of the current FB–111.
However, it is essentially a brand new aircraft (new fuselage, avionics,
engines). It is smaller than the B–1, would carry about half the B–1’s
payload, and preliminary estimates suggest that it would cost some-
what more than half the cost of the B–1.
The Air Force believes that proceeding with an FB–111H develop-
ment program is a less expensive FY 1978 near term approach to retain-
ing a penetrating bomber option than maintaining B–1 development.
They would shift 1978 B–1 R&D funds into the new program.
for Lance. Brzezinski forwarded the memorandum to Carter under cover of an undated
memorandum in which he summarized Lance’s memorandum and wrote: “I believe that
you should support Bert’s recommendation. I would not, however, expend any signif-
icant amount of political capital in blocking an FB–111H program, given our need for
support on more important issues such as the ratification of the Panama Canal Treaty.”
Carter replied by writing in the margin: “The FB–111H program should be kept at a min-
imum.” (Ibid.)
2 On September 7, the New York Times reported: “The Air Force, seeking to salvage
technology designed for the B–1 bomber, has urged Defense Secretary Harold Brown
to revive production of the controversial FB–111 fighter and covert it into a long-­range
nuclear manned bomber.” (Bernard Weinraub, “Air Force Urges Revival of FB–111 As a

This is only half the story however. The Air Force will agree that
the FB–111 would be a less effective penetrator than the B–1. Given
the great uncertainty of the cost estimates for the still to be designed
FB–111H, this system could easily be more expensive to deploy than
an equally effective B–1 force. In addition, the probability that we will
have to exercise the production option must be assessed. Thus, the
appropriate question is: Is this probability small enough to make the
pensation for the extra costs that we risk paying in the event that we
build the FB–111H?
Arguments Against the FB–111H Proposal
A number of arguments can be made against initiation of FB–111H
at this time.
• A decision to begin serious development of this system could be
interpreted as essentially a reversal of your B–1 decision, since the air-
craft are similar in many ways. In terms of the primary arguments made
against the B–1, the only major difference is a lower unit cost. This is no
justification, however, since total cost of fulfilling the required mission
is what counts—­not unit costs.
• The air-­launched cruise missile has been out from under the
shadow of the B–1 program only a few months. Renewal of the compe-
tition between the standoff and manned penetrator options should be
delayed for a while to maximize the seriousness with which the ALCM
program is taken.
• The FB–111H option could adversely affect our long term SALT
negotiating posture, although the near term impact of starting to
develop a new penetrating strategic bomber may not be great. In partic-
ular, the similarity between the FB–111H and the Soviet Backfire could
lead to negotiating difficulties.
• Finally, commitment to even a very small program now is sure to
generate enormous pressures for full-­scale development and produc-
tion within a few years. The Air Force views the FB–111H as its last
chance to buy a penetrating bomber—­an issue of strong emotional
force with the Service. There are powerful congressional interests back-
ing the program and unfavorable past experience with terminating the
F–111 and A–7 production lines attests to the difficulties involved.
RECOMMENDATION
In view of the above considerations, the B–1 option should be
retained for the next year—­and for this period at least, any FB–111
initiatives should be avoided. Beyond the problems the FB–111H may
give us in SALT, and the fact that it is an inferior choice to the B–1, it
seems premature to begin consideration of a manned bomber that is so

similar a solution to the problem of maintaining the effectiveness of our
bomber force as the B–1.
I recommend that you ask Harold Brown, in his testimony before
the House and Senate Appropriations Committees now scheduled for
September 15 and 20, to state that the Administration does not wish to
initiate the FB–111H program at this time even at a minimal level. He
should support continued B–1 development during 1978 at the mini-
mum level sufficient to provide an option for production.3
3 Carter checked his approval of Lance’s recommendation. In a September 20 memo-
randum Brzezinski wrote Brown: “Last week OMB sent a memo to the President suggest-
ing that you should oppose any efforts by the Congress to begin a development program
for the FB–111H. Since this memo would not have gotten to the President in advance
of your testimony before the Congress last Thursday, I asked David Aaron to pass on
OMB’s as well as my own concerns over this issue. The President has since seen the OMB
memo and has indicated that if an FB–111H program is started, ‘it should be kept at a
minimum.’” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File,
36.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Secretary Brown’s Response to Questions on Our Nuclear War Procedures and
Doctrine
In the spring, in connection with a review of our “crisis manage-
ment” procedures for the event of nuclear war, you asked Harold Brown
to provide answers to questions about (1) procedures for the conduct of
a limited nuclear war, (2) the survivability of our command and control
under nuclear attack, and (3) the concept of “limited nuclear options”
(LNOs). He has responded with a memorandum (Tab A), a report on
our “Current Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy” (Tab B). I delayed
Box 47, Nuclear War Doctrine: Limited Nuclear Options (LNO) and Regional Nuclear
who sent the memorandum to Brzezinski under a September 9 covering memorandum.
(Ibid.) An unknown hand wrote on the first page of Odom’s memorandum: “Hand Car-
memorandum: “Zbig—See margin notes.”

an earlier version of his report pending the outcome of PRM–10, and
this second response is his revision in light of PRM–10 and PD–18.
(A copy of PD–18 is at Tab H.)2
The answers to the three original questions are succinctly stated at
Tabs C, D, and E. The JCS separate answers are at Tab F.
—Procedures. You will quickly note that the procedure for a limited
nuclear operation, [2 lines not declassified], is not very realistic, especially
in view of the Soviet stated preference for targeting command and con-
trol at the beginning of a conflict.
—Command and Control. Communications for a retaliatory strike
order may be very secure, but the survivability of the NCA for con-
ducting the war over several days or weeks and for coping with the
domestic civil front is not addressed.
—Limited Nuclear Options. The discussion of LNOs is less useful
than the appended list of presently approved LNOs which our forces
could execute.
To sum up, we have a limited nuclear war doctrine and targeting
capability, but we seem to lack some of the defensive capabilities that
would make it practical.
The longer report, “Current Nuclear Weapons Employment Pol-
icy,” is an excellent essay explaining the historical process by which we
arrived at our present condition, a doctrine but with only part of the
capability to implement it. In particular, it recounts our changing views
on what constitutes “deterrence” and how to “control escalation,” if
deterrence fails.
As Harold Brown points out in this memorandum, NSDM–242
specified a number of actions that have not been carried out effectively,
and he recommends that we reemphasize them. (A copy of NSDM 242
is at Tab G).3 He invites you to hear a briefing on LNOs by the JCS and
to visit SAC Headquarters in Omaha. I encourage you to accept these
invitations because:
—As the report argues, and as NSDM 242 specified, LNOs and the
SIOP require repeated interaction between the NCA and the planning
process if our nuclear force planning is to reflect the policy preference
of the NCA.
—The experience will improve your familiarity with the context
in which our White House Emergency Procedures and IVORY ITEMS
drills must fit. Recent press reporting on the subject of your readiness
for handling a nuclear war emergency (Orr Kelly’s piece in U.S. News
2 Not found attached; see Document 31.

& World Report)4 makes this a matter of potential public sensitivity, not
only because our procedures are mentioned, but also because Brezhnev
is described as practicing frequently with his nuclear war command
and control system. Our OPAL drills, your NEACP trip, and the IVORY
ITEM drill are already giant strides in this area of readiness in com-
parison to anything since the issuance of NSDM–242 which called for
similar “exercises” that never took place.
Finally, I shall consult with Harold Brown on re-­emphasizing
neglected aspects of NSDM–242.5

Tab A

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President
Carter6
Washington, August 19, 1977
SUBJECT
US Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy (U)
(TS) Several months ago, you directed Zbigniew Brzezinski to
ask me7 several questions concerning our current nuclear weapons
employment policy (NSDM–242), and the appropriateness of retaining
that policy. My response to your questions was initially forwarded to
the White House on June 3.8 At that time, however, it was anticipated
that PRM–10 would likely provide additional insight with respect to
nuclear weapons employment questions. As a consequence, the report
was held within the NSC awaiting completion of PRM–10. The report
was returned to me on July 29 to permit whatever modifications neces-
sary to accommodate my views on the results of PRM–10.
(TS) I have reviewed my previously developed responses to your
questions, and am enclosing the report, slightly altered to the above
end, for your information and consideration. In addition to responding
to your specific questions, the report provides additional background
to help in understanding our existing policy and the complexity of
4 Orr Kelly, “If U.S. Comes Under Nuclear Assault,” U.S. News & World Report,
­September 5, 1977.
5 Brzezinski wrote below this paragraph: “I inserted 5 clips, marking items you
might want to read, time-­permitting.”
6 Top Secret.
issues involving deterrence and the possible employment or threat of
employment of nuclear weapons.
(TS) Clearly, the question of whether existing nuclear employment
policy should be continued or modified, and if so, in what respects, is
of greatest importance. In providing their comments to assist in prepar-
ing the report, the Joint Chiefs of Staff judged that the rationale used
in developing current nuclear doctrine appears valid for the immedi-
ate future. They recommend that current nuclear policy as described in
NSDM–242 be retained.
(TS) The analyses and discussions of PRM–10 suggest that there
is still no consensus with respect to some elements of the general war
targeting criteria described in NSDM–242. It is apparent that follow-­on
work will be required in this area, and I intend to continue such study.
I am not, therefore, prepared to make a final recommendation on the
ultimate disposition of NSDM–242 at this time. The attached report
therefore does not present that issue for decision by you.
(S) Nevertheless, whatever judgments may ultimately be made
on its details, NSDM–242 represented a major step in nuclear employ-
ment policy. It promulgated for the first time a single national policy for
employment of both strategic and theater nuclear forces—­i.e., for plan-
ning how our existing forces would be used if necessary. It is a major
advance in providing an opportunity for greater participation by the
(civilian) National Command Authorities in nuclear planning, and for
rationalizing the planning process. Moreover, in addition to establish-
ing objectives and policy for nuclear weapons employment planning,
NSDM–242 also specified several tasks to be undertaken in the areas of
crisis management, declaratory policy, political-­military interface in the
planning process, and Presidential review of the resulting operational
plans. For a variety of reasons, these requirements for implementing
the overall policy have never all been completely satisfied. I believe
that reemphasis on these areas will now be needed regardless of the
eventual judgments made on NSDM–242.
(TS) With respect to the status of current guidance, I endorse the
views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the policy stated in NSDM–242
appears valid for the immediate future, and I recommend that NSDM–
242 be retained for employment planning purposes. I do this because
even if (as is quite possible) further analysis indicates that significant
policy modifications should be directed at some future point, adequate
lead time will be necessary to transition to a new employment policy.
Indeed, because of the complexity of the planning process, while some
limited modifications might be introduced more rapidly, two or more
years would be needed to develop new planning guidance and fully
translate it into a new general war plan (SIOP). It would be essential

that a comprehensive policy statement be in effect in the interim to pro-
vide focus and guidance for nuclear employment planning.
(S) I further recommend that action continue under the leadership
of the Secretary of Defense to refine and support implementation of
NSDM–242, especially in those areas unlikely to be affected by possible
future policy adjustments. Such action should include:
—Continued action to familiarize you and your senior advisors
with the content, capabilities, limitations and risks of the nuclear oper-
ational plans developed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in support of the
national nuclear employment policy, and to familiarize decision mak-
ers with the critical factors to be considered during the nuclear decision
process.
—Initiation of actions needed to enhance the definition by you,
with the advice of the National Security Council, of political objectives
and criteria to assist the Joint Chiefs of Staff in their preparation of mil-
itary plans for limited nuclear employment options when required by
the President during a crisis. We also need to assure in peacetime that
in crisis and war there will be adequate interaction and coordination of
political, diplomatic, and military measures (including both operations
and intelligence) in any attempt to control escalation through the lim-
ited employment of nuclear weapons.
—Initiation of a comprehensive review of deterrent concepts,
to include alternative strategic targeting criteria which could serve
as a basis for refinement of nuclear employment planning guidance
(NUWEP) issued by the Secretary of Defense.
(S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff have developed and I have reviewed a
briefing on non-SIOP (i.e., relatively small) nuclear options. This brief-
ing on limited nuclear employment options and the status of their plan-
ning was prepared as a follow-­on to briefings you have received on the
SIOP. I recommend that after you have reviewed the attached report,
we schedule the Joint Chiefs of Staff briefing for you.9
(S) I also recommend that you and I visit the Strategic Air Com-
mand and the Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff within the next two
months—­perhaps in late September or early in October.10
(S) I will make a further recommendation on the disposition of
NSDM–242 and the appropriate policy on the issues it presents after I
have completed a review of deterrent concepts and alternative strategic
targeting criteria as a follow-­on to PRM–10.
Harold Brown
9 In the right margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “do so soon.”
10 In the right margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “ok.”

Tab B

Report Prepared in the Department of Defense11
Washington, August 12, 1977
[Omitted here are the title page and table of contents.]
REPORT
BY THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
ON
CURRENT US NUCLEAR EMPLOYMENT POLICY (U)
I. Introduction
(TS) The following report responds to the President’s request for
information and comments on the US nuclear employment policy
established by NSDM–242.
(C) It is appropriate to note that NSDM–242 provides policy for
planning the employment of all available US strategic and theater
nuclear weapons (except anti-­submarine and anti-­air defense weap-
ons), and should be regarded as quite distinct from acquisition and
deployment policies which appear in other documents and about
which determinations are made separately. The operational employ-
ment plans (SIOP and other contingency plans) developed in support
of NSDM–242 are capabilities plans designed to achieve NSDM–242
objectives to the extent practicable with currently available nuclear
forces.
(TS) The main body of the report (Sections II–V) focuses on our
present nuclear war doctrine, and the underlying observations, assump-
tions and rationale that led to adoption of the policy represented by
NSDM–242, and discusses the advisability of retaining NSDM–242.
Discussions of the more specific questions relative to: (1) procedures
for conducting nuclear war, (2) command and control survivability, and
(3) objectives and assumptions of our current limited nuclear options
are contained in appropriate annexes to the basic report.
(C) The report draws on the current views and recommendations of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In its explanation of the current policy stated in
NSDM–242, the report also draws heavily on the record of the NSSM–
169 interagency study group on nuclear weapons employment policy12
11 Top Secret.
12 For the Summary Report of the Inter-Agency Working Group on NSSM 169, June
Document 17.

whose analyses and recommendations resulted in the specific policy
stated in NSDM–242. The NSSM–169 group’s rationale is presented to
permit a better understanding of the current doctrine and why it was
adopted. A critical analysis of this rationale has not been attempted.
Such an analysis is appropriate as part of PRM–10 follow-­on activities.
II. US Nuclear War Planning—Background (1962–74)
(S) Since 1962, employment planning for virtually all US strategic
nuclear forces has been contained in the Single Integrated Operational
Plan (SIOP). Until 1976, the SIOP was prepared in accordance with the
National Strategic Targeting and Attack Policy (NSTAP), developed by
the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The NSTAP was a JCS guidance document for
military planners. There was, however, no single coherent statement or
document that could be regarded as a national strategic nuclear employ-
ment policy. There was essentially no publicly stated US employment
policy at all for theater nuclear forces (although US and its Allies in the
Nuclear Planning Group had developed a classified body of nuclear
employment guidelines for use in the NATO theater, and SACEUR had
long had plans for employment of theater forces in conjunction with
the SIOP). Actual theater nuclear force employment planning for the
most part was limited to definition of procedures to be used by field
commanders for requesting authority to selectively employ their tacti-
cal nuclear weapons prior to SIOP execution.
(TS) The fundamental planning concept of the NSTAP was to
maximize US power in a nuclear exchange so as to maintain strategic
superiority and thereby lead to early termination of the war on terms
favorable to the US and its allies. Under the NSTAP, the basic SIOP
objectives were:
—“To destroy or neutralize, on a selective basis, nuclear offensive
capabilities of the enemy that threaten the United States and its allies,
in order to limit damage to the United States and its allies to the extent
practicable.”
—“To destroy or neutralize, on a selective basis, a comprehensive
enemy military target system in order to assist in the destruction of the
enemy’s overall military capability.”
—“To destroy, on a selective basis and under all conditions of war
initiation, the war-­supporting and urban-­industrial resources of the
enemy.”
The NSTAP organized the SIOP into several attack options to
provide a degree of flexibility to the National Command Authorities
(NCA). Some additional flexibility was afforded by a built-­in execu-
tion capability that permitted [2 lines not declassified]. Nevertheless, the
SIOP execution options available under the NSTAP were massive by
any standard with approximately [less than 1 line not declassified] being
involved in even the smallest SIOP retaliatory option.

(TS) Although successive Secretaries of Defense and Presidents
were familiar in general with NSTAP planning objectives and the SIOP,
their statements about US policy for buying nuclear weapons frequently
suggested nuclear employment doctrine and strategies that differed
from the actual attacks planned in the SIOP. Strategic force sizing crite-
ria of that era were predicated on the assumption that deterrence could
be assured by threatening to destroy in retaliation about one-­third of
the Soviet population and 70 percent of the war-­supporting economic
base. Secretaries of Defense, though mentioning damage limitation as
a US strategic forces objective, tended to imply that population and
industry were the prime targets for “assured destruction” in retaliation
to a Soviet nuclear attack against the United States. However, because
forces to carry out the assured destruction policy were well hedged to
cover a worst-­case condition, weapons became available for targeting
a comprehensive military target system. The actual employment plan
(SIOP) continued to place the major weight of effort on enemy mili-
tary forces to limit damage to the US and its allies, and to assist in the
destruction of the enemy’s over-­all military capability.
III. Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy Reassessment (1969–74)
(U) Overwhelming US nuclear superiority and the threat of large-­
scale nuclear retaliation provided a credible deterrent not only to delib-
erate nuclear attack throughout the 1950s and into the 1960s but also
a reasonably plausible threat for response to conventional attacks. US
nuclear capability continued to increase during this period with signif-
icant qualitative and quantitative improvements in US nuclear forces.
Although concerns for the survivability of the US forces date back to
discussion of the vulnerability of bomber bases in the late 1950s, the
deployment of submarine-­launched ballistic missiles, silo-­based ICBMs
on constant alert, as well as an alert posture for SAC bombers greatly
enhanced the survivability of the US retaliatory capability. An effective
US second-­strike retaliatory capability appeared secure even after hav-
ing sustained a major surprise attack by the Soviet Union, and some
US capability existed to neutralize Soviet nuclear forces. Nevertheless,
while by most measures, the US retained strategic nuclear superiority,
the Soviets were rapidly narrowing this lead. In particular, the USSR
was likewise achieving a secure strategic retaliatory capability them-
selves by rapid deployments of ICBMs protected in hardened silos, and
SLBMs under the sea.
(S) In the minds of many analysts, these changing strategic realities
raised serious questions as to the continued effectiveness of our nuclear
deterrent. While virtually all believed our strategic forces and plans
adequate to deter a major nuclear attack on the US, they were uncertain
that the threat of large-­scale nuclear retaliation provided the best deter-
rent to lesser attacks or threats to the US and its allies. Moreover, the

changing strategic balance appeared to erode US allies’ confidence in
the strength and credibility of the US nuclear deterrent. The diminished
credibility of the assured destruction doctrine to deter attacks against
Europe led Secretary McNamara to press for a flexible response strat-
(S) Escalation Control. Pursuant to the widely expressed doubts
concerning the continued effectiveness of the US nuclear deterrent,
Secretary Laird initiated a study in 1970. The study initially included
participants from the Department of Defense under the chairmanship
of Dr. John Foster. Later, in 1973, it became the NSSM–169 study, and
representatives from the Department of State, the Central Intelligence
Agency, and the staff of the National Security Council were added
(though they had been consulted informally earlier). The NSSM–169
study group concluded: (1) the threat of a massive retaliatory response
is credible as a deterrent only at the upper levels of potential strategic
nuclear conflict, and (2) if deterrence fails by accident or miscalcula-
tion, counterforce attacks against Soviet nuclear threats offer little con-
fidence of holding damage to the US to a low level.
(U) The study group recommended that the US introduce limited
nuclear employment options into its nuclear planning to enhance deter-
rence and to limit damage by controlling escalation. The National Com-
mand Authorities (NCA) would have greater flexibility in responding
to a wider range of threats against the US and its allies and thereby
increase the overall credibility of our deterrent and the possibility of
limiting damage, if deterrence failed.
(U) The study group noted that under the previous nuclear employ-
ment policy (NSTAP), the means of limiting damage was viewed in
military terms—­counterforce attacks against nuclear threats. The group
concluded that in a major nuclear conflict with the Soviet Union, coun-
terforce strikes would not significantly reduce urban damage to the US
and its allies. The US did not have the capabilities to effectively target
the increasingly survivable Soviet nuclear forces, either preemptively
or in retaliation. In addition, US strategic defense capabilities were lim-
ited. Air defense forces had been steadily declining and ballistic missile
defense—­not feasible for area defense in any event—­was constrained
by the ABM Treaty. Consequently, the group introduced the concept of
limiting damage through the control of escalation. If deterrence failed,
the objective would be to confine the conflict to the lowest level possi-
ble while attempting to coerce the enemy to terminate the war on terms
acceptable to the US. Efforts to control escalation through the employ-
ment of limited nuclear options would show restraint. They would
provide opportunities for the enemy to reconsider and to negotiate for

an acceptable settlement (although not necessarily a settlement that
achieves all of the objectives or goals desired by either side).
(U) Options to control escalation are intended to work on the will
and determination of the opposing political leadership. They are not
intended to fulfill a total set of military objectives but rather to:
—Reverse or stalemate the situation, at least temporarily.
—Diminish the enemy’s expectation of success.
—Convince him that his limits will be exceeded.
—Present the enemy with a set of response alternatives which
make it difficult for him to respond militarily in kind, and disadvanta-
geous to escalate.
—Convince him that early termination is his most attractive
alternative.
Key questions, perhaps unanswerable, are the degree to which
such an approach can influence Soviet actions during a nuclear war, the
means for conveying such messages (explicitly or implicitly), and the
potential effectiveness of the whole approach. Even if the likely effec-
tiveness is low, the stake is so high that in the absence of clearly better
approaches, some pursuit of this one is justified.
(U) The concept of escalation control requires establishing bound-
aries limiting the scope, level, and duration of the violence. Planning
emphasis is shifted from the traditional approach which places specific
military targeting requirements (designed to secure military advan-
tage) foremost to an approach in which political-­military objectives
established by the NCA (designed to terminate conflict as quickly as
possible) are paramount. Special emphasis is placed on mutually sup-
porting military (conventional and nuclear) and political measures.
A high degree of interaction would be required among the NCA, the
JCS, and the commanders of the unified and specified commands in
selecting the details of the attack.
(U) Behind the concept of escalation control is the assumption that
statesmen define some limits as to the losses (costs) they are willing to
suffer to achieve their objectives. In theory, if the Soviets realize they
cannot achieve their objectives quickly or easily, they will be deterred
from further escalation. The options involved would be clearly below
the level of a massive attack, and they would seek to coerce the enemy
into negotiation for early war termination by striking relatively small
numbers of selected targets and providing a deterrent to further esca-
lation by holding forth the prospect of subsequent massive attacks on
targets he values highly. If, however, there are virtually no limits on
the enemy’s objectives or the costs he is willing to incur, then control
of escalation through limited nuclear options may not be possible,
and the conflict could only be stopped by destroying his capability to
achieve his objective. If deterrence fails, the essential first step would be

to assess the enemy’s ultimate objectives and determine whether and
where he would likely consider his costs disproportionate to any gain.
Also required would be a clear understanding of our own objectives
with respect to the issue at hand, and our willingness to risk a Soviet
counter-­limited strike in return.
(U) The NSSM 169 study group recognized that there can be no
guarantee that the limited nuclear options will in fact control escala-
tion. They believed, however, that the capability to employ limited
nuclear options provides the NCA with the only means to try to control
the level of violence.
General War
(S) A second focus of concern to the NSSM–169 study group was
how best to deter a major attack on the US. Recognizing, however, that
there was no way deterrence of a major nuclear war could be categor-
ically assured, the group also developed targeting criteria that would
contribute to the most favorable outcome possible for the US in the
event deterrence failed. They concluded that the ability to deny the
enemy his postwar objectives in terms of overall power and influence
would be a better deterrent to a major nuclear attack than destroying
what was defined in advance to be “unacceptable cost” in terms of
fatalities and damage to the enemy’s war-­supporting and urban indus-
trial base.
(S) Under NSTAP, the preponderance of weapons in the SIOP
were aimed at military targets with attacks directed at enemy nuclear
offensive capabilities, as well as attacks against a comprehensive mil-
itary target system. A significantly smaller number of weapons were
allocated against the war-­supporting and urban-­industrial targets to
achieve the public strategy of “assured destruction.”
(S) In place of a general war-­targeting objective threatening to kill
millions of people and destroy a large percentage of Soviet industry,
the NSSM–169 study group recommended threatening to destroy the
enemy’s military and economic power and slow down the enemy’s
postwar recovery. [3 lines not declassified] By directly threatening the
political, military and economic institutions through which they direct
and control their societies, they believed the opposing political lead-
ers’ goals and values would be more directly threatened and deterrence
enhanced. Moreover, the US goal of securing the best position possible
for the US in terms of postwar power and influence if deterrence fails
would be promoted.
(TS) The group rejected the targeting alternative which emphasized
indiscriminate destruction of population for the following reasons:
—The US was limited in its ability to insure approximately equal
Soviet deaths to those suffered by the US given the demographic

asymmetry (i.e., the US is more concentrated in cities than Soviet pop-
ulation) and the smaller yields of US warheads. (SIOP analyses in 1972
estimated 123 million US fatalities compared to 82 million Soviet fatal-
ities in a maximum level nuclear exchange between the US and USSR,
i.e., both sides fully generated with the USSR striking first.)
—The Soviets might be able to reduce the US ability to destroy
Soviet population by massive civil defense programs. Although the
extent and effectiveness of these programs were unknown, their exis-
tence created uncertainty in the estimates of Soviet civilian fatalities we
would be able to achieve.
—The Soviet and PRC leadership might have a higher tolerance
for casualties than perceived by the US, and might not be deterred by
the threat to destroy the percentage of the population and industry
defined by the US. Historically, the Soviets have accepted enormous
human costs to secure the objectives of the communist regime. Millions
of deaths are estimated to have occurred (though over years, not days)
during the agricultural collectivization and Stalinist purges preceding
World War II in which twenty million Soviets are estimated to have
died.
—The US deterrent strategy, out of moral concern, should not
emphasize the killing of non-­combatants.
(TS) The NSSM–169 study group was not unanimous in believing
that a threat to post-­attack recovery targets would be more effective
than some other targeting objective in terms of enhancing deterrence.
Whether a criterion of comparable fatalities and damage was required
was open to debate, and some held that the revised targeting crite-
ria would not result in significant differences from the then currently
declared threat of major retaliation against population. (This in fact,
appeared to be the case when analysis of the first SIOP developed
under NSDM–242 criteria showed—­without considering possible
Soviet civil defense—­a decrease of only about two percent in expected
Soviet fatalities. The political, economic, and military institutions are,
in the large, where the population is). All of the NSSM–169 study group
agreed, however, that the new criteria would not decrease deterrence of
a major nuclear attack.
IV. Current Nuclear Employment Policy and Planning Guidance
(TS) The concepts developed by the NSSM–169 study group were
incorporated in NSDM–242 issued by the President on January 24,
1974. NSDM–242 defined general employment planning objectives
and broad targeting policy for US nuclear forces including for the first
time, provisions for a strategic reserve force. It also established proce-
dures for the development of further guidance and Presidential review
of employment plans, as well as certain objectives and tasks for com-
mand, control and crisis management. The broad policies directed by
NSDM–242 have been more definitively elaborated by the Secretary
of Defense as Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy (NUWEP), and

by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in their detailed planning guidance to the
CINCs and the Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff.
(TS) Briefly stated, NSDM–242 and NUWEP establish that the
fundamental objective of the current US doctrine of “Flexible Nuclear
Response” is deterrence of conventional and nuclear attacks and
attempts at coercion by nuclear powers against the US and its allies.
This condition is established by an assured and evident US nuclear
retaliatory capability effective across a wide spectrum of possible con-
flict situations. Should conflict occur, the strategy seeks to limit dam-
age to the US and its allies through the control of escalation. This is to
be accomplished by providing a wide range of employment options to
the NCA for response to varying levels of provocation. These options
are to be employed, in conjunction with other supporting diplomatic
and military measures, to limit conflict to the lowest level feasible and
coerce an enemy into negotiating a termination of the war on terms
acceptable to the US and its allies. This is to be done while holding vital
enemy targets hostage and threatening their subsequent destruction if
the enemy fails to negotiate. The availability of such options is meant
to enhance deterrence in the first place. To the extent that escalation
cannot be controlled and an all-­out war occurs, the strategy seeks to
maximize US power relative to an enemy by destroying the political,
economic and military structures supporting the enemy’s status as a
major power and those resources critical to his early post-­war recovery,
limiting damage to the US to the degree practical, and by maintaining
a strategic force in reserve for protection and coercion during and after
a major nuclear exchange.
(U) Present policy concepts emphasize preplanning to: enhance
force efficiency and effectiveness, provide for rapid execution, and pro-
vide a solid basis for estimating consequences (expected damage lev-
els, fatalities, risks, etc.). The full range of politico-­military conditions
cannot be anticipated. Past experience has shown that national deci-
sionmakers desire a full range of options to consider in determining
appropriate solutions to a crisis. It is therefore prudent and necessary
to maintain the capability for responding to a wide range of hostile
actions. Therefore, nuclear employment plans have been designed to
allow for flexible adaptation as events unfold prior to execution. Where
only general plans can be formulated in advance, dedicated organiza-
tions and specialized planning procedures have been established within
the military structure of the Joint Staff and unified and specified com-
mands for the rapid development, assessment and execution of specific
limited nuclear employment options. It is assumed that there will be
a high degree of control and direction by the NCA which will require
close interaction between political, diplomatic, and military actions in
the face of rapidly, often obscurely unfolding events. An acceptable

concept has not yet evolved of how this interaction between the NCA
and other involved organizations might occur.
(U) The announcement by Secretary Schlesinger of the new US
employment policy was widely interpreted as indicating that the US
was shifting its nuclear targeting to a silo-­busting, counterforce strat-
egy which would require acquisition of new strategic weapon systems
and capabilities. In fact, the changes in the targeting, and the addi-
tional flexibility incorporated in the employment plans have not as
so far carried out entailed purchase of new systems. Schlesinger did
acknowledge, however, that the doctrine would be improved if certain
qualitative improvements were funded for the forces and command
and control systems. The contemporaneous discussion of better US
hard target capability related to a distinct issue—­avoiding the percep-
tions that he believed would result if the USSR were thought to have a
great edge over the US in any particular category of strategic capability.
Neither did the doctrine represent a radical shift in targeting emphasis.
On the contrary, prepared US nuclear war plans had always included
options for attacking both urban-­industrial and military (hard and soft)
targets, but heretofore they always involved the expenditure of several
thousand nuclear weapons. The concepts of NSDM–242 were meant to
provide greater flexibility to the NCA by providing a wide spectrum of
variously sized options from which to choose an appropriate response
at any level of aggression.
(TS) In implementing NSDM–242, the Secretary of Defense’s
NUWEP guidance directed that Major Attack Options and Selected
Attack Options (MAOs and SAOs) be included in the SIOP. MAOs pro-
vide for massive attacks against the primary military resources (nuclear
and conventional), the recovery resources, and the national leadership
of the USSR and PRC and their allies. SAOs provide for generally large-­
scale (although smaller than MAOs) attacks against selected military
targets, and are target sub-­sets extracted from the MAOs. SAOs con-
tribute to the objective of escalation control by providing preplanned
options within the SIOP to respond to large-­scale Soviet or PRC nuclear
attacks against military targets of the US and/or its allies.
(S) Limited and Regional Nuclear Options (LNOs and RNOs)
were also required by NSDM–242 and NUWEP. LNOs and RNOs pro-
vide smaller, more discrete alternatives to the larger retaliatory attacks
planned in the SIOP as MAOs and SAOs. LNOs are generally small-­
scale preplanned attacks by nuclear-­capable strategic or theater forces
against fixed targets. RNOs are attacks, normally by nuclear-­capable
theater forces, designed to counter deployed attacking enemy forces and
supporting resources. These non-SIOP options, which normally vary in
size [2 lines not declassified], are developed by the unified and specified
commanders (CINCs) and reviewed and approved by the Joint Chiefs

of Staff. They are then incorporated in the contingency operations plans
prepared by the CINCs to support defense tasks and objectives in their
assigned geographic region or functional area of responsibility.
(U) For the most part, LNO–RNO development has produced
options that emphasize their military utility (rather than political
utility) in the defense of an area or interest believed vital to the US.
While criteria for assessing military effectiveness are well developed
and widely understood, and thus can be used to guide preplanning of
options, definition of useful criteria for evaluating the potential polit-
ical utility of LNOs and RNOs has been found to be very complex.
Factors relevant to a determination of political utility are extremely
subjective, and may not be adequately understood until an actual cri-
sis begins to unfold. Thus, it has been easier to conceptualize and pre-­
plan limited options on the basis of their potential military utility rather
than potential political contribution in the contingency situations that
have been postulated. Progress is needed toward the development
and statement of political objectives and criteria to enhance the mili-
tary planners’ capability to pre-­plan, and more importantly, to translate
national political objectives into limited options useful to the NCA in
a nuclear crisis. In this regard, the Joint Chiefs of Staff in collaboration
with the Office of the Secretary of Defense, have initiated a series of
politico-­military war simulations designed to raise the level of familiar-
ization and understanding of nuclear war considerations among senior
civilian and military officials. Two separate series of simulations have
examined limited nuclear option concepts in crisis scenarios focused on
the Mid-East and northeast Asia. The simulations have been considered
very informative and useful by most participants, and should be con-
tinued. Better insight, however, still remains to be developed in the area
of interfacing political objectives, requirements and criteria with mili-
tary plans and capabilities. This will be particularly important in the
management of an actual crisis when it will be necessary to integrate
political and diplomatic measures with military activities if an attempt
is being made to control escalation through the limited employment of
nuclear weapons.
V. Advisability of Retaining NSDM–242
(S) The NSDM–242 nuclear weapons employment policy provided,
for the first time, a nationally promulgated common policy framework
for both strategic and theater forces. It remains for this Administration
to determine whether or not NSDM–242 should be retained, modified
or replaced.
(S) It would be inadvisable merely to cancel NSDM–242 in the
absence of an equally comprehensive national nuclear weapons
employment policy statement. Nuclear weapons employment plan-
ning is an immensely complex and time consuming activity. Significant

modifications to nuclear weapons employment doctrine generate liter-
ally vast adjustments not only in the targeting plans themselves, but in
command and control procedures, emergency action procedures, train-
ing, intelligence requirements, as well as many other areas. Two years
of intense activity elapsed between the signing of NSDM–242 and the
effective date of the first SIOP developed accordingly. Consequently,
transition to any new or significantly revised doctrine would require
an adequate lead time.
(TS) Even though no one can say with confidence that the exis-
tence of limited nuclear options will either deter a potential aggressor
in every case, or that escalation can be controlled through the employ-
ment of limited nuclear options, there is no doubt that we would wish
to consider alternative options in a serious crisis. Agreement exists
that the US should continue to plan for the flexible use of its nuclear
weapons.
(TS) With respect to general war, we can never be absolutely certain
of precisely what or how much will deter the Soviet leadership. Con-
sequently, we cannot be confident that a massive nuclear war will not
occur by either design or miscalculation. The concept of focusing our
general war targeting objectives on the enemy power structure itself,
and on its regenerative capacity, enables the doctrine to be related not
only to deterrence, but also to US interests and objectives in a postwar
world, should a general war occur. It is believed that the NSDM–242
targeting objectives currently incorporated in the SIOP are adequate for
the immediate future. We intend, however, to examine alternative tar-
geting concepts in PRM–10 follow-­on analyses. It is possible that these
analyses may result in recommendations for future modifications to
strategic targeting objectives and priorities.
(TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff were asked to provide their views with
respect to NSDM–242. After review of the doctrine, they concluded that
the rationale used in developing current nuclear employment policy
over the past several years appears to be valid for the immediate future.
They believe the doctrine expressed in NSDM–242 is responsive to the
realities of current technology and the relative military power balance
between the United States and the Soviet Union. In that its adoption has
placed greater emphasis on planning for limited options, they believe
it improves the capability for deterrence across the entire spectrum of
conflict and provides the NCA with a realistic flexible response capabil-
ity. For these reasons, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe current doctrine
for the employment of nuclear weapons, as embodied in NSDM–242
should be retained. They believe the following additional factors would
support this position:
—Deterrence remains the principal objective of national policy.
Intelligence analyses of current capabilities of the Soviet Union and the

projected threats indicate that the Soviet Union is rapidly closing the
technology gap which will allow it to enhance its capability to wage
nuclear conflict at various levels of intensity. Therefore, it is prudent
to maintain US deterrent capability over a wide spectrum of possible
conflict through a concept that embraces both strategic and theater
nuclear weapons. This close coupling of US strategic capabilities to the-
ater forces and the extension of the nuclear umbrella to theaters with-
out stalwart US conventional defenses are believed to have enhanced
deterrence of nuclear and conventional coercion and attack, especially
in the face of Soviet force improvement.
—Targeting for an assured retaliation capability should remain
focused on the postwar recovery resources and, as practical, national
leadership and primary military threats. This is particularly true in
light of evident Soviet hardening efforts (storage facilities, work force
shelters, political/military centers, etc.) and other civil defense pro-
grams. Targeting of national leadership (includes political/­military C3)
and military nuclear/conventional capabilities enhances deterrence,
helps limit damage to the extent practical, and denies the Soviets the
capability to seize industrial resources in Europe as a basis for their
recovery. Additional intelligence support is needed to provide an ade-
quate data base which will enable recovery forecasting and improve
the capability for targeting post-­attack recovery resources.
—A survivable strategic reserve force is considered even more nec-
essary as a means for the United States to deter further attack (following
a major nuclear exchange) from either the USSR/PRC or other world
powers, or to achieve objectives which were not fully accomplished by
the initial SIOP laydown.
—Escalation control appears to be an increasingly viable concept in
view of the extensive Soviet ICBM hardening efforts, the SLBM threat,
and ABM Treaty agreements. Counterforce (as a damage limiting capa-
bility) has limited effectiveness, making escalation control one of the
few means of limiting damage to the United States, particularly in the
absence of improved US civil defense measures.
—US NATO Allies’ confidence in deterrence is strengthened if they
believe the United States has options that are usable and effective to
defend NATO. NATO’s Nuclear Operations (NOP) provide for general
nuclear war attacks on the Warsaw Pact which can be simultaneously exe-
cuted with the US SIOP. Included in the NOP are Selected Employment
Plans (SEPs) developed by NATO which are similar in concept to US
LNOs and RNOs. Any US limited nuclear capability strengthens Allied
confidence in the US willingness and capability to defend NATO. Con-
sideration of current policy must include its impact on Allied solidarity.
RECOMMENDATIONS
(TS) I endorse the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the pol-
icy stated in NSDM–242 appears valid for the immediate future, and
I recommend that NSDM–242 be retained for employment planning
purposes. I do this because even if further analysis indicates that sig-
nificant policy modifications should be directed at some future point,
adequate lead time will be necessary to transition to a new employment
policy. Indeed, because of the complexity of the planning process, while
some limited modifications might be introduced more rapidly, two or

more years would be needed to develop new planning guidance and
fully translate it into a new general war plan (SIOP). It would be essen-
tial that a comprehensive policy statement be in effect in the interim to
provide focus and guidance for nuclear employment planning.
(S) I further recommend that action continue under the leadership
of the Secretary of Defense to refine and support implementation of
NSDM–242, especially in those areas unlikely to be affected by possible
future policy adjustments. Such action should include:
—Continued action to familiarize you and your senior advisors
with the content, capabilities, limitations and risks of the nuclear oper-
ational plans developed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in support of the
national nuclear employment policy, and to familiarize decision mak-
ers with the critical factors to be considered during the nuclear decision
process.14
—Initiation of actions needed to enhance the definition by you,
with the advice of the National Security Council, of political objectives
and criteria to assist the Joint Chiefs of Staff in their preparation of mil-
itary plans for limited nuclear employment options when required by
the President during a crisis. We also need to assure in peacetime that
in crisis and war there will be adequate interaction and coordination of
political, diplomatic, and military measures (including both operations
and intelligence) in any attempt to control escalation through the lim-
ited employment of nuclear weapons.15
—Initiation of a comprehensive review of deterrent concepts
to include alternative strategic targeting criteria which could serve
as a basis for refinement of nuclear employment planning guidance
(NUWEP) issued by the Secretary of Defense.

Tab C

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense16
Washington, undated
PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCTING NUCLEAR WAR
(TS) Limited Nuclear Conflict. The primary command center for
conduct of a limited nuclear conflict would be the National Military
Command Center (NMCC). The Secretary of Defense and Joint Chiefs
of Staff, operating from the NMCC, would monitor the conflict through
inputs from the commanders of unified and specified commands
(CINCs) and the National Military Intelligence Center (NMIC) and
14 In the right margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “ok JC.”
15 In the right margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “ok—Zbig do this.”
16 Top Secret.

make military recommendations to the President. Nuclear weapon
employment [5 lines not declassified] Joint Chiefs of Staff would be pro-
vided to the President for his consideration and decision. Request for
employment of nuclear weapons would also come from the theater
CINC to the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the form of a request for selective
or conditional nuclear release authority. The Joint Chiefs of Staff would
pass the request with their advice and recommendations to the NCA
for decision. In the case of NATO Europe, SACEUR would submit his
request through US channels concurrent with introducing it into the
rest of NATO. While theater communications would be somewhat
degraded it is expected that connectivity would be sufficient to permit
the NMCC to receive reconnaissance data, strike reports, nuclear det-
onation reports, and maintain continuous interaction with appropriate
theater CINCs. Based on this information and guidance from the NCA
and their advisers (i.e., the NSC, and other government agency prin-
cipals) the Joint Chiefs of Staff in coordination with the CINCs would
develop appropriate options for NCA consideration. Such options
might include additional force deployments, follow-­on nuclear strikes,
a review of the SIOP Execution Considerations, and a tentative execu-
tion decision as a precautionary measure should the conflict escalate to
a higher level. [10 lines not declassified]
(TS) General War. Should the crisis lead to a major nuclear exchange,
SIOP execution considerations and Joint Chiefs of Staff recommenda-
tions on appropriate SIOP options would be passed to the NCA for
decision. The decision would then be implemented by Joint Chiefs of
Staff transmission of emergency actions messages to the SIOP forces.
First priority following the exchange would be location of the surviving
NCA and Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, or their successors. [9 lines not
declassified]

Tab D

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense17
Washington, undated
SURVIVABILITY OF US COMMAND AND CONTROL SYSTEMS
(TS) Under either attack with warning or surprise conditions,
analytical studies show that US C3 systems could suffer severe dam-
age from a major nuclear exchange or a limited exchange aimed at
17 Top Secret.

command and control components.18 Most fixed, primary and alternate
command centers could be destroyed [7 lines not declassified].
(TS) Since the Blue Ribbon Panel Report,19 several survivability
improvements have been made in US command and control systems.
[5 lines not declassified]. In summary, the potential for survivability of
the US command and control system today is better than it was in 1970,
with recent assessments concluding that it contributes significantly to
a credible deterrence.

Tab E

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense20
Washington, undated
LIMITED NUCLEAR EMPLOYMENT OPTIONS (LNO/RNO)
OBJECTIVES AND ASSUMPTIONS
(U) The basic objective of non-SIOP limited nuclear employment
options (LNOs and RNOs) is to strengthen deterrence across a broader
range of possible conflicts by providing a series of preplanned, mea-
sured and discrete nuclear response options more applicable to situa-
tions where the deterrent threat of the large-­scale options in the SIOP
would be inappropriate or incredible. In the event that deterrence fails,
the principal objective of non-SIOP options is to secure early war termi-
nation on terms acceptable to the US and its allies at the lowest level of
conflict feasible, thereby limiting the level of overall damage. In accor-
dance with this objective, LNOs and RNOs have been developed for a
number of contingencies. These options are available for consideration
by the NCA during a crisis and for use in conjunction with political and
other military measures such as employment of conventional forces.
Specific objectives of current LNOs and RNOs are contained in the
Appendix.
(U) The basic political assumption underlying the development
of non-SIOP nuclear options is that escalation control can be achieved.
The fundamental assumption of escalation control is that there are lim-
its on the risks or losses the enemy is willing to accept. Militarily, a
key assumption is that the controlled, restrained use of nuclear force
provides the capability to demonstrate resolve, to reverse locally a
18 Carter underlined “aimed at command and control components” and wrote next
to it: “certain target.”
20 Top Secret.

disadvantageous force balance, or to destroy specific, valued targets.
When political and military efforts are combined, the assumption is
that escalation can be controlled by enhancing or guiding enemy per-
ceptions. This is done by communicating with him (communicating
NATO’s intentions, MOLINK, etc.) and by limiting the level, scope and
duration of nuclear strikes, while achieving military effectiveness.

Appendix to Tab E21
Washington, undated
LIMITED NUCLEAR OPTIONS (LNOs) AND REGIONAL
NUCLEAR OPTIONS (RNOs) OBJECTIVES (U)
EUROPEAN COMMAND
[3 paragraphs (18 lines) not declassified]
ATLANTIC COMMAND
[2 paragraphs (9 lines) not declassified]
PACIFIC COMMAND
[1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified]
STRATEGIC AIR COMMAND
[1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified]

Tab F

Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff (Brown) to Secretary of Defense Brown22
Washington, May 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Nuclear Weapons Employment Doctrine (U)
1. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff are pleased to provide their views
on the subjects raised in the memorandum by the Assistant to the
21 Top Secret.
22 Top Secret.

discussion of each issue is contained in the Appendix.24 The questions in
the aforementioned memorandum are repeated below for clarity.
a. “A succinct statement of our present nuclear war doctrine. In so
doing, you should comment on the advisability of retaining or cancel-
ling NSDM 242 and limited nuclear options.”
The fundamental objective of current US doctrine for the employ-
ment of nuclear weapons is deterrence of conventional or nuclear
attacks and attempts at coercion by nuclear powers against the United
States and its allies. If deterrence fails, the objective seeks to limit dam-
age to the United States and its allies through control of escalation by
employing first conventional and then, if necessary, limited nuclear
options designed to limit the conflict and reestablish deterrence. If esca-
lation cannot be controlled, the objective seeks to maximize US power
relative to an enemy in the postwar era. This doctrine is responsive
to the realities of current technology and the relative military power
balance between the United States and the Soviet Union. Its adoption
has placed greater emphasis on planning for limited options, thereby
improving the capability for deterrence across the entire spectrum of
conflict and providing the NCA with a realistic, flexible response capa-
bility. It also complements and supports NATO’s strategy of flexible
response. For these reasons, NSDM 242 and limited nuclear options
should be retained.
b. “A brief statement of the procedures for actually conducting
a nuclear war, limited or total, beyond the initial phase. This should
include an indication of the command procedures for the conduct of
such a war, including such operational aspects as the location and pro-
cedures for effective exercise of control. In addition, please provide
your assessment of the survivability of our command and control sys-
tems. The Blue Ribbon Defense Panel of 1970 reached some disturbing
conclusions regarding this matter.”
The key element in US nuclear war procedures is the direct
involvement of the NCA in not only the initial stages but the execution
of a nuclear war. The effectiveness of this participation is almost totally
dependent on the survivability of command centers and reliable com-
munications. The primary command center for conduct of a limited
nuclear conflict would be the [5 lines not declassified]. In a major nuclear
attack on the United States, the SIOP could be successfully executed. [2
lines not declassified]. Under the conditions of limited nuclear exchange,
the effectiveness of communications with executing forces would be
dependent on the intensity of the nuclear exchange and whether or not
attacks were aimed at command and control components. Continuing
efforts are being made to enhance the survivability and effectiveness of
these systems.
c. “A short statement of the basic objectives to be achieved through
our various LNO options and some indication of the assumptions, both
political and military, regarding the specific LNOs.”
Limited nuclear options have been developed to support general-
ized military campaigns within a theater of operations, complementing
23 See Document 9.
24 Not found attached.

rather than substituting for conventional forces. Real and declared
capability to employ limited nuclear options has enhanced deterrence,
especially in the face of Soviet force improvement. These options sup-
port the principal means to limit damage; i.e., through control of esca-
lation. Their existence provides implicit recognition that the purpose
of military power is not only to deter but also to prosecute military
conflict. Political and military assumptions regarding specific LNOs are
contained in the Annex. A non-SIOP nuclear options briefing, which
you heard on 11 April 1977, is available for presentation to the Assistant
to the President for National Security Affairs.
2. (TS) The current doctrine for the employment of nuclear weap-
ons, as embodied in NSDM 242, should be retained. Actions should
continue to refine its implementation and support its execution, includ-
ing the development of a capability for comparative postwar recovery
analysis; improvement of CINC ad hoc planning capabilities; addi-
tional intelligence support; and an enhancement of command and con-
trol survivability, reliability, and flexibility. To enhance implementation
of nuclear weapons employment doctrine, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have
instituted an annual review process, the initial results of which were
Employment Guidance (U).”25
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
George S. Brown
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff
25 Not found.

37.
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–321
Washington, September 30, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Administrator, General Services Administration
SUBJECT
Civil Defense
The President has directed that the Policy Review Committee
undertake a review of issues related to civil defense in the United States
and the Soviet Union. The purpose of this study is to analyze the strate-
gic implications of civil defense programs in the United States and the
Soviet Union, and to determine what changes, if any, should be made
in current U.S. policies related to civil defense questions. For the pur-
pose of this study, the term “civil defense” will be assumed to include
all activities related to the protection from attack of population, indus-
try, and political leadership below the level of the national command
authority.
The study, to be prepared for the Policy Review Committee,
chaired by DOD, is to be conducted by a working group chaired by the
NSC staff (with Sam Huntington designated as chairman). This study
should be completed for PRC review by February 15, 1978.
This review should include an analysis of the following issues:
—The nature and capabilities of current U.S. and Soviet civil
defense programs.
—Doctrines, policies and objectives of U.S. and Soviet civil defense
programs.
—The strategic usefulness of current and potential U.S. and Soviet
civil defense programs.
—Alternative U.S. policy responses to Soviet civil defense and
alternative policies for U.S. civil defense.
Attached are more detailed Terms of Reference for this study.2
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 Not found attached.
38.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, October 31, 1977
SUBJECT
Speech on Defense Policy
There are many reasons why you may wish to deliver a major
speech on defense policy in December or early January.
1. In such a speech you could make an authoritative statement of
the defense policies and programs which have been developed during
the past year, particularly in PD–182 and in the formulation of the FY
1979 defense budget during the coming weeks. It would thus be the
vehicle for communicating to the public the general framework and
rationale for the specific program decision which will be revealed in
January and would provide guidance and direction for both Congress
and the bureaucracy.
2. Assuming agreement is reached on the key elements of SALT in
the coming months, this speech would explain the relationship between
these agreements and our own new and on-­going defense programs.
3. A defense speech would strengthen the public image of you in
your role as Commander-­in-Chief and would help counter the argu-
ments of those opposed to the Panama Treaty and to SALT that you
have been neglectful of our defense posture.
indicates that Carter saw the memorandum. In the upper right corner of the memoran-
dum, Carter wrote: “OK to do a draft—Time and delivery will be decided later. J.”
2 See Document 31.

4. It would also answer congressional criticisms, such as those con-
cerning the B–1 and MX in the past several weeks, that we do not have
a coherent defense policy and would provide a response to arguments
(such as those advanced in the attached letter from Gene Rostow) that
you should provide more vigorous leadership in this area.
5. It would usefully balance your other major foreign policy
speeches which have emphasized the need to control the arms race
and restrict arms proliferation through United States-Soviet Union and
multilateral negotiations.
6. It could also, particularly if a SALT agreement is reached, pro-
vide reassurance to our allies that we are not relaxing our determina-
tion or our ability to meet our commitments to them.
Given these reasons why such a speech might well be desirable
about the first of the year, I am, unless you object, asking Sam Hunting-
ton to work with other members of the NSC Staff in developing ideas
and themes for it.3

Attachment

Letter From Eugene Rostow of the Committee on the Present
Danger to President Carter4
Washington, September 19, 1977
Dear Mr. President,
The Executive Committee of the Committee on the Present Dan-
ger appreciated our meeting last Friday, September 16, with Samuel
Huntington, of your National Security Council staff. Pursuant to your
request at our meeting on August 4,5 he came to explain the several
steps which led to your assessment of Soviet policy, and your decisions
After a thorough and spirited discussion of the main problems, we
expressed these general preliminary reactions to him:
(1) On the basis of Mr. Huntington’s exposition, the thrust and
tenor of PD–18 appeared promising to us, but we believe its background
3 At the end of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “Naturally, we will coordinate
with Harold.”
5 Carter and Brown met with Rostow and other members of the Committee on the
Present Danger in the Cabinet Room the afternoon of August 4. (Carter Library, Presiden-
tial Materials, President’s Daily Diary)

and content should be explained to the American people, and to world
opinion, in a major speech by you, and not through leaks to the press,
or speeches by the Secretary of Defense, however constructive;
(2) We should be glad to respond to your request on August 4 for
our appraisal of your assessment of Soviet intentions and capabilities,
when we have studied the relevant documents, and discussed them
further with your associates;
(3) We were unable to reconcile the policy of PD–18, as Mr. Hun-
tington explained it, with other aspects of the ongoing foreign and
defense policies of the Administration, including the withdrawal
of conventional forces from Korea; the apparent willingness of the
Administration to consider denouncing the Security Treaty with Tai-
wan; the positions taken in the SALT negotiations; and the contents of
the defense budget, including its provisions for strategic weapons and
naval strength; and
(4) We noted with interest that according to Mr. Huntington, Era II
in Soviet-American relations, starting with the October, 1973, war in the
Middle East, is considered to be more dangerous for us than the period
which preceded it, and that the operating premise of PD–18 is that the
Soviet Union will take advantage of every opportunity for the expan-
sion of its power and influence unless deterred by unacceptable risk.
With great respect, and every good wish,
Yours sincerely,
Eugene V. Rostow
Chairman, Executive Committee
39.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 3, 1977
SUBJECT
PD/NSC–18 Follow-On Studies (U)
In response to your Directive of 24 August 1977: Follow-On Stud-
ies for PD/NSC–18,2 I have initiated five DOD studies:
2 See Document 32.

The first is a Targeting Study which will analyze (1) the relation-
ships between targeting (i.e., employment policy as distinct from per-
ceived force characteristics) and deterrence; (2) plausible alternative
approaches and criteria for targeting; and (3) the effects and limita-
tions imposed by force capabilities and target characteristics. We are
currently drafting a preliminary Concept Paper outlining the scope of
issues to be addressed, and will pass you a copy.
The second is an ICBM Modernization Study which will seek to
answer three critical questions: (1) what is the contribution of the ICBM
to our strategic force posture in terms of deterrence, hedging, and war­
fighting; (2) what are the costs and effectiveness of alternatives for
maintaining an ICBM force that will survive to be used; and (3) what
are the potential uses of hard target damage capability and how does
having this capability affect deterrence, crisis stability, and warfight-
ing? We plan to complete this study by mid-January.
The third is a Secure Reserve Force Target Acquisition Study. With
the Intelligence Community staff, we will begin with a review of the
current capabilities of the SRF for target acquisition under different
employment strategies. Then, once we have concluded the Targeting
Study, we will assess the means to insure that the target acquisition
capability will be available for any potential changes in US nuclear
employment policy for the strategic reserve force.
The fourth is a Sustainability Study. We have completed a TOR3
for the study and are about to begin Phase 1: the accumulation of data
to establish baseline estimates of (1) Soviet and Warsaw Pact, and North
Korea sustaining capability; (2) US sustaining capability worldwide; (3)
Allied sustaining capability; (4) interchangeability and availability of
US/NATO and US/South Korean stocks; and (5) US/NATO/and other
Allies capacity for industrial and manpower mobilization. This will be
a massive task. We will try to complete it by 1 June 1978.
The fifth study is of Naval Strategic Planning. A special task force
under the direction of the Secretary of the Navy has been working for
over two months. They have defined the “Policy Tasks” of the Navy
and will be looking at alternative force postures by region, the Pacific,
Mediterranean, Atlantic, etc. The study should be completed by March
1978.
While the studies are just underway, I think we have spent the past
weeks usefully defining the issues each study will address. The critical
questions which these studies raise will have my highest priority over
the next year.
Harold Brown
3 The Terms of Reference were not found.

40.
Presidential Directive/NSC–241
Washington, November 16, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Attorney General
The Secretary of Commerce
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
The Administrator, General Services Administration
The Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs and Policy
SUBJECT
Telecommunications Protection Policy (S)
1. The President has reviewed the results of the NSC Special Coor-
dination Committee’s consideration of the PRM/NSC–22 study and
has reached the following conclusions.2 It is the President’s intention
that this directive establish a national policy to guide the conduct of
USG activities in and related to security of telecommunications.
2. The National Telecommunications Protection Policy shall consist
of the following major elements:
a. Government classified information relating to national defense
and foreign relations shall be transmitted only by secure means.
b. Unclassified information transmitted by and between Govern-
ment agencies and contractors that would be useful to an adversary
should be protected.
c. Non-­governmental information that would be useful to an
adversary shall be identified and the private sector informed of the
problem and encouraged to take appropriate protective measures.
d. While the private conversations of U.S. citizens do not appear
to be the targets of foreign intercept activity at this time, this judgment
should be kept under close and continuous review and the American
people informed of any change in this conclusion. As a precautionary
measure, the responsible Agencies should work with the FCC and the
common carriers to adopt system capabilities which protect the privacy
of individual communications and to carry out changes in regulatory
policy and draft legislation that may be required.
Further, the NSC Special Coordination Committee shall periodi-
cally review the extent to which the Soviets or others may be collect-
ing and exploiting individual private communications to determine if
additional surveillance or protection activity is warranted. Finally, the
laws which protect against criminal domestic acts such as wiretaps or
intercept shall be strictly enforced.
3. The following activities should be pursued in support of the
above policy:
a. The private sector telecommunications carriers should be briefed
on the nature of the threat and appropriate government R&D informa-
tion shall be made available so as to help and encourage them to devise
adequate protection strategies. A similar program shall be pursued for
government contractors and other most likely affected industries, cor-
porations and private sector entities.
b. The Secretary of Defense shall initiate, through the industrial
security mechanism, new and improved personal and telecommunica-
tions security measures among business organizations holding classi-
fied Defense contracts.
c. All departments and agencies shall revitalize programs of secu-
rity training for U.S. Government personnel who use telephones and
other means of communication for both unclassified and classified
purposes.
d. A permanent interagency group under the chairmanship of the
Department of State shall be established consisting of representatives
of the Executive Office of the President, the Director of Central Intelli-
gence, the Department of Defense, National Security Agency and the
Department of Justice/Federal Bureau of Investigation to review and if
necessary to deny real estate acquisitions through lease or purchase by
the USSR and other Communist countries that present a serious poten-
tial threat to U.S. telecommunications security.
e. All foreign government leased or owned facilities in this country
should be evaluated as to their possible use for intercept operations and
appropriate investigative action undertaken in the most likely cases.
Any identified intercept activities should be monitored to determine
the threat posed to USG and private sector telecommunications.
f. Subject to continuous review of available technology and reas-
sessment of the foreign intercept threat the following immediate tech-
nical actions shall be undertaken:

—The government shall conduct a multi-­faceted R&D program
covering both system and user oriented protection approaches funded
at about $15 million per year.
—Phase I and II of the DUCKPINS cable program shall be com-
pleted as soon as possible and no later than in 1978. This program shall
be funded at a level of about $4 million per year.
—Executive Secure Voice Network (ESVN) systems shall be
installed when appropriate high priority requirements can be validated.
4. Management and policy review responsibilities for telecommu-
nication protection shall be organized as follows:
a. The NSC Special Coordination Committee (SCC) shall be respon-
sible for providing policy guidance and for ensuring full implementa-
tion of this directive, including effective protection techniques for the
government and maximum assistance to the private sector to enhance
its protection from interception. The SCC shall exercise this responsi-
bility through a special Subcommittee on Telecommunications Protec-
tion chaired by the Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy,
with administrative support provided by the Secretary of Commerce.
The Subcommittee shall include but not be limited to representatives of
the following departments and agencies: State, Treasury, Justice, Com-
merce, Defense, Transportation, Energy, Central Intelligence Agency,
General Services Administration, the National Security Agency, and the
National Security Council Staff.
b. The Subcommittee shall submit a report on its activities, rec-
ommendations and findings at least annually to the National Security
Council through the Special Coordination Committee. Additionally,
that report shall specifically address how effectively the policy and
actions specified in this directive are being implemented.
c. The Secretary of Defense shall act as the Executive Agent for
communications security (COMSEC) to protect government-­derived
classified information and government-­derived unclassified informa-
tion which relates to national security. COMSEC is concerned with pro-
tective measures designed for the security of classified information and
other information related to national security.
d. The Secretary of Commerce shall act as the Executive Agent for
communications protection for government-­derived unclassified infor-
mation (excluding that relating to national security) and for dealing
with the commercial and private sector to enhance their communica-
tions protection and privacy.
e. It is recognized that there will be some overlap between the
responsibilities of the Executive Agents in that Defense will continue
to provide some non-­cryptographic protection for government-­derived
unclassified information as it does now, and Commerce will have
responsibilities in commercial application of cryptographic technology.

The Subcommittee will review such areas on a case-­by-­case basis and
attempt to minimize any redundancies.
f. The Subcommittee should choose a future implementation strat-
egy based on cost-­benefit analysis, legal considerations and regulatory
policy. As an initial action, the heads of departments and agencies, as
designated by the Subcommittee, shall assess the need for protection of
unclassified information transmitted under their auspices and report
their conclusions to the Subcommittee within 60 days. The Subcommit-
tee shall then set appropriate standards for protection.
g. The heads of all departments and agencies of the Federal Gov-
ernment shall organize and conduct their communications security and
emanations security activities as they see fit subject to the provisions
of law, the provisions of this and other applicable directives, and deci-
sions of the Subcommittee. Nothing in this directive shall relieve the
heads of the individual departments and agencies of their responsibili-
ties for executing all measures required to assure the security of federal
telecommunications and the control of compromising emanations.
h. The President’s Science Advisor, as Chairman of the Subcommit-
tee, shall promptly prepare and arrange for a comprehensive briefing
for the Senate and House Select Committees on Intelligence concerning
the Administration’s new Telecommunications Protection Policy.
tions Security Directive are hereby rescinded.3
6. The Office of Management and Budget and the Attorney General
are to resolve, as a matter of priority, the necessary arrangements for
funding and legal accommodation, to include appropriate legislation,
if necessary, to enable expeditious implementation of actions directed
above.
Zbigniew Brzezinski

41.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, November 28, 1977
SUBJECT
PD/NSC–18 Follow-­on Studies
In response to your memo of 3 November on the above subject, I
would like to make the following points.2
First, the study on targeting looks like it will address the issues of
concern. I am assuming, however, that you will not limit the study to an
examination of what we can do with the inventory of weapons that we
currently project for ourselves. It is important for us to understand just
how our targeting policies and their effectiveness might change as we
continue with SALT. We should also consider what we could do with
increases in our weapons inventories that might be driven by factors
such as political sufficiency.
The second study appears to address most of my concerns about
hard target kill capability and the future of the TRIAD concept. Your
combining of these issues in a single study focused primarily on the
future of the ICBM force seems like a reasonable approach.
The three questions you have posed for this second study seem
appropriate. I assume that you will delve into the basis of requirements
for the unique capabilities provided by the land based ICBM. I also
assume that you will seriously consider the possibility that non-­time
urgent hard target kill capability in the form of (possibly improved)
ALCM’s can meet substantial portions of our need for hard target kill
capability.
Your intentions for the third study on “secure reserve force target
acquisition” sound reasonable. I agree that much of this study must
await completion of the targeting study.
The substance of the sustainability study also sounds reasonable;
my staff has been in contact with yours and has given them informal
Huntington, Box 45, PD 18: (Follow-On). Secret.
2 Utgoff and Huntington forwarded Brown’s memorandum, printed as Docu-
ment 39, to Brzezinski under a November 16 covering memorandum, which reported:
“Harold’s memo shows that some progress has been made in getting these studies
underway—­though in general not much given the amount of time that has elapsed.”
Utgoff and Huntington also noted: “We have worded the comments on the Navy study
in such a way as to avoid the impression that we accept this study as an appropriate
response to your request. We believe that it would not be prudent to give the NSC impri-
matur to a study of the missions of the Navy—­done by the Navy.” (Ibid.)

comments concerning what you intend to do. Your memo does not,
however, explicitly address the institutional arrangements for this
study. My August 24 memo to you called for the sustainability issues
to be “coordinated by the National Security Council for the President’s
decision.”3 I suggest that we form an interagency steering group to (1)
periodically review and comment on the study’s progress, (2) handle
DOD requests for external tasks (e.g. of the DCI); and (3) review, coor-
dinate and suggest changes in final DOD drafts of your study. I am
also concerned that the time allowed for the study is overly long and,
as a result, the study will not affect the FY 80–84 program. If this work
is to influence that program, a stricter timetable is needed. I suggest
of the study be completed by 1 July 1978, in time for the President to
review the study and make decisions that could be accommodated in
his review of the DOD program Status Report in August.
The fifth study may very well meet our needs, but I can’t tell from
the information we have so far received on it. Perhaps the best course
here would be simply to delay proceeding with an NSC/DOD study of
the Navy’s purposes—­on the possibility that an in-­depth review of the
Navy’s own study shows that our needs have been met.
I look forward to seeing detailed drafts of the terms of reference
for these studies very soon. Overall, your descriptions of them suggest
a good focus on a number of really critical questions. I hope we can see
them properly answered—­my staff and I will support you in this effort
in every way we can.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
3 See Document 32.

42.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, December 1977
[Omitted here are the title page and table of contents.]
Estimated Soviet Defense Spending in Rubles:
Recent Trends and Prospects
Key Judgments
Total Defense Spending
Our estimates of the ruble cost of Soviet defense activities during
the period 1970–76 indicate that:
• Soviet spending for defense, defined to correspond to US bud-
getary accounts and measured in constant 1970 prices, has been grow-
• Defined more broadly, as Soviet practice might require, defense
in 1976.
Composition and Allocation
Ruble estimates provide insight into the resource composition of
the Soviet defense effort and the trends in resource allocations among
the branches of service. Analysis based on the narrower definition
of defense—­for which the estimates are more detailed and precise—­
indicates that:
• The shares allocated to investment, operating, and RDT&E
remained fairly constant during the 1970–76 period. About half of total
spending went for investment, about 30 percent for operating expendi-
tures, and about 20 percent for RDT&E.
• The Soviet Navy and Ground Forces received roughly constant
shares of investment and operating spending during the period. Spend-
ing for the Strategic Rocket Forces and the Air Forces displayed cyclical
behavior, and the Air Defense Forces’ share of investment and operat-
ing expenditures decreased by about one-­fifth.
Economic Impact
The defense effort has had a substantial impact on the Soviet
economy:
Huntington, Box 32, East West Planning Group: (USSR Defense Spending). Secret. Pre-
pared in the National Foreign Assessment Center.

• During the 1970–76 period, defense spending consumed an
cent, depending on how defense spending is defined.
• Defense production consumed about one-­third of the final prod-
uct of machine-­building and metalworking, the branch of industry that
produces investment goods as well as military hardware.
Prospects
The average annual growth rate of 4 to 5 percent implied by these
estimates exceeds the average annual rate at which we expect the Soviet
economy to grow in the years ahead. Econometric projections are that
Soviet GNP will grow at about 4 percent a year through 1980, but that
the projected economic slowdown notwithstanding, Soviet spending
for defense is likely to continue to grow at roughly its current rate into
the 1980s, whether or not a SALT II agreement is concluded.
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
43.
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Science and
Technology Policy (Press) to President Carter1
Washington, December 2, 1977
SUBJECT
M–X Weapons System
As you requested, I have been getting more involved in some of
the military technology issues. I discussed this with Zbig, and he sug-
gested that a vulnerability analysis of the M–X and cruise missile sys-
tems would be useful. Subsequently, I convened a panel of university
and industrial experts for this purpose. I have attached the Executive
Summary of the panel’s report on the M–X and will send you a separate
memorandum concerning our cruise missile analysis next week.
The panel examined the comparative vulnerability of the trench-­
based M–X system to the silo-­based Minuteman and came up with
­several interesting conclusions:
—The threat to Minuteman is not so imminent or certain that com-
mitment to an alternative system must be made in FY 1979.
—Minuteman will remain a significant survivable component of
the US deterrent throughout most of the 1980s until the Soviets succeed
in developing and deploying warheads of greatly improved accuracy.
—Due to its complexity, small area of deployment, and technical
aspects of the trench design, the M–X trench system has potential vul-
nerabilities which require further assessment and considerable uncer-
tainty remains in assessments of its survivability.
—In addition to novel basing systems, other less costly options
for enhancing survivability of Minuteman including relatively simple
defensive measures should be more fully explored.
On the basis of these conclusions, commitment to full-­scale devel-
opment of the M–X trench mobile system as proposed in the FY 1979
defense budget request ($260 M) appears premature. I recognize that
there may be overriding political considerations, such as the impact on
the domestic SALT debate and international perceptions of US resolve,
which in your judgment could necessitate support for the Defense pro-
posal. However, on the technical merits of the issue, I would recom-
mend that you defer full-­scale development and substantially reduce
funding for M–X in the FY 1979 budget, at least down to the level of
effort provided in FY 1978 (about $150 M).
The Panel also noted that a decision to develop a new missile can
and should be made on considerations that are separable from those
of maintaining ICBM survivability. These include the impact on cri-
sis stability, concerns about aging of the Minuteman force, targeting
requirements and political perceptions. The panel confined itself to
vulnerability analysis for its initial effort, but if you think it would be
useful, we will examine this broader issue as well.

Attachment

Executive Summary of a Report Prepared by the Vulnerability
Panel of the Office of Science and Technology Policy2
Washington, undated
I. The proposed M–X weapons system includes a missile which is
larger, more accurate and carries more warheads than Minuteman III,
and a mobile basing system to make the missile more survivable.
The proposed M–X funding plan for FY 79 allocates about $200 M
to missile development. This can be viewed as a commitment to the
2 Secret.

development of a substantially more capable missile. A decision to
develop a new missile can and should be made on considerations that
are for the most part separable from those of providing a new basing
system to maintain ICBM survivability.
II. The vulnerability of Minuteman has properly been a matter
of continuing concern, and it is not too soon to pursue alternatives to
­Minuteman silo-­basing. However, the threat to the Minuteman is not so
imminent or certain that commitment to the development of a specific
alternative system must be made now.
III. Minuteman will remain a significant survivable component of
the US deterrent throughout most of the 1980s, that is, until the Soviets
succeed in developing and deploying an adequate number of warheads
of greatly improved accuracy [less than 1 line not declassified]. Such accu-
racy can be achieved either in a new generation of Soviet missiles, or by
an upgrade in accuracy beyond that now projected in Soviet systems
presently deployed. We are basing this conclusion on evaluation of
the destructive interaction among attacking warheads (i.e., fratricide),
which makes two-­on-­one attacks very difficult for purposes other than
to increase system launch reliability.
IV. Conceptually, the trench-­based M–X system has advantages
in survivability over Minuteman III against attacks of very high accu-
racy. However, an assessment of its survivability can only be demon-
strated through calculation and certain limited tests. Considering the
complexity of the system, considerable uncertainty will remain in such
assessments.
Survivability of the M–X relies on secrecy of location of the missile.
If by technical or intelligence means the attacker can determine, even
approximately, the location of the missile within the trench, the M–X
system survivability would be severely compromised.
Whereas the vulnerability of Minuteman is particularly sensitive
to achievement of high accuracies, as noted above, the M–X is vulnera-
ble to attack by large numbers of less accurate RVs.
M–X is based on a much smaller land area than is Minuteman.
Therefore, the M–X trench-­based system is considerably more sus-
ceptible to “pin-­down” under protracted nuclear missile attack than
is ­Minuteman III. The vulnerability of M–X to pin-­down, in combina-
tion with a possible shoot-­look-­shoot attack on M–X requires further
assessment.
V. In addition to novel basing systems, less costly options, such as
defensive measures, for enhancing survivability of existing Minuteman
silos should be more fully explored, recognizing that the defended area
need be only a few hundred meters across, thereby allowing the use of
relatively simple protection measures.

44.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 4, 1977
SUBJECT
FY 79 DOD Budget Review
As part of our review of the FY 79 DOD Budget, I have had my
staff prepare a set of papers that address the budget issues with the
greatest national security implications. There are two papers on the size
and make-­up of the overall budget, two on strategic forces issues, and
one dealing with some new initiatives that could improve the effective-
ness of our forces.
The first paper (Tab A) examines the question of how big the defense
budget should be. This paper does not deal with the programmatic or
resources allocation aspects, which are the province of DOD and OMB,
but with the broader strategic and political issues which you need to
consider in setting the overall level of defense expenditures. I believe
that a reasonable increase must be made in our defense request if we
are to compensate for the effects of inflation, offset the steady Soviet
buildup, and maintain support for your foreign policy initiatives both
at home and abroad. While Harold’s proposed budget of about $130 B
is certainly too large, OMB’s proposed budget of $123–125 B is probably
too low to meet your overall national security needs.
The second paper (Tab B) compares the budget to the defense priorities
established by the national security policies laid down by your Administration
thus far.2 Generally, Harold has done a good job in responding to the
new policies. However, there is one key anomaly that you may wish to
keep in mind as you review the budget: funding for the sea forces mis-
sion continues to dominate, though the strategic concerns addressed
by our defense policy indicate a need to shift priorities toward other
missions, particularly toward land forces.
The third paper (Tab C) examines the mobile M–X issue—­whether to
keep this system in the advanced development stage ($160 M in FY 79)
or go into full-­scale development ($260 M in FY 79). This issue puts
you in a delicate bind—­there are numerous substantive arguments
suggesting that full-­scale development of this system is premature, yet
notation indicates that Carter saw the memorandum. Carter initialed the upper right
corner of the memorandum.
2 Tabs B–E were not found attached.

proceeding may be necessary in order to gain sufficient support for
ratification of the emerging SALT II agreements. On balance, I believe
that you should hold off full-­scale development for the present, and
reassess your position later if the SALT situation requires it. If we are
going ahead with full-­scale development of the M–X, we should make
the current opponents of SALT earn it.
The fourth paper (Tab D) looks at DOD plans for replacing or com-
plementing the B–52 force with a new strategic bomber. Our impression is
that the B–1 cancellation has created a state of confusion in Air Force
planning that is far from being sorted out. Current planning places too
heavy an emphasis on the possibilities of purchasing the FB–111H or a
wide-­bodied transport as a follow-­on bomber. I believe that the appro-
grams at the minimum level acceptable to Congress; (2) provide just
enough funding for the wide-­bodied transport cruise missile carrier to
aircraft. This new initiative is militarily justifiable, could have very pos-
itive political effects, and would have low near-­term costs ($50–60M or
less) in the first two years.
The final paper (Tab E) suggests some questions you could raise
in the course of the budget review to encourage the Services to work more
effectively together. We believe that the Services’ reluctance to employ
other Services capabilities to satisfy very jealously guarded primary
missions makes them less effective than they should be, particularly in
responding to crisis contingencies. We intend to address this problem
in the DOD reorganization studies, and possibly in further Presidential
reviews.

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council4
Washington, undated
Level of Defense Spending
Issue: What overall level of defense spending should your FY 79
budget call for?
wrote “?” in the margin.
4 Secret.

This is the perennial question, how much is enough? Defense
approaches the problem by aggregation of specific programs, infra-
structure and overhead aimed at fulfilling your strategic guidance, and
the services’ missions. OMB’s fiscal guidance is based on a judgment
of how much we ought to spend in comparison with other federal pro-
grams and where the “fat” lies in the Defense budget. I want to give
you a third perspective: what level of U.S. defense effort is needed to
deal with the strategic, foreign policy, and domestic political effects
of the continuing Soviet buildup—­particularly in light of your deter-
mination to aggressively pursue improved relations and arms control
arrangements with the Soviet Union.
I am assuming that the seven alternative levels proposed by OMB,
ranging from $114 B TOA to $136 B all encompass worthwhile pro-
grams and that the question is not waste but how large an effort we
want to make. I also understand that the real range of choice involves
cent of the budget.
The Soviet Buildup
The CIA estimate of Soviet defense spending which is commonly
accepted as a comparable index of Soviet capability does not show a
crash Soviet program. Rather it shows a steady average annual increase
of 3–4% in real terms over the last decade and more. This growth is evi-
dent in nearly all parts of the Soviet military establishment, including
investment.
The compound effect of this level of effort has been impressive:
—[4 lines not declassified] They have erased their strategic inferior-
ity of a decade ago but show no sign of slackening efforts.
—They have reequipped their ground forces facing NATO, includ-
ing a new armored personnel carrier, new self-­propelled artillery, and
now a new tank.
—They have modernized their tactical air forces in Europe, sig-
nificantly narrowing the disparity against them in qualitative factors
(range and payload) while retaining a substantial advantage in num-
bers of aircraft.
—They have moved their navy to sea, challenging us for control
of the Mediterranean, conducting intense surveillance and operations
throughout the Atlantic and in the Far East.
During the same period, US defense spending declined in real
terms at a steady 4% rate from the wartime peak as the US disengaged
from Vietnam. Moreover, the high rate of expenditure during the Viet-
nam war did not find its way into investment but was eaten up by
combat operations. The result at the end of the war was low readiness, a
backlog of major maintenance and obsolete equipment. Finally, in FY 76

the Defense budget was increased by 4%, followed by 5% real growth
in FY 77. The FY 78 budget, recently approved by Congress, contains
only 1% real growth, reflecting, in part, the cancellation of the B–1.
The broad strategic and political consequences of these unfavorable
trends are increasingly obvious. In Europe open concern about Soviet
military superiority has led to policies and actions to accommodate the
Soviet Union that are evidence that the process of Finlandization may
already be underway. In Asia the shock of Vietnam and the US deci-
sions on Korea have led the Chinese as well as the Japanese to believe
that we are moving toward a gradual pullback. At home, moderate and
conservative opinion is increasingly concerned at the adequacy of our
defense efforts and suspicions of the effects of arms control agreements
with the Soviet Union.
The last point deserves some elaboration. American opinion has
always swung back and forth on the issue of dealing with the Soviet
Union. We are clearly in a more conservative period despite the pub-
lic’s underlying support for better relations and nuclear arms control.
At the same time, as I have suggested, many of your initiatives are
seen as “soft”—­which even most of those supporting detente do not
want us to be. In this context your Defense budget level takes on added
significance. It could either enhance confidence that our arms control
agreements are consistent with our security or further polarize Con-
gressional and public opinion.
The NATO 3% Real Growth “Commitment”
Our PRM–10 review led to a fundamental judgment: that the
trends in the East-West military balance in the last decade have been
unfavorable; but that public opinion could support budget levels that
would permit us to offset Soviet modernization by the mid-’80s. PD–18
emphasized the need of offset future Soviet modernization by equiva-
lent increases in US and Allied defense spending, and called for 3% real
growth.5
At the NATO Summit, you told the Allies that the US would make
a major effort to increase the collective strength of the Alliance if the
Allies would do the same.6 Since about 1970, Allied defense spending
has increased by about 2%–3% per year in real terms, but many Euro-
pean countries are capable of doing more. At the Summit follow-­up
meeting, the NATO Defense Ministers agreed to a Ministerial Guidance
(a NATO planning document that is renegotiated every two years) that
included an aim of an annual increase in real terms “in the region of
5 See Document 31.

Though it is too early to say with certainty, it appears that most
Allies will respond favorably to this aim.
—The FRG plans a 3% real increase in defense spending in 1979.
—France, which does not adhere to Ministerial Guidance, intends
7% real growth.
—However, the British, who carry one of the heaviest defense bur-
lion from their planned level, resulting in a ½% real decline.
The whole issue of how much is enough and whether we are going
to respond to the long term Soviet buildup will in practical and polit-
ical terms revolve around the 3% growth issue—­whether we will fol-
low that goal, how to define it and what the baseline should be. All
informed opinion is aware that the Government has made such a com-
mitment and this will be taken as a barometer of your overall attitude
on security issues.
There are two issues regarding the definition of the 3% aim:
—Should the FY 79 budget request be compared to the Administra-
by Congress ($116.5 B)?
—Should the 3% factor apply to the entire budget or to some
“NATO-­related portion” (OMB uses 40% of the budget)?
Different answers to these two questions result in four alternative
levels (TOA $ B):
Base
Inflation7
Growth
Total
(40% budget grows)
(entire budget grows)
(40% budget grows)
(entire budget grows)
The higher baseline would result in a request for real growth of
on the average of the two years, since the FY 78 budget ended up provid-
ing for only 1% real growth. It also “protects” the NATO commitment
from the inevitable Congressional cuts. In short, we would ask again
for the money we thought we needed but that Congress cut.
On the other hand, since the NATO commitment does not apply to
the FY 78 budget, there is no political need to make up for last year’s
cuts in this year’s budget. Moreover, about $1 B was cut at the Admin-
istration’s request due to your B–1 decision.
the original.]

The “NATO-­related portion” definition has some serious drawbacks:
—The NATO Ministerial Guidance has historically been inter-
preted in terms of a longstanding NATO definition of defense spend-
ing, which includes all defense spending. Further, Secretary Brown has
publicly implied that the commitment applies to the entire budget, not
a portion of it.
—There is no clearly defined “NATO-­related portion” of the DOD
budget. OMB’s 40% figure is taken from an analysis that OSD has
provided annually to Congress since the early ’70s.8 It includes those
general purpose forces that we would anticipate employing in Europe
in a worldwide war. It does not include strategic nuclear forces, con-
ventional strategic reserve forces, forces for Asia, all R&D and fixed
installation costs, certain central support costs such as headquarters
and personnel support. Many of these items or some fraction of them
should be considered as NATO-­related, especially strategic nuclear
forces, given their role in the NATO Triad and the defense of Europe.
In fact, we would encounter political difficulties were we to argue that
strategic forces are not part of our NATO contribution.
—Attempting the 40% argument could hurt our credibility with
the Allies and invite them to take the same approach, which would
undermine the intent of the 3% goal.
—A growth definition that explicitly excluded forces for Asia
would increase Asian concerns about the US willingness to defend our
allies in that area.
Other Considerations
NATO considerations aside, and as I have indicated, there are
important reasons for pursuing 3% real growth for the entire budget in
the next fiscal year:
—Continued robust modernization of our forces is needed, as
stated by PD–18, “to maintain an overall balance of military power
at least as favorable as now exists” because Soviet military strength
continues its steady growth of 3–4% per year in all aspects of defense
spending. If we do not, we may have to cut back our new initiatives on
broad programs (e.g., 0+M, procurement, R&D) that would adversely
affect readiness and/or our future capabilities.
—It answers any domestic and international political need to
demonstrate that this Administration is taking steps to meet the Soviet
“buildup.” SALT, CTB, and budget issues such as the M–X, AWACS,
Navy shipbuilding, and the like, may require serious expenditure of
political capital. An improved perception that you are in favor of a
strong defense will strengthen your hand with Congress on these issues.
—We are not wedded to 3% real growth forever: success of your
arms control initiatives or other positive changes in the international
8 The OSD analysis provides a range of costs, in part to illustrate the difficulty of
identifying NATO-­related expenditures. [Footnote is in the original.]

political climate may justify reductions in at least some parts of the
defense effort.
NSC Recommendation: A Level of $127–129 B
This level of funds can be spent effectively. It provides for a request
to Congress about $12 B above last year’s appropriations, of which
about $5 B would be real growth. This 4% real increase in the total bud-
get request will protect the 3% real increase that we need from the inev-
itable Congressional cuts.
In terms of the size of the DOD budget, the $2 B difference between
applying the 3% real growth factor to the entire budget or to the OMB-­
recommended 40% NATO portion does not appear worth the domestic
and international political repercussions associated with attempting to
split the budget. We would appear to be fiddling around the edges of
the commitment simply to rationalize spending less. Using the entire
budget as a base does not preclude the bulk of the growth in those areas
most directly related to NATO.
B with an additional $1 B will bring on charges of “cut insurance,” but
the fact is that Congress always cuts the budget because it has a job to
do, whether cut insurance is there or not. It would be unwise to assume
that we could preempt Congressional cutbacks.

45.
Minutes of a Special Coordination Committee Subcommittee
Meeting1
SUBJECT
PD/NSC–24: Telecommunications Protection Policy2
PARTICIPANTS
White House
Frank Press (Chairman)
Wayne Kay
Ben Huberman
John Marcum
Rick Neustadt
State
Harold Saunders
Alfred Giovetti
Treasury
Richard Davis
Harold Paterson
Defense/NCS
Lt. Gen. Lee Paschall
Col. Preston Hix
Don Lacer
FCC
Walter Hinchman
GSA
Frank Carr
Warren Burton
OMB
James Oliver
Justice
John Harmon
Newall Squyers
Commerce
Jordan Baruch
Henry Geller
John Richardson
Transportation
Richard Alfultis
James Williams
Energy
John LaBarre
Charles Brashears
NSC
Sam Hoskinson
CIA
[2 names not declassified]
NSA
Adm. Bobby Inman
Howard Rosenbloom
Dr. Frank Press, The President’s Science Advisor and Chairman of
the Special Subcommittee on Telecommunications Protection convened
the initial subcommittee meeting on this date. The purpose of the meet-
ing was to discuss implementation of Presidential Directive, PD–24.
The Chairman summarized the Soviet activities and the sequence
of events leading to PRM–223 and PD–24. The essential elements
of PD–24 were outlined and he reported that the Senate and House
Welch, Box 210, Command, Control, Communications. Top Secret. The meeting took
place in the White House Situation Room.
2 See Document 40.
3 See Document 8.

Intelligence Committees had been briefed on the President’s initiatives
contained in PD–24.
The Chairman noted the following:
—An annual report is to be submitted by the subcommittee to the
National Security Council through the SCC. The due date for this initial
report to the SCC is December 14, 1978. Subcommittee members, and
the Executive Agents in particular, shall be called upon to assist in the
reports preparation.
—That two Executive Agents have been designated: the Secre-
tary of Defense for COMSEC to protect government-­derived classified
information and government-­derived unclassified information which
relates to national security. The Secretary of Commerce for communi-
cations protection for government-­derived unclassified information
(excluding that relating to national security) and for dealing with the
commercial and private sector to enhance their communications pro-
tection and privacy. The subcommittee shall resolve areas of depart-
mental overlap, should they occur, on a case-­by-­case basis.
—That Colonel Wayne Kay is the Subcommittee Executive Secre-
tary and White House staff coordinator for PD–24.
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
Numbering herein refers to applicable paragraphs in the PD.
—2.b. Unclassified information transmitted by and between gov-
ernment agencies and contractors that would be useful to an adversary
should be protected.
Tasking: The nature and extent of this type information needs to
be defined. The Executive Agents will investigate this area jointly, dis-
tinguish between that related to national security and that which is not
and advise the subcommittee of their findings.
—2.c. Non-­governmental information that would be useful to an
adversary shall be identified and the private sector informed of the
problem and encouraged to take appropriate protective measures.
Tasking: The Department of Commerce shall take steps to identify
this type information, prepare a briefing for the private sector, review
the briefing with the subcommittee prior to presentation to the private
sector and review with the subcommittee their program to satisfy this
requirement. The DOD shall assist as requested.
—2.d. While the private conversations of U.S. citizens do not appear
to be the targets for foreign intercept activity at this time, this judgment
should be kept under close and continuous review and the American
people informed of any change in this conclusion. As a precautionary
measure; the responsible Agencies should work with the FCC and the
common carriers to adopt system capabilities which protect the privacy
of individual communications and to carry out changes in regulatory
policy and draft legislation that may be required.

Tasking: The Departments of Justice, Commerce and Defense shall
work with the FCC in carrying out this function. The NSA is to provide
technical assistance as necessary.
—2.d. [6 lines not declassified]
Tasking: [3 lines not declassified]
—3.a. The private sector telecommunications carriers should be
briefed on the nature of the threat and appropriate government R&D
information shall be made available so as to help and encourage them
to devise adequate protection strategies. A similar program shall be
pursued for government contractors and other most likely affected
industries, corporations and private sector entities.
Tasking: The Executive Agents shall, as in 2.c. above, prepare a
program for briefing the private sector and appropriate government
contractors. They are further enjoined to work with the DOJ and FCC
as necessary. The briefings are to be reviewed and cleared by the
subcommittee.
REMARKS:
It was noted by the Director, NSA that thus far, 11 carriers and
17 defense contractors had been given a classified briefing. He also
pointed out that the DOD Joint Logistics Commanders were presently
working on proposals to be submitted to the Joint Chiefs concerning the
threat and providing options to be used by Defense contractors to pro-
tect information, both classified and unclassified relating to National
Security. It was not determined who would pay for implementing pro-
tection measures—­an open issue which may require a policy decision.
It was also noted that while high level executives within the tele-
communications companies had been briefed, it was obvious the work-
ing levels therein had not been, as evidenced by the number of requests
being submitted to GSA for specialized carrier contracts for services.
Further, it was the consensus of the subcommittee that classification, in
large part, stifled open and honest dialogue with the commercial sector.
Did knowledge of the threat cause the commercial sector to suffer
by reduced use of the phone or by modifying their information han-
dling techniques?
Are the companies therefore put at a disadvantage in economic
competition? Similarly, what will the impact be on a government agency
if significantly altered information handling techniques were imposed.
Tasking: The OSTP/NSC will assess downgrade and/or declassi-
fication aspects.
Department of Commerce (covered in part under 2.c.) in conjunc-
tion with Defense prepare and submit to the subcommittee a position
paper and strategy for transfer of R&D information to telecommunica-
tions carriers. Department of Defense shall also present their prepared

briefing (for carriers and defense contractors) for review and submit
their program of on-­going activities.
—3.d. A permanent interagency group under the chairmanship of
the Department of State shall be established consisting of representa-
tives of the Executive Office of the President, the Director of Central
Intelligence, the Department of Defense, National Security Agency and
the Department of Justice/Federal Bureau of Investigation to review
and if necessary to deny real estate acquisition through lease or pur-
chase by the USSR and other Communist countries that present a seri-
ous potential threat to U.S. telecommunications security.
Tasking: The Department of State representative was requested to
insure that relevant actions of this group were made known to the sub-
committee as necessary.
—3.e. [6 lines not declassified]
Tasking: [2 lines not declassified]
—3.f. Subject to continuous review of available technology and
reassessment of the foreign intercept threat the following immediate
technical actions shall be undertaken:
—The government shall conduct a multi-­faceted R&D program
covering both system and user oriented protection approaches funded
at about $15 million per year.
Tasking: Of utmost concern is to avoid Executive Agent R&D
duplication. It was acknowledged that R&D would be pursued within
each agents sphere of responsibility. The Chairman stressed that the
government R&D programs pull together, therefore, the DOD (NSA) as
lead agent with full Commerce support, shall submit an R&D program
package to the subcommittee for review. Furthermore, R&D dollars are
to be highlighted for the President in future budgetary requests.
—Phase I and II of the DUCKPINS cable program shall be com-
pleted as soon as possible and no later than in 1978. This program shall
be funded at a level of about $4 million per year.
Tasking: It is recognized that the DUCKPINS cable program is a
continuing program without a cut-­off date even after full implementa-
tion. The Manager, NCS shall be prepared to provide program status at
least quarterly.
—Executive Secure Voice Network (ESVN) systems shall be
installed when appropriate high priority requirements can be validated.
Tasking: The Manager, NCS shall continue collection and anal-
ysis of government-­wide requirements for ESVN. NSA shall con-
tinue to assist. The Committee will review and validate fully justified
requirements.
—4.f. The Subcommittee should choose a future implementa-
tion strategy based on cost-­benefit analysis, legal considerations and

regulatory policy. As an initial action, the head of departments and
agencies, as designated by the Subcommittee, shall assess the need for
protection of unclassified information transmitted under their suspices
and report their conclusions to the Subcommittee within 60 days. The
Subcommittee shall then set appropriate standards for protection.
Tasking: The Department of Commerce will develop and submit
for subcommittee review a technique to assess department/agency
information. It will include but not be limited to:
—Kinds of information which may need protection.
—How the data is transmitted.
—Origination and distribution points.
—System nodes.
—If protection is necessary, what kind of protection and estimated
cost.
—Is the cost of protection higher than the loss of data if it were
compromised.
The GSA will keep the subcommittee informed on its on-­going
bulk encryption study for satellites.
The CIA should be prepared, if called upon, to provide a reassess-
ment of known Soviet intentions.
The NSA shall review its past activities in these areas and provide
the subcommittee a summary thereof.
Concerning the magnitude of the threat, or changes thereto, the
Department of Justice (FBI) shall be the lead agent in keeping the sub-
committee informed.
tions Security Directive are hereby rescinded.4
REMARKS:
By rescinding the 1968 NSC Communications Security Directive,
the United States Communications Security Board or USCSB is abol-
ished. The policies promulgated by that board shall remain in effect
until such time as the subcommittee Executive Secretary, in consulta-
tion with Defense, reviews that policy and makes recommendations
concerning their disposition.
The Chairman tabled a final issue; not one contained in PD–24 but
directly related to the overall subject of telecommunications protection
policy and is therefore an area that may well need policy attention. The
following is a summary of the presentation given by Howard Rosen-
bloom and deals with “public cryptography, signals intelligence and
academic freedom.”

The needs of the public for privacy and protection have been rec-
ognized and publicized. This has created a market for security devices
to protect:
—Banking (Electronic Fund Transfer)
—Personnel Data
—Medical History
—Data Communications
—Voice Communications
This field is called public cryptography.
The Government, to protect National Security matters, has devel-
oped and employed devices that protect a similar range of information.
The methods employed for protection are highly classified because
they reveal our capability to retrieve intelligence from foreign commu-
nications. Once the methods are revealed, the foreign target can thwart
our intelligence gathering.
Recent academic/industrial work, stimulated by the public mar-
ket, has produced a well-­publicized concept for an “unbreakable”
cipher system which could economically cater for the public need. The
National Bureau of Standards, with classified help from the National
Security Agency, has produced an “encryption” standard which is pro-
posed for public use.
The NBS system, because of classified input, is invulnerable to
mathematical attack. The public work, however, is vulnerable to attack
using classified methods. The academic/industrial community is
unaware of this because of classification and is unwilling to accept the
restriction on academic freedom that dealing with classified informa-
tion represents. The public has been suspicious of the NBS standard
because the classified methods employed to test and strengthen it
have not been revealed because of impact on signals intelligence and
National Security.
Further, the academic community is concerned that the Govern-
ment plans to inhibit their cryptologic research. They have become
aware of ITAR (International Traffic in Arms Regulation), a regulation
that inhibits export of munitions and cryptography. The U.S. controls
export of cryptography to prevent the spread of good protection to
those foreign targets that now yield valuable signals intelligence. The
academic community wants clarification of the portions of ITAR which
seem to inhibit international publication of cryptographic research and
appears to infringe their academic freedom.
The following issues may need policy determination:
—Academic world needs immediate clarification of ITAR and how
it affects their academic freedom.

—Government needs to clarify the relation of public cryptography
to classified cryptography.
—Government needs to balance the impact on National Security of
the needs for public cryptography and academic freedom.
RELATED QUESTIONS:
—How “good” should public cryptography be?
—In view of export problem
—In view of domestic surveillance needs
—How can academic freedom be provided and minimize damage
to National Security?
—How will ITAR interpretation apply?
—Is new legislation needed?
—How should the Government interface with Academe/Industry
in public cryptography? Should the Government support unclassified
research? How can the classified work interface with the unclassified
work?
—How should DOD and DOC employ classified tools for public
cryptography? Should DOD “go it alone”?
—How does the U.S. Government deal with the U.K. for public
cryptography? Should there be separate contact from both DOD and
DOC?
—What public statements should be made? By whom? When?
The Chairman stressed the need for a mechanism to respond to
academia.
Tasking: The Department of Justice is to evaluate the applicability
of ITAR and its relationship to research, publications or presentations
about public cryptography by the academic community; regardless of
whether the foregoing be verbal or in the form of papers and whether
the research is supported by private or government funds.
The Department of Commerce as lead agent, working with the
NSA shall propose a position paper outlining a national policy for gov-
ernment use. This position paper is due to the working group com-
prised of OSTP, Commerce, NSA and Justice by January 20, 1978. The
lead agent is enjoined to contact the National Science Foundation and
Department of State who may be asked to contribute in their respective
areas (State for the U.K. coordination effort). The President’s Science
Advisor shall be responsible for all public coordination.
The Director, OMB and Manager, NCS shall attend all future
meetings.
The next subcommittee meeting is tentatively scheduled for the

46.
Memorandum From Crisis Management Staff to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 10, 1977
SUBJECT
NSC Annual Report
This memorandum responds to your request, November 23,2 for
material which you may use in the NSC Annual Report.
Crisis Management at the nuclear level.
1. The situation as we inherited it.
Procedures. We found the White House Emergency Procedures
neglected, rusty, and out of date. There was concern in the JCS that the
NCA might not be able to respond effectively in the event of a surprise
attack. The unsatisfactory OPAL III drill in March was symptomatic of
the overall situation.
Doctrine. U.S. “crisis management” doctrine at the nuclear level
had been evolving, particularly as a result of NSSM 169 and the ensu-
ing NSDM 242 (promulgated in 1974) which provides for the first time a
single statement of national strategic employment policy.3 The new pol-
icy was based on the judgment that (1) a massive retaliatory response
is credible only at the upper levels of conflict and that (2) counterforce
strikes will not reduce damage to the U.S. to low levels. A broader range
of lesser responses was deemed necessary if a nuclear crisis was to be
managed. Accordingly, the concept of “escalation control” at lower lev-
els of conflict was introduced. To support it, “limited nuclear options”
were required, and since 1974, a number of limited strikes have been
planned and programmed. At the same time, the SIOP itself was being
revised to include more than one option in line with the NSDM 242
guidance. In January the President was briefed on its “fifth” revision,
SIOP–5.
2. Goals for this Administration.
The first goal was to put the WHEP in good order. The second goal
was to help the President become familiar with the U.S. doctrine for
2 Not found.

nuclear “crisis management” as it relates to the WHEP and the National
Command Authority.
3. The steps taken to implement these goals.
The WHEP. An extensive review memorandum for the WHEP was
developed in February, and after some fumbling between the NSC and
the Military Office, an ad hoc group, including representatives from the
NSC staff, the Military Office, WHCA, the FPA, and the NMCC, was
formed. It met about once a month through mid-­summer to review the
remedial steps taken by its members. This phase ended when Hugh
Carter held a meeting with the President to brief him on the progress
and to ask his guidance on unresolved issues such as the location of
NEACP and the arrangement between him and the Vice President
for emergency evacuation. On July 9, an “OPAL III with destination
NEACP” was executed in 19 minutes, evidence that the system had
indeed been put in reasonably good order.
Procedures and Doctrine. On March 31, you sent a memorandum to
the Secretary of Defense asking him and the JCS4 to explain our nuclear
war procedures and doctrine, including LNOs. The response on June
3, was set aside pending the outcome of PRM 10, and the follow-­on
response by Harold Brown arrived on August 19,5 after it was clear that
PRM 10 produced no definitive basis for a change.
The Defense memorandum of August 19 spelled out the recent his-
tory of our doctrinal development and procedures. It elaborated the
concept of “escalation control”—­in the event of the failure of “deter-
rence,” and stated the rationale for “Limited Nuclear Options.” Your
covering memorandum to the President6 pointed out some doubts
about the feasibility of “escalation control,” especially in view of our
command, control, and communications vulnerabilities. Nonetheless,
the Defense memorandum provided a concise history of our efforts 1)
to define “deterrence” in operational terms for targeting guidance, and
2) our concept of how we might respond if deterrence were to fail. If the
President absorbed Harold Brown’s essay, he has a fairly clear idea of
where we are in our doctrine, its ambiguities and its adequacies.
The impact of your memorandum of March 31 did not end with
the August 19 response. Several other things also occurred:
—The JCS began a thorough review of LNOs/RNOs to prepare a
Presidential briefing and to determine where they were going with the
LNO concept in general. Although Harold Brown offered this briefing
4 See Document 10.
5 See Tab A, Document 36.
6 See Document 36.

to the President, it never took place. A script of the briefing was submit-
ted to the President in mid-November.
—The President accepted Harold Brown’s invitation to visit SAC
Headquarters. His trip there on November 19,7 is the first such Presi-
dential attention to the command and control of our strategic forces on
recent record.
—Most important, IVORY ITEM drills were initiated.
Although the initiative came from Defense, it seems that our
activity with the WHEP, our interest in LNOs, and the doctrinal ques-
tions raised by the memorandum of March 31 gave Defense a sense
of urgency about both WHEP and doctrine. In fact, several people in
Defense were surprised to discover that NSDM 242 calls for frequent
and repeated interaction between the military planners and the NCA
to ensure that military planning does indeed support the preferences of
the NCA. Apparently, such interaction never occurred under the previ-
ous Administrations although they authored and endorsed the NSDM.
4. Difficulties encountered.
The WHEP. The organization of the White House makes it very
difficult for the NSC staff to control or check the WHEP. All the oper-
ational control of the assets, which are key to the WHEP, belong to the
Military Office: helicopters, communications, cars, etc. The administra-
tive demands on these assets have, at times, caused serious neglect of
WHEP criteria, especially in Presidential travel. The President’s empha-
sis on emergency procedures, however, allowed us to work rather effec-
tively in a “staff supervisory” role with Hugh Carter whose Military
Office has “operational control.” Hugh and I developed a “job descrip-
tion” for an “emergency procedures officer” last spring in an effort to
clarify who has what responsibilities. It granted the NSC only a peri-
odic “staff review” of the WHEP. The major part of the job is reserved
for the Director of the Military Office. Marty Beaman, a lawyer from
Florida, now occupies that post as Bill Gulley’s successor. The JCS, you
recall, was extremely nervous about having no one with military and
command experience in that job. Their fears are not without justifica-
tion, but I have moderated them by acting as an informal go-­between
and by getting Hugh Carter involved and concerned with the WHEP.
In other words, we have a make-­shift arrangement that operates on
good will between the NSC and the Military Office. Speaking candidly,
there is a residue of ill-­feeling over there as a result of our pushing and
shoving on WHEP reform.
7 Carter visited Strategic Air Command Headquarters in Omaha on October 22.
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)

Doctrine. I use this word in the straightforward sense of general-
ized and specific guidance which relates strategic concepts to opera-
tions, to the world of realities and of one’s capabilities.
The initial Defense response to the March 31 memorandum prom-
ised doctrinal change and improvements as a result of PRM 10 (the Force
Posture Review), but it was a false promise. The PD–18 follow-­on stud-
ies reassert the promise. In truth, it seems that nobody wants to address
the “escalation control” concept critically. The same is true for LNOs/
RNOs. There is a reluctance to think hard about “deterrence” failing,
and there is a lot of foggy thinking about how to keep it from failing.
In a sense, NSDM 242 was a declaratory measure (bluff?) to make the
Soviets believe we might use “limited” nuclear strikes at lower levels of
crisis of confrontation. Although we have made progress in developing
the operational and staffing capability to deliver limited strikes tailored
to a given situation, we have done nothing to prepare our homeland
for counter-LNOs. Some who realize this want to return to “minimum
deterrence,” or “assured destruction.” Others want to build toward
something like a psychologically meaningful nuclear “superiority.”
Still others seem to believe that arms control measures will dissolve the
central dilemmas of our nuclear doctrine.
In this milieu of doctrinal confusion, it has not been easy to clarify
for the President “where we are and whither we are tending” with our
strategic capabilities.
5. Accomplishments attained.
The WHEP. It is in better shape than at any time in several years,
perhaps decades. Particularly WHCA has tightened up its procedures.
The interface with the NMCC is greatly improved, and it should remain
so in view of the continual interaction we now have on that front. The
best indication of the overall WHEP condition came with the IVORY
ITEM drill in which the President participated. The OPAL III went off
with precision and speed.
The real capstone in accomplishments has been the President’s
participation in IVORY ITEM. It has never been done before, and the
event triggered revisions and changes in the SIOP based on Presidential guid-
ance for the first time in history. Heretofore, the SIOP designers have had to
imagine what the President would want to see and know in an emergency. The
thick “Decision Handbook” is the product of years of speculating in J–3
about the President’s needs without a single clue from a President!
NEACP, OPAL drills, and the Vice President’s role have been clar-
ified (although clarity has exposed yet new things to be done in some
instances.)

Doctrine. The implications from the IVORY ITEM discussions for
doctrine are monumental.
—[3 lines not declassified]
—Refinement of SIOP options continues. Although no specific
changes have yet been directed, the last IVORY ITEM meeting seems
likely to bring about one or two more “alternatives.”
—The President is increasingly aware of the “escalation control”
concept with its inherent weaknesses, as well as those of our commu-
nications and control posture. This was clear in the last IVORY ITEM
scenario discussion he held with you, Secretary Brown, et alia.
6. Follow-­on goals.
The major follow-­on concern is keeping the IVORY ITEM subject
on the agenda. As the President reacts, it is clear what steps to take. If he
never addresses the IVORY ITEM and WHEP contingencies, we simply
cannot know where he wants to go in future developments.
7. The next stage.
The concept of NCA interaction with the military planners for
nuclear “crisis management,” as set down in NSDM 242, is sound.
Any new PD emerging from the PD–18 follow-­on studies should
retain it. I am preparing a separate memorandum on this point, one
based on the President’s guidance on the Defense memorandum of
August 19. I do not believe we should rush ahead with it now but rather
let the IVORY ITEM discussions take their course. They are providing
the interaction which eventually we might want to routinize in a more
formal sense.
[Omitted here is material unrelated to national security policy.]

47.
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre) to President Carter1
Washington, January 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Navy Shipbuilding Plans
In the 1979 Defense budget, you deleted advance funding for a
medium-­sized aircraft carrier (CVV). Further, you deferred a decision
on whether any carrier should be built in the next five years, pending
the completion of a Defense study of the issue. That study is to be com-
pleted by the Navy in February or March, 1978.
We recommend that you call Senator Stennis and Representative
Price this week to obtain their support for your 1979 shipbuilding pro-
gram and their advice on longer-­range shipbuilding plans. Word of
your decisions is leaking out, and some people may try an end run
to the Committees to get a larger shipbuilding program. The House
Armed Services Committee is especially likely to add a nuclear carrier
(CVN), costing $2 billion and maybe the nuclear AEGIS ship (CGN)
costing $1.1 billion. The Senate Committee may also be leaning toward
adding a carrier.
To head off this potential budget threat, a commitment from Sten-
nis and Price to await the results of the study would be useful. They
should be made aware that final decisions for aircraft carriers have not
been made. Further, they could be informed that after you review the
Defense study with Secretary Brown, you will inform them of your
decision. Without your personal commitment to these two gentlemen,
the Congress is likely to develop its own five-­year shipbuilding plan
which will include one or more new nuclear carriers. If they believe the
program is unacceptably low, you might want to consider adding $700
would be useful anti-­submarine warfare assets. In addition, the Ingalls
Shipyard in Mississippi, where they are built, is running out of work.
Because a carrier decision will not be made prior to completion of
the Defense study, specific outyear shipbuilding plans should not be
provided to the Congress with the 1979 budget. Current law, however,
requires submission to Congress of:
of the memorandum: “Jim—Price: ‘ok’ Stennis ‘ok’ J.” A stamped notation at the top of
the memorandum reads: “The President Has Seen.”

—The Five-Year Defense Program for construction of nuclear-­
powered major combatant vessels and an update of the previous five-­
year shipbuilding plan concurrent with the budget submission.
We see two ways to proceed:
Option A: Submit a 1980 Authorization and a five-­year plan with
no new carriers. Submit an amended budget and five-­year plan, in the
spring, if you decide to proceed with a new carrier.
Option B: Submit a 1980 Authorization and a five-­year shipbuilding
plan that specifies total dollars but not specific ships. Provide a specific
list of ships for 1980–1983 when a carrier decision is made this spring.
Option A has the advantage of providing Congress with a specific
shipbuilding program while reserving the option of adding a carrier
later if they desired. Its disadvantage is that it implies that you have
already decided against building any new carriers.
Option B leaves the decision completely open and is consistent
with the way military construction authorizations are handled. Its dis-
advantage is that some members of Congress might consider it contrary
to the intent of the laws requiring submission of future-­year shipbuild-
ing information.
Recommendation: Option B, and that you call Senator Stennis and
Congressman Price this week.
Decision: Option A _______
2 Carter indicated his approval of the recommendation by writing a checkmark and
initialing next to “Option B.”

48.
Report by Secretary of Defense Brown to the Congress1
Washington, January 23, 1978
[Omitted here are the cover page and table of contents.]
SECTION I
SUMMARY
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:
The President requests a defense budget for FY 1979 which entails
outlays. The planned outlays will constitute a 3.5 percent real increase
over the spending programmed for FY 1978.
The Long-Range Projections for defense contain a real increase in
measured in FY 1979 prices. Assuming normal patterns of economic
growth over the five-­year period, we estimate that defense outlays, as
a percent of Gross National Product (GNP), will actually decline from
The body of my annual report explains in detail the defense poli-
cies and programs adopted by the Carter administration. In this sum-
mary and opening statement, I will focus on the main reasons for the
proposed modest increases in real terms in the FY 1979 defense budget
and long-­range projections.
I. INTERNATIONAL TRENDS AND DEFENSE
The defense budget, as you know, is shaped by a number of fac-
tors. Not the least of these is the international environment. Certain
features of that environment and our relationship with it are especially
worth noting.
—First, even though nearly 33 years have passed since the end
of World War II, a number of territorial and other issues remain
unresolved—­particularly in Africa and the Middle East. There is no
recognized and stable status quo to which all nations—­or all the major
nations, or most nations—­adhere.
—Second, the United States is becoming increasingly dependent
on this environment—­in trade, in raw materials, in energy, and in a
broad range of political relationships.
[2]. Secret; Formerly Restricted Data. Brown sent the report to Carter under a January 20
covering memorandum prior to submitting it to the Congress. (Ibid.)

—Third, most of the international competition for power is con-
ducted with peaceful instruments, and most international issues are
resolved by peaceful means. But force, whether in the form of orga-
nized military power or of terrorism, continues to be a major factor in
the resolution of international disputes. Military power has a substan-
tial influence on the international attitudes of friends and adversaries
during peace as well as in war.
—Fourth, the relations between the United States and the Soviet
Union continue to be marked by both competition and cooperation,
with the attendant risk of conflict. However, there are opportunities to
stabilize and perhaps to ease these relations—­especially through arms
control agreements.
—Fifth, where the competition between the two superpowers is
non-­military, the United States continues to enjoy a number of critical
advantages: in industrial, agricultural, technological, and diplomatic
strength; in the energy and enterprise of its citizens; in the appeal of
our system—­its responsiveness and plain decency; and in the support
of allies and other friends who genuinely share similar aspirations.
—Sixth, the Soviet Union, by contrast, suffers from major inter-
nal handicaps—­economic, political, and social—­and these handicaps
will probably increase with the decline already occurring in birth rates
and about to occur in domestic energy supplies and rates of economic
growth. The Soviets also suffer from a lack of genuinely committed
allies, and they have been set back in their relations with the People’s
Republic of China (PRC), India, and parts of the Middle East. None-
theless, despite these handicaps and setbacks, the Soviets have been
acquiring military power comparable to that of the United States. By
some measures they are ahead; by others they are behind. (Compara-
tive military capability also depends on such factors as the geographic
location of a conflict.)
—Finally, while many trends and issues continue to develop
independently of relations between the United States and the Soviet
Union—­and require our attention and resources—­the Soviet Union
remains our principal national security problem: not the only one but
the biggest one.
We are negotiating (and must continue to negotiate) with the
Soviets for specific, equitable and adequately verifiable arms control
and disarmament agreements—­agreements that strengthen interna-
tional stability, curb the arms competition, and reduce armaments:
conventional as well as nuclear. We should seek to involve the Sovi-
ets constructively in a number of international activities—­social and
economic, including non-­strategic trade. We should encourage their
cooperation in resolving international conflicts and reducing areas
of tension that could lead to confrontation. To the degree that we can
channel any United States-Soviet competition into non-­military areas,
we will be better off, especially considering our economic, social, and
other advantages.
However, none of these efforts toward cooperation should cause us
to minimize the American commitment to human rights, national inde-
pendence, and democratic institutions—­or to collective security with

our friends. Certainly they must not keep us, along with our allies, from
offsetting Soviet military power in such vital areas as Western Europe.
The main objective of our collective security system must be the
maintenance of an overall military balance with the Soviet Union no
less favorable than the one that now exists. Deterrence and stability, not
overbearing military power, are what we seek. To have them, and to be
confident in them, we must be assured of a credible fighting capability.
The demands of such a capability are substantial. Over the past
15 years, Soviet defense spending has been gradually increasing; we
estimate the average rate of increase, in real terms, at between three
and four percent a year, roughly in line with growth in the Soviet GNP.
For a substantial part of that same period (from FY 1964 to FY 1975),
U.S. baseline budgets (with military retired pay and the incremental
costs of the war in Southeast Asia excluded) have been declining in
real terms. Only since FY 1976, has our defense budget been increasing
in real terms. As a consequence, the Soviet defense effort now appears
to exceed ours. The margin is a matter of judgment, and depends on
whether the two programs are compared in rubles or dollars. Estimates
of 20 percent to 40 percent for this excess appear reasonable.
On the other hand, we are fortunate in having prosperous and
willing allies who can help counterbalance the Soviet effort. The Sovi-
ets are not so fortunate. Moreover, they have felt obliged to allocate
up to about 20 percent of their total defense effort to the Far East and
the PRC. These considerations are allowed for in our judgments on the
proper size of the U.S. defense program. Nonetheless, if we and our
allies are to keep pace with the Soviets and offset their military power,
we must increase our own efforts.
In particular, an increasingly precarious conventional balance
between NATO and the Warsaw Pact in Europe is a matter of serious
concern. That is why we and our NATO allies, in May, 1977, recog-
nized the need to raise our respective levels of defense spending by
approximately three percent a year in real terms. That is also why we
have already launched several major initiatives to cope with short term
NATO vulnerabilities, develop long term and coordinated defense
plans, and achieve a greater degree of alliance cooperation in the com-
mon defense. All of us, it is now acknowledged, must expand our
responses to the Soviet military buildup.
The general magnitude of the Soviet defense effort, and the con-
tinued uncertainties in international relations, account to a consider-
able extent for the size and composition of the U.S. defense budget. But
we do not seek to create a mirror-­image of Soviet military capabilities.
Instead, we strive to maintain the nuclear and conventional forces nec-
essary to deter, or if necessary frustrate, possible Soviet military actions
in areas of the world that are vital to us.

Because certain deficiencies threaten to develop in our posture as
a result of the recent and diverging patterns of defense spending in
the United States and the Soviet Union, we need increased resources to
redress them. I will discuss our main concerns here. The details of our
needs will be found in the remainder of the report.
II. THE STRATEGIC NUCLEAR FORCES
A strategic nuclear attack is the least likely military contingency
we face. However, there is no task more vital than the maintenance
of the strategic nuclear balance between the United States and the
Soviet Union. In my judgment, a rough strategic nuclear equilibrium
exists between the two superpowers at the present time. Neither coun-
try enjoys a military advantage; neither is in a position to exploit its
nuclear capabilities for political ends. The situation is one of standoff
or stalemate. Mutual strategic deterrence and essential equivalence are
in effect.
This administration is determined to continue the current state of
affairs. We would prefer to continue it through equitable and verifi-
able agreements for arms limitations and reductions, and I believe we
are making progress in that direction through the Strategic Arms Lim-
itation Talks (SALT). But we will maintain it by whatever means and
resources are necessary. No one should have any doubts whatsoever
on that score.
I stress this determination for two basic reasons. First, the strategic
balance is not static; owing to a substantial and continuing Soviet effort,
it is highly dynamic. Second, the problem of coping with this dyna-
mism is complex and demanding; there is no easy, one-­shot solution
to it.
The United States has not been idle in this competition; we have
programs underway to modernize each element of our TRIAD. How-
ever, all of us must recognize that the Soviets continue to fund a number
of large, impressive and costly strategic programs to strengthen their
offensive capabilities, their active defenses, and their passive defense
system.
Exactly why the Soviets are pushing so hard to improve their stra-
tegic nuclear capabilities is uncertain. What is certain is that we cannot
ignore their efforts or assume that they are motivated by considerations
either of altruism or of pure deterrence.
My own view is that, for many years now, we have been at the
point where a full-­scale thermonuclear exchange between the United
States and the Soviet Union would be a disaster of unprecedented pro-
portions for both sides. Nothing I have learned during the past year
has altered that conclusion. I also believe that any use of nuclear weap-
ons by the two superpowers against one another—­whether tactical or

strategic—­would carry a high risk—­though not the certainty—­of esca-
lating the conflict to a full-­scale thermonuclear exchange.
But if deterrence of nuclear war is our most fundamental defense
objective—­and it surely is—­what counts is what Soviet civilian and
military leaders believe. On that score, unfortunately, we face another
uncertainty. What we see as sufficient for security may appear as quite
inadequate to them. What would deter us might not deter them. What
some of us consider credible as a deterrent, they may dismiss as a bluff.
Great caution and careful hedging are essential in the face of these
uncertainties. Basically, they require us to insist on essential equiva-
lence with the Soviet Union in strategic nuclear forces. Because of the
stakes, no lesser requirement will do.
We do not propose to plan against total irrationality. Rather, the
issue is how to make it clear to the Soviets that they cannot gain any
military or political advantage from their strategic forces. Insistence on
essential equivalence guards against any danger that the Soviets might
be seen as superior—­even if the perception is not technically justified.
By essential equivalence, we mean the maintenance of conditions
such that:
—Soviet strategic nuclear forces do not become usable instruments
of political leverage, diplomatic coercion, or military advantage;
—­nuclear stability, especially in a crisis, is maintained;
—­any advantages in force characteristics enjoyed by the Soviets
are offset by U.S. advantages in other characteristics; and
—­the U.S. posture is not in fact, and is not seen as, inferior in per-
formance to the strategic nuclear forces of the Soviet Union.
These conditions exist today, and our objective in the current
SALT II negotiations is to maintain them in the future. But owing to
the current and impending improvements in Soviet strategic offensive
and defensive capabilities, we will have to continue our own effort—­
primarily for increased research and development for the Missile-X
(MX) Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM), development and some
deployment of cruise missiles, deployment of the Mark 12A warhead,
and introduction of the TRIDENT missiles and submarines.
III. THE GENERAL PURPOSE FORCES
It should be evident that, in an era of mutual strategic deterrence,
we must become more concerned than ever about a number of regional
balances, and about the adequacy of U.S. and allied conventional capa-
bilities. Strategic parity has not created this problem; the United States
and its allies have been at risk to Soviet nuclear attacks for many years.
But nuclear parity has forced all of us to recognize that the use of the
more traditional types of force by our adversaries may seem to them
less risky than formerly.

A. Europe
Whether for this or for some other reason, the Warsaw Pact main-
tains and continues to improve its capability to launch a major attack
on Western Europe. Such an attack could be nuclear or non-­nuclear.
It might occur after some days or weeks of mobilization and deploy-
ment by the Warsaw Pact, but we cannot rule out the possibility that
the powerful Pact forces already positioned in Eastern Europe would
attack without reinforcement, and with little tactical warning, in the
midst of a major East-West crisis.
The United States will do its share to ensure that NATO has the
capabilities—­conventional as well as nuclear—­to maintain the inde-
pendence and territorial integrity of Western Europe. We are deter-
mined to help stop any of these possible Pact attacks with a minimum
loss of allied territory, and ensure the prompt restoration of prewar
boundaries.
Our policy is in complete agreement with current NATO guidance
in its emphasis on a flexible response and on the need for conventional
as well as for tactical and strategic nuclear forces in the posture of the
Alliance. We also agree with our allies that, owing to the strengthening
of Soviet forces in Eastern Europe, NATO (including the United States)
must make major improvements in the conventional capabilities of the
Alliance including:
—­the deployed forward defense forces in Europe and their
positioning;
—­the initial combat capabilities of these forward defense forces,
and particularly their antitank capabilities;
—­and allied rapid reinforcing capabilities.
I have already instituted a number of U.S. programs in these areas.
We are substantially enhancing the readiness of the United States gen-
eral purpose forces and improving our ability to provide rapid rein-
forcements to NATO. Currently, within 10 days, we could augment our
one division and 40 squadrons. We plan, by 1983, to be able to add five
divisions and 60 tactical air squadrons in the same amount of time.
Along with the allies, we are building up our anti-­armor capabil-
ities and adding to our war reserve stocks. During the next five years,
the United States alone plans to increase its “heavied up” divisions to
and 18,000 anti-­tank guided missiles for the Army, and purchase more
than 2,000 tactical aircraft for the Air Force. Our allies, in the coming
year alone, will add almost 2,000 anti-­tank guided missile launchers
and 14,000 anti-­tank missiles to their capability in Central Europe.

In December, 1977, the allies also agreed to improve war reserve
stocks, increase readiness, and strengthen reinforcement capabilities.
These measures, along with greater anti-­armor effectiveness, will
enhance NATO’s capability against the possibility of a Warsaw Pact
short-­warning attack.
At the same time, we and our allies are working toward a greater
integration of NATO doctrine, tactics, procedures, and equipment. The
more that equipment, munitions, and their logistic support are inter-­
operable, the more effectively allied forces can contain a coordinated
attack. Standardized or interoperable command, control and commu-
nications and interchangeable munitions are particularly essential for
this purpose.
B. East Asia
There is a rather clear dividing line in Europe between friends
and adversaries. The dangers are less sharply defined in Asia. Soviet
forces in Asia are directed primarily at China. North Korea continues to
improve its military capabilities relative to South Korea, but the long-­
term overall trends clearly favor the South. The situation in Southeast
Asia remains obscure, and the ultimate intentions of Vietnam continue
to be uncertain.
In these circumstances, the President has reaffirmed the commit-
ment of the United States to a position of strength in the Western Pacific.
We will continue to protect our interests in Northeast Asia and fulfill all
our treaty obligations. The planned withdrawal of the 2nd U.S. Infantry
Division from South Korea in no way alters that commitment.
We shall continue to oppose aggression in Korea. With Congressio-
nal approval of the necessary legislation, we plan to augment the com-
bat capability of the South Korean ground forces. The major portion of
the 2nd Division will remain deployed in Korea until after 1980. The
Seventh Fleet, a Marine Amphibious Force with its organic air wing,
and three USAF land-­based tactical fighter wings will continue on sta-
tion in the Western Pacific, including one in Korea.
Continuation of the close U.S.-Japanese defense relationship will
further strengthen stability in Asia. We support Japanese efforts to
improve their self-­defense forces, particularly their recently announced
plans to augment their air defense and ASW capabilities.
C. Other Contingencies
There are, in addition, a number of other regions where the United
States and its allies have vital interests and where serious and poten-
tially explosive rivalries exist. The Middle East, despite the hope

provided by recent events,2 remains a source of potential conflict.
United States and European security cannot be separated from the
security of other critical parts of the world. Soviet control of the vital
oil-­producing regions of the Persian Gulf, in particular, could destroy
the cohesion of NATO and perhaps NATO’s ability to defend itself.
In this area, or indeed in the Far East, rival local forces might
become engaged initially without external involvement. However, the
Soviets could intervene in all three regions, although in some instances
their forces could only be airlifted light infantry or naval and perhaps
air units. Whatever the developments, and however they might occur,
such clashes not only might require the dispatch of appropriate U.S.
forces to the scene in support of friends; they could precede and even
set off a crisis or conflagration in Europe.
Accordingly, we must continue to maintain a defense posture that
permits us to respond effectively and simultaneously to a relatively
minor as well as to a major contingency. We currently estimate the
needs of such a posture—­over and above the forces we program for
a major war with the Soviet Union—­as a limited number of land com-
bat forces, in large part relatively light (though their actual configura-
tion will depend on the nature of the forces, they might be expected
to encounter), consisting of both Marine and Army combat divisions
with their support; naval, amphibious lift, and tactical air forces; and
strategic mobility forces with the range and payload to minimize our
dependence on overseas staging and logistical support bases.
This by no means completes our defense needs. The United States
is a maritime nation. Much more than the Soviet Union, we depend on
access to major air and sea lanes not only to acquire critical raw mate-
rials and engage in other peaceful pursuits, but also to protect our vital
interests, forces, and allies overseas in wartime.
The Soviets have developed a long-­range force of aircraft, surface
combatants, and submarines capable of challenging our maritime inter-
ests. We must maintain the air and naval forces necessary to deal with
the challenge and project U.S. power where and as required.
Most of these various requirements can be satisfied with exist-
ing programs and forces. But in an era when wars could be short and
intense, appropriate elements of our forces in the continental United
States (CONUS) must be rapidly deployable to Asia and the Middle
East as well as to Europe.
2 Presumably a reference to Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem
in November 1977, and the beginning of direct Egyptian-Israeli peace negotiations.

IV. READINESS
I should emphasize that, while the prospect of short, intense wars
makes it necessary to have our main conventional forces in being, that
alone is not sufficient. We must also maintain a high level of readiness
in our active forces. Otherwise, we will have the facade rather than the
reality of collective security.
I consider our forces to be ready when they are well trained, have
modern unit equipment in good operating order, hold war reserve
stocks on which they can draw for the early stages of any conflict and
are capable of timely response to crisis. Unfortunately, I cannot report
that our forces, by this definition, are as ready as I would like them to
be.
There are several reasons for the current state of affairs. Our neces-
sary efforts to conserve fuel have meant reductions in ground combat
training exercises, Navy steaming hours, and flying hours for all ser-
vices (although we have been able to make some substitution for these
losses, using simulators). Modernization, in some cases, has brought
with it shorter mean-­times to failure, longer repair times, and increased
training requirements, as well as greater sophistication and capability
of equipment. Inflation, increased pay, and the need to modernize our
forces have meant curtailed funds for operation and maintenance.
The conventional wisdom has been that, in an emergency, the
neglect of readiness can be quickly overcome by a rapid infusion of
resources. Whatever merit this wisdom may have had when the United
States had ample time for extended mobilization, it is now out of date.
We have not yet developed the methodological tools to show
the precise sensitivity of readiness to changes in our commitment of
resources. But loss of readiness is a cumulative process that takes time
as well as money to reverse.
Accordingly, we must keep up our training not only because U.S.
forces may be sent into action with very little advance warning, but also
because we rely increasingly on the sophistication of our equipment to
compensate for potential superiority in enemy numbers. It is equally
essential that our war reserve stocks be maintained, mostly for our own
needs, but to some degree for Asian allies as well. At the same time,
we must raise the percentage of our equipment that is combat-­ready
because, owing to unit costs, we have less of it to bring to bear in an
emergency.
To put the matter bluntly, unless we are prepared to maintain these
components of readiness, collective security and deterrence will be seri-
ously undermined. The increased resources in the FY 1979 budget will
permit us to get on with the job.

V. CONCLUSION
To sum up, what we are saying with the FY 1979 budget and Five-
Year Defense program is that, while there is work ahead of us, there are
no grounds for panic or crash efforts. The world remains turbulent and
dangerous; the Soviets, despite all their internal handicaps and external
problems, have become a serious military competitor. But they have
not suddenly achieved the status of a Goliath any more than we have
ended up abruptly as a David at the end of an inoperative slingshot.
Although both of us are heavyweights, I am confident that we remain
the more agile of the two.
Perhaps the analogy of the hare and the tortoise is more appro-
priate as a description of the Soviet-American competition in the past.
Certainly we pulled ahead in the late 1950s and early 1960s, and then
substantially reduced our basic effort while the Soviets continued to
expand theirs at a steady pace. Now we must increase our investment
in defense if we are to stay abreast.
That we have the basic strength and will for the task cannot be in
doubt. That we have the prudence and patience to run at whatever pace
the Soviets may choose to set remains to be seen. All I can say to you is
that the FY 1979 budget and projected programs recommend what this
administration regards as the right regimen for a long-­distance runner.
[Omitted here is the body of the report.]
49.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, January 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Approval of the Cruise Missile Program as a Program of Highest National Priority
PURPOSE
This is to request that you approve the Cruise Missile Program as a
program of highest national priority.
BACKGROUND
In order to meet the required Initial Operational Capability date
for the Air Launched Cruise Missile (ALCM), top priority for industrial
resources is essential. Your approval will allow assignment of a BRICK-
BAT DX industrial priority rating to our contracts with industry.2 It will
assure that materials, components and other resources will be applied
to the Cruise Missile program first in the event of conflict with commer-
cial or lesser important Defense contracts.
shown that leadtimes for many materials and components, particularly
aluminum ingots and electronic parts, are lengthy. Failure to apply a
blanket BRICK-BAT rating to the program will make it necessary to
resolve individual resource bottlenecks and conflicts on a slower and
more costly case-­by-­case interagency basis.
2. Relationship to Sea and Ground Launched Cruise Missiles (SLCM
and GLCM)—Because many of the component parts of the ALCM,
SLCM and GLCM are manufactured by the same Defense contractors,
it would be more cost-­effective and efficient to apply equal priority in
industry for these systems at this stage in their development.
3. Other BRICK-BAT Programs—Programs have received this
assignment in the past, generally because of key political, scientific,
psychological or military objectives. Nine programs are presently in
the BRICK-BAT category. Included are systems such as the M60 Tank,
TRIDENT, MINUTEMAN and the Ballistic Missile Defense Advanced
Technology Program.
4. Adverse Reaction/Impact—We do not anticipate any adverse reac-
tion from special interest groups. Impact on industry will be minimal
providing the DX industrial priority rating is assigned early in the
acquisition cycle.
million through FY 78. Of the total cost, approximately $130 million
is estimated to be for critical components and materials which will be
benefited by assignment of the DX industrial priority rating.
I recommend that you approve the Cruise Missile Program as a
program of highest national priority. The enclosure contains the text of
a suggested reply.3
Harold Brown
2 BRICK-BAT DX is the highest level of priority for production and acquisition of
industrial resources.
3 Not found attached. Carter signed his name below Brown’s to indicate his approval
of the recommendation.

50.
Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 28, 1978
SUBJECT
Items of Interest from the NMCC Visit2
First, I could not hear all of the conversations but the following
points emerged from what I did monitor. I put them down for our
record and possible follow-­up.
—The President seems not to have been aware of some of the vul-
nerabilities of our warning satellites (DSP). This also relates to Soviet
laser R and D, as I understood this part of the discussion.
—Your question about varied Soviet attack strategies raises many
questions about our command and control which have concerned me
for a long time. The President responded, as I understood him, with a
desire to do something about command and control as well as the vul-
nerability of our warning systems (doing something of course requires
a large step over a number of years; it also requires a change in some of
our doctrinal assumptions.)
—Harold Brown seems extremely reluctant either to announce a
launch on warning policy or to allow the impression to emerge that we
might have such policy. I missed other interlocutors’ responses.
—I will get you some better information on the operational signif-
icance of DEFCON levels.
—Harold Brown’s mention of changing Soviet strategic doctrine
about limiting use of nuclear weapons raises a key issue in which we
will possibly see major revisions in the next year or two. The intelli-
gence community has a lot of work yet to be done. [3 lines not declassi-
fied] I have the impression that the President’s view on this is taking a
rigid shape. He is justified in this view, [less than 1 line not declassified],
but it is conceivable that they will change.
—Your question on the chances of a false warning from the various
systems is being researched in the JCS. An answer will be forthcoming
shortly. In this connection, I do not believe it was made clear that the
DSP systems are not simply waiting for a Soviet launch. They record
launches almost everyday, ours, the Soviets, and others world-­wide.
Thus, we have a vast experience with their reliability and sensitivities.
—Finally, the “feedback” has been very positive. General Rogers
observed that had we had to go to war at this level a few years ago,
Brzezinski initialed the top right corner of the memorandum and wrote “good.”
meeting was found.

things would have worked rather poorly. The IVORY ITEM series has
altered that situation remarkably.
51.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, February 25, 1978
You will recall that at the session in the NMCC last month2 you
asked for more information on what U.S. and Soviet laser capabilities
are today and what they will be in the future.
The attached is a response to that request.
Harold Brown

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense3
Washington, undated
US AND SOVIET LASER WEAPONS CAPABILITIES
(S) The potential of laser weapons is embodied in three fundamen-
tal characteristics: delivery of energy at the speed of light, a ­potentially
large magazine, and a wide field of fire within which the laser can switch
rapidly from target to target. The US High Energy Laser (HEL) pro-
gram is intended to develop the technology base for laser devices, and
to demonstrate the feasibility and potential of the HEL as a weapon. We
plan to assess, by the early 1980s, the viability of lasers in comparison
to other weapons. Principal applications defined today include defense
of aircraft, ships and ground targets against aircraft and tactical mis-
siles. A decision to develop prototype weapons for these applications
would produce laser weapons by the late 1980s. We are also examining
concepts for space-­based laser ASAT devices. The feasibility of such
devices could be demonstrated by the late 1980s.
3 Top Secret.

(TS) The Soviet laser weapons program enjoys a high priority. Sev-
eral HEL ranges and test sites have been identified in the USSR, and the
size and nature of these facilities indicate an annual HEL investment
which is considerably higher than our own. We feel that the current
Soviet laser technology level is comparable to ours. While we may tend
to lead in pointing and tracking capability, the Soviets have probably
achieved higher power levels. We believe the Soviets have underway
a number of prototype development projects designed to assess the
viability of laser weapons. Table 1 summarizes our assessment of US
and Soviet laser weapon capabilities in an anti-­satellite (ASAT) role. In
this context, “capability” implies operational deployment in sufficient
numbers to provide a meaningful effect. The US capabilities are poten-
tial capabilities—­they are not capabilities which exist or are planned for
implementation, but reflect what could be achieved in an orderly pro-
gram without fiscal constraints. Similarly, the estimated Soviet capabil-
ities reflect what could be achieved.
(S) Three types of capabilities are listed: “jam sensor”, “kill sen-
sor”, and “kill structure”. “Jam sensor”, implies introducing false tar-
gets or obliterating some portion of the image. “Kill sensor”, implies
permanent damage to the sensor or sensing medium. These capabil-
ities generally require the laser to be in or near the optical field of
view. Finally, “kill structure” involves damage to softer structural
elements such as solar arrays. The power required to kill structure is
about seven orders of magnitude higher than the power required to
jam sensors.
(TS) Within one year, both the US and the Soviets could jam satel-
lite sensors (film or detector arrays) at essentially all altitudes and kill
sensors in satellites at low altitudes. The US airborne laser provides a
near term advantage in reducing the reaction time from command to
kill. But the Soviets may have a near term advantage in the ability to
effect structural damage.
(TS) By the early 1990s, the US and the Soviet Union could have the
capability to jam and kill sensors on high altitude satellites. Structural
kills would be limited to medium altitude unless space-­borne laser
weapons were deployed. While a space deployment is possible by the
early 1990s, it would be a substantial technological undertaking with
considerable development risk.
(S) The entries in Table 1 indicating effective altitudes were devel-
oped using simple assumptions about spectral sensitivity and damage
levels. A case by case analysis could easily result in an order of magni-
tude variation in effective range.
(TS) US and Soviet laser weapon capabilities in missions other
than ASAT are summarized in Table 2. Both US and Soviet HEL pro-
grams will be demonstrating lethality and capability from now through

the mid-1980s. We estimate that prototype air defense systems will be
available in the Soviet Union by the early 1980s. Prototype US systems
will be demonstrated in the mid-1980s. By the early 1990s, both the US
and the Soviet Union could develop a capability for the short range
point defense of ships, ground targets and aircraft. This capability could
include structural as well as sensor kill devices. A US or Soviet space-­
based laser defense capability could defend friendly satellites against
ASAT attack by the early 1990s. But development and deployment of
such a capability in this time frame will involve significant risk. It is not
likely that either the US or the Soviet Union will develop an effective
laser ABM capability by the early 1990s.

Table 1

Table Prepared in the Department of Defense4
Washington, undated
U.S. AND SOVIET LASER WEAPONS CAPABILITIES IN ANTI-SATELLITE MISSIONS
POTENTIAL5 U.S. CAPABILITY
ESTIMATED SOVIET CAPABILITY
Time
Frame
Laser
Basing
Mode
JAM SENSORS
(film, detector
arrays)
KILL SENSORS
(film, detector
arrays)
KILL
STRUCTURE
OF
SATELLITES
JAM SENSORS
(film, detector
arrays)
KILL SENSORS
(film, detector
arrays)
KILL
STRUCTURE
OF
SATELLITES
Now
(within
one
year)
Ground To
geosynchronous
altitudes.
Low-­altitude
(800 km)
(Photo recon)6
None
To geosyn-
chronous alti-
tudes. (Photo
& launch
warning)
Low-­altitude
recon)7
Uncertain—­
possible sub-
system damage
or degradation
at low-­altitude8
Aircraft To geosynchro-
nous altitudes.
Low-­altitude
(500 km)
(Photo recon)
None
None
None
None
Space
None
None
None
None
None
None
4 Top Secret.
5 Implementation of these capabilities is not included in current US programs. [Footnote is in the original.]
6 Reaction time limited. [Footnote is in the original.]
7 Reaction time limited. [Footnote is in the original.]
8 Reaction time limited. [Footnote is in the original.]

POTENTIAL U.S. CAPABILITY
ESTIMATED SOVIET CAPABILITY
Time
Frame
Laser
Basing
Mode
JAM SENSORS
(film, detector
arrays)
KILL SENSORS
(film, detector
arrays)
KILL
STRUCTURE
OF
SATELLITES
JAM SENSORS
(film, detector
arrays)
KILL SENSORS
(film, detector
arrays)
KILL
STRUCTURE
OF
SATELLITES
Early
1990s
Ground
All altitudes.
High-­altitude
Mid-­altitude
(1000 km)
(Photo,
some ELINT,
Ocean Recon,
Weather)10
All altitudes.
High-­altitude
Mid-­altitude
(1000 km)
Aircraft
All altitudes
High-­altitude
(17,000 km)
Same as
above with-
out reaction
time limits.
All altitudes.
High-­altitude
(17,000 km)
Same as
ground based.
Space
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Possible
capability
against all
satellites.
Not Applicable Not Applicable
Possible
Capability—
Capability
comparable to
US, but may
not mirror US
approaches.
9 Reaction time limited by number and distribution of sites. [Footnote is in the original.]
10 Reaction time limited by number and distribution of sites. [Footnote is in the original.]
11 Reaction time limited by number and distribution of sites. [Footnote is in the original.]

Table 2

Table Prepared in the Department of Defense12
Washington, undated
(Number of weapons for a “meaningful effect”)
U.S. AND SOVIET CAPABILITIES LASER WEAPONS—OTHER THAN ASAT
POTENTIAL13 U.S. CAPABILITY
ESTIMATED SOVIET CAPABILITY
Mission
Now
Early 1990s
Now
Early 1990s
Point defense—Ship (enough
to equip 6 aircraft carriers)
None—­technology and
lethality demonstrations
underway.
Sensor kill devices
widely deployed—­
initial capability for
other devices.
None14
Ship defense system
against anti-­ship missiles,
cruise missiles.
Point defense—Ground tar-
get (approx. 30)
None—­technology and
lethality demonstrations
underway.
Sensor kill devices
widely deployed—­
initial capability for
other devices.
None15
Short range (3–8 km) air
defense and mobile lasers
against personnel & light
armored vehicles.
12 Top Secret.
13 Implementation of these capabilities depends upon assessments relative to competing weapons. Assumed no fiscal constraints but conservative
development approach. [Footnote is in the original.]
14 Believed prototype projects underway. [Footnote is in the original.]
15 Believed prototype projects underway. [Footnote is in the original.]

POTENTIAL U.S. CAPABILITY
ESTIMATED SOVIET CAPABILITY
Mission
Now
Early 1990s
Now
Early 1990s
Defense of Aircraft (several
10’s if on strategic bombers)
None—­technology and
lethality demonstrations
underway.
Short range (3–8 km)
capability in large
aircraft. Possible
limited capability in
fighter aircraft.
None16
Short range (3–8 km)
capability. Potential
means of improving pres-
ent aircraft deficiencies.
Space Defense (Anti-ASAT)
None
Possible capability
to defend all U.S.
satellites from space
attack.
None
Possible capability—
Capability comparable to
U.S., but may not mirror
US approaches.
ABM—­terminal intercept of
RVs (perhaps 50–100)
None
None
None
None
16 Believed prototype projects underway. [Footnote is in the original.]

52.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, March 3, 1978
During preparation for your visit to the National Military Command
Center (NMCC) on 28 January 1978,2 I examined available SIOP target-
ing options for non-Soviet Warsaw Pact (NSWP) countries. I believe the
information on the effects that ‘withholds’ could have on fatalities and
on attack effectiveness in the NSWP may be of interest to you.
[3 paragraphs (21 lines) not declassified]
Your visit to the NMCC set a most welcome precedent. Continued
practice exercises of the SIOP with your participation will prove valu-
able in refining that decision process.
Harold Brown
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 86, Defense: 1978. Top Secret. Outside the System.
Carter initialed the memorandum.
53.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 10, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #50
1. Opinion
Last week Harold Brown discussed with you the idea of putting
the M-X missile in Minuteman silos. This idea has been gaining some
support lately, given the difficulties that the Air Force is having in iden-
tifying a technically feasible and reasonably affordable mobile basing
scheme.
Sensitive. Carter initialed the top of the memorandum.

The fact that something must eventually be done about Minute-
man’s growing vulnerability seems clear. We have just completed an
analysis of the potential impact of extending to 1985 the current SALT
II modernization limits. The results support RAND’s presentation to
you—Soviet difficulties in trying to achieve a high confidence attack
capability against Minuteman would increase, but such limits would
not significantly reduce the rate at which our confidence in the surviv-
ability of Minuteman is decaying.2 And SALT II protocol limits would
foreclose a matching ICBM hard-­target capability raising all the politi-
cal problems Senator Nunn indicated.
However, deploying the M–X missile in the Minuteman silos seems
like a poor solution. While it would reduce the developing asymmetries
in throw weight and hard-­target kill capabilities, it also would increase
crisis instability. By putting both sides’ knockout punch in a vulner-
able position, there would be a premium on the side that starts first.
Adopting a launch under attack strategy has significant problems too.
Its credibility depends on public knowledge, but public knowledge will
precipitate a heated political debate over whether this strategy is possi-
ble without predelegation of your authority to order nuclear attacks—­a
very sensitive matter.
For these reasons many pro defense and pro arms control legisla-
tors on the Hill are united against putting M–X missiles in silos. Indeed
the program has survived politically because it has held out the possi-
bility of being a survivable ICBM. There is great reluctance to spending
billions on a new missile for an increasingly vulnerable basing mode.
The Air Force is continuing studies of possible mobile basing
schemes for the M–X missiles and DDR&E is examining some exotic
options for protecting ICBM. But the prospect is that we will have to
learn to live with ICBM vulnerability.
We do not, however, have to accept an asymmetry on counterforce.
There is a way to increase our counterforce capabilities without the
instabilities of developing M–X in silos: we could develop the Trident II
(D–5) missile as a survivable hard-­target weapon. This program is still in
early conceptual studies, but it seems clear that a highly effective hard-­
target kill capability can be achieved with an SLBM.
However, at present the Trident II missile program has very mod-
est funding. The Navy has put off the start of a serious Trident II devel-
opment program because it sees the total of $5–7 billion in required
2 On February 23, Carter participated in a meeting in the White House Situation
Room to discuss SALT with Mondale, Nunn, Secretary of Defense Brown, Brzezinski,
Aaron, and Donald Rice, President of the RAND Corporation. (Carter Library, Presiden-
tial Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No minutes of the meeting were found.

development funds as competing with other programs the Navy lead-
ership values more, such as building new ships or buying new aircraft.
If a serious development effort were started now, the D–5 could
be initially deployed in 1987 or 88—­if high priority were given to the
project, deployment could probably start a year or two sooner. Such a
program would be consistent with SALT II. And an announcement that
we are pursuing this—­even only as an option—­would go a long way to
defuse the “counterforce debate” that Sam Nunn believes would be so
damaging as SALT II ratification.
Even if we ultimately decide to forego an increase in missile hard-­
target kill capabilities, development of the Trident II missile would still
have advantages. The throw weight of this missile is approximately
the same as that of the M–X, and deployment of it would help reduce
the growing throw weight asymmetry. Further, the Trident II missile
(which is significantly larger than the Trident I) would make maximum
use of each submarine. Thus allowing us the option of deploying fewer
submarines overall—­with lower costs, at least in the long run.
In view of these considerations, we should be cautious about the
idea of putting M–X missiles in Minuteman silos—­and look seriously
at the possibility that development of the Trident II missile or an alter-
native option.3
2. Facts
A Look Into the Arms Trade Future
The Council on Foreign Relations recently published a book enti-
tled Controlling Future Arms Trade.4 The book is part of the Council’s
1980’s Project which is designed to identify and analyze issues likely to
be of international concern during the next 10 to 20 years. A number of
interesting predictions were made in the book, including:
—The pattern of transfers in the 1980’s will conform less and less
to the division of influence between East and West; the Soviet Union
and the U.S. will increasingly sell arms to each other’s clients; clients
will feel free to bargain between East and West. The existence of other
3 Carter wrote beneath this paragraph: “This is something about which Harold
should brief me—(by memo first) J.” In a March 13 memorandum, Brzezinski wrote
Brown: “In connection with your discussion with the President of the idea of putting the
M–X Missile in Minuteman silos, the President has asked for a memorandum from you
about possible alternatives to M–X. Specifically, he would be interested in your views
about the possibility of developing the Trident II (D–5) missile as a survivable hard target
weapon. The memorandum should also surface other possible options, if any. We would
also plan discussing this issue at a PRC.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
­Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 126, Weekly National
4 Anne Hessing Cahn, et al., eds. Controlling Future Arms Trade (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1977).

Northern arms exporters will mean even greater latitude for arms
recipients in choosing among exporters. A buyers market will, in short,
continue to exist.
—The dominent impulse of developing nations’ arms plans for the
coming decade is toward arms independence. More nations will be able
to achieve weapons independence by indigenous production, although
most countries will likely remain dependent on the superpowers for
front-­line weapons platforms such as high performance combat aircraft.
—The availability of precision-­guided munitions (PGMs) will rep-
resent the most notable change in conventional weaponry from the
own PGMs.
—The international demand for high cost, low attrition combat aircraft
such as the F–14 will diminish significantly in the 1980’s. This reduced
demand will result in part because these aircraft are too costly to risk in
combat against PGMs.
—There may be a greater willingness on the part of many producing
nations to sell weapons abroad, particularly if they see their reluctance as
only serving the benefit of other less scrupulous suppliers. The “high-­
technology, high-­morality” nations, such as Germany and Japan, may
well become more actively involved in the arms trade in the future.
But this development is not inevitable. The Swedes appear steadfast in
their high-­morality posture.
—The 1980’s will probably see more trade in “threshhold” items that
will further blur the already vague distinction between offense and
defense, strategic and tactical, nuclear and conventional, e.g., the cruise
missile.
—There will be a proliferation of “second-­tier” producers, such as Italy,
Yugoslavia, Israel and growth of co-­producers.
—The 1980’s will see a further weakening of autonomous European
production lines for combat aircraft. European industries will turn more
and more to co-­production and licensing arrangements with American
aircraft industries. NATO standardization in the 1980’s is likely to be,
therefore, two-­tiered, with the U.S. taking the lead in major weapons
platforms and increasing European collaboration in tactical missiles
and other armaments.
I think you will be pleased to know that most of the recommen-
dations contained in Controlling Future Arms Trade are found either in
PD–135 or the guidelines you have adopted for our discussions with
August 1978, Document 33.

the British, Germans, French and Soviets. Those that are not will be
explored by my staff, including the one that follows:
—Actively encourage the transfer of weapons and systems which
would improve defensive and strategic warning capabilities.
[Omitted here is material unrelated to national security policy.]
54.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, March 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Consolidated Guidance
During the past four months I have been through the initial stages
of producing a Consolidated Guidance for planning in the Defense
Department. Heretofore there had been three separate (strategy, pro-
gram, fiscal) and not always consistent guidance documents.
The process began with extensive discussions during October and
November among the Chiefs, the Secretaries of the Military Depart-
ments, the OSD staff, Charles Duncan and myself, of what sorts of
things should be contained in a consolidated guidance. Following that,
a first draft was drawn up by my staff. I made changes and sent it to
the JCS and Services for comments. This was followed by another series
of reviews with the Services, a redrafting, and a further examination
and rewrite by Charles and myself last weekend with the benefit of
personal comments from the Service Secretaries and each of the Chiefs.
The result is a 300-­page document2 which I am not transmitting
to you. Your staff will be provided with that material for their informa-
tion. But if this is to be only a staff exercise, it will fail to realize most of
its potential value.
I believe instead that the next stage is to get your personal views
about a few fundamental issues on which you may wish to make per-
sonal inputs, and with which you will therefore want to become more
familiar. Possible—­and very different—­examples are: (a) strategic
forces; and (b) the effects on our defense posture and capabilities ten
PD–18 [1]. Secret.
2 Not found.

years from now and, by implication, on our foreign policy of a change
up or down in average annual level of defense expenditures by 5%
either way.
To find out how you would like now to proceed, I attach a ten-­page
summary of what seem to me to be the major issues and the major fea-
tures of the guidance.3 I also attach for your information the table of
contents and two sample sections of the guidance document; the first
is on strategic nuclear forces and the second on forces for NATO.4 I
would appreciate it if you could go through the ten-­page summary and
indicate any issues you would like to have discussed in more depth.
I will then prepare more detailed briefing documents for a meeting
during which you and I can discuss them thoroughly with Charles
Duncan, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, and a few of your other
staff. We could (and I would recommend it) do this during the week
of March 20th, before you leave on your overseas trip.5 Alternatively,
you may wish to wait until May when, according to the OMB staff, you
will be in a position to look at the Government-­wide guidance for the
FY 1980 budget.
There is one matter, however, which will not wait beyond the end
of March. This is the need to submit to the Congress a five-­year ship-­
building program. It is important that this be a program that we are
prepared to stick with over a period of at least a few years, subject of
course to changes that we are forced to make to account for Congres-
sional changes while still assuring program balance. I will be ready to
go over this subject with you any time after March 13th. Probably Zbig,
Jim McIntyre, and I should discuss it first.
Unsurprisingly, there are a number of matters within the Consol-
idated Guidance that are not unanimously agreed within the Defense
Department. There are therefore likely to be additional changes in it as
the arguments (and the realities of Congressional action) sway me one
way or the other. It begins to look as if the Congress, while making a
number of changes up and down (adding a CVN and deferring a Tri-
dent submarine, for example) is at least as likely to approve a higher
Defense budget for Fiscal 79 than we submitted as a lower one.
This will probably reinforce the view among my subordinates
(one of their few unanimous views) that a 5% increase above what is
now contained in the five-­year fiscal guidance, could easily be passed
if the Administration would propose it. They see this course of action
as solving their most severe problems and as making the difference
3 Attached but not printed is the 10-­page summary; see the attachment to Docu-
ment 63.
4 Attached but not printed.

between a low-­risk defense capability and a high-­risk defense capa-
bility. They may even be right on both scores. You (and I) may take
a different view from that one. But that imposes on us, I believe, an
obligation carefully to consider the alternatives proposed by the Mili-
tary Departments and the Joints Chiefs of Staff, and fully to justify the
Administration’s decisions. I hope that this Consolidated Guidance
document and the dialogue leading to the decisions will help us to
do so.
Harold Brown
55.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Alternative Ways of Answering the Soviets’ Growing Strategic Counterforce
Capabilities
Bill Perry, the DOD Undersecretary for Research and Engineering,
recently sent Harold Brown and Charles Duncan a memo on this issue
that I thought you might find interesting (Tab A). It provides some
information on possible alternatives to putting M–X in silos; a more
complete examination of this question is being prepared by DOD in
response to your recent request.
In reading the memo, you will note the following points:
—Bill Perry seems quite concerned about the potential crisis insta-
bility problem posed by the low survivability of silos.2 Nevertheless, he
is examining the idea of putting M–X missiles in some of the Minute-
man III silos—­a seeming contradiction.
—The idea of developing a [less than 1 line not declassified] mis-
sile that can also serve as the M–X if we add another missile stage is
very interesting. If it is possible, it significantly reduces the risk that
right corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Very interesting—J.”
2 See Document 53.

a near-­term start [less than 1 line not declassified] would end up being
wasted effort.
—“Deep silos” means perhaps 1000–2000 ft. below the surface.
DOD hasn’t yet identified a good method by which the deep-­based
missiles might dig themselves out after an attack. Given the delays that
might be encountered in digging out, such a scheme might still be use-
ful in providing a long-­term reserve force of ICBMs.
—There are a number of “Garwinian” defense schemes for protect-
ing individual silos.3 [2 lines not declassified] The RVs would presumably
be destroyed, or caused to detonate at altitudes at which the silo-­based
missiles would still survive.

Tab A

Memorandum From the Under Secretary of Defense for
Research and Engineering (Perry) to Secretary of Defense
Brown and the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Duncan)4
Washington, March 15, 1978
SUBJECT
Strategic Deterrence
This is a brief status report on an ongoing analysis we are conduct-
ing on alternative ways of maintaining our strategic deterrence in the
face of the growing Soviet counterforce capability.
The data available to date on the new guidance systems being
tested on the SS–18 and SS–19 suggest that these systems have as
their objective significant improvements in accuracy, probably reduc-
ing CEP to the dangerous area of 200m to 250m. If they are successful
in this area, and if they retrofit this system on deployed SS–18s and
SS–19s, they could pose a serious counterforce threat as early as 1983.
This is two or three years earlier than we would have estimated if the
improved guidance capability had to wait for the next generation of
missiles to be deployed. [8 lines not declassified] The latter assumption I
think is unrealistic.
Thus our land-­based ICBM force not only becomes susceptible to
being taken out, it could almost be considered as an invitation to attack.
Watson Research Center in New York. Garwin was a member of the Council on Foreign
Relations and an expert on nuclear weapons technology. He was also a member of the
Office of Science and Technology Policy panel conducting the Vulnerability Study of the
M–X missile. See the attachment to Document 43.
4 Top Secret; Eyes Only. Outside the System. A stamped notation reads: “SecDef has
seen.”

Moreover because we would recognize its susceptibility we would be
tempted to launch on warning thereby putting a “hair-­trigger” on our
deterrence forces. In short, our ICBM force would become destabiliz-
ing. For this reason I believe it is urgent that we seriously explore alter-
natives so that we don’t drift into this situation by the Soviet threat
developing before our response was ready.
I am exploring a number of R&D and acquisition alternatives that
will provide a timely solution to this problem. Accelerating the M–X
is the major alternative but one in which I still have serious concerns
because of the technical problems I see and the cost problems I expect to
see. We will continue an intensive effort (DRE, AF, and DSB) to develop
a technically acceptable MX program. In the meantime, we are pursu-
ing at a conceptual level alternatives to MX. These concepts, if pursued,
would entail the following programatic actions:
1. Expedite the TRIDENT II program.
a. The TRIDENT II missile would be accelerated to allow an IOC
of 1984.
b. The advanced development phase could be run as a design
competition between the TRIDENT contractors and the MX missile
contractor(s).
2. Redirect the MX missile program.
a. The MX missile would be a [less than 1 line not declassified] missile
plus an additional stage [1 line not declassified]. It would also have a 1984
IOC.
b. [1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]
c. [1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified]
3. Redirect the MX missile basing program.
a. The new MX missile would be put in some of the MM III silos,
thus increasing the residual warheads after attack by a factor of three.
b. The balance of the silos would be replaced with deep silos [2 lines
not declassified]
4. Consider deployment of a “thin” ABM system.
a. Complete development of the new light-­weight non-­nuclear
interceptor.
b. Install this system for a thin defense of one MM wing [less than
1 line not declassified] with an IOC of 1984. System would include PARS
already there plus 100 interceptors (to be compatible with SALT).
c. The deployed system could stop (at most) 100 RVs, but provides
a base from which an effective ABM system could be made operational
in a year or two from decision.
d. Accelerate R&D in non-­conventional (Garwinian) “bloody-­
nose” defenses of individual silos as a backup to ABM deployment.

5. MM II
a. Left-­over MM III missiles could be deployed in MM II silos
(compatible with SALT restrictions) during the gap period between
POSEIDON phase-­out and TRIDENT phase-­in. This option may be
particularly important if our TRIDENT ship construction problems
worsen.
b. Develop a more effective use of our SALT quota of SNDVs than
the present MM II.
Some combinations of the programs just outlined would lead to a
reduction of ICBM vulnerability by 1984 with high confidence because
the technical risks are not high (with the exception of the ABM, which
does not seem difficult but involves more unknowns). These programs
in aggregate would be less expensive than the MX alternative. The
cost of the ABM development is more than offset by the R&D savings
effected by a single missile development. The cost of deep silo deploy-
ment is more than offset by avoiding the cost of deploying the MX
trenches. Also this approach is compatible with present SALT agree-
ments and gives us a good negotiating position for future agreements.
However the concept has a major weakness to the extent it depends
upon ABM, as long as we are limited to 100 interceptors. Therefore our
major objective continues to be finding a technically sound approach
to MX basing. The trench looks less and less attractive and a number
of other alternatives are being seriously examined by the Air Force and
DSB. I will give you a status report on this effort in a week or two.
William J. Perry

56.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 20, 1978
SUBJECT
Questions From Your NMCC Visit
Harold Brown has responded with written answers2 to clear up the
questions raised during your visit to the National Military Command
Center at the Pentagon.3
You need not read through the details; I have, therefore, summed
up the crux of the five answers.
I. [1 paragraph (11 lines) not declassified]
II. [1 paragraph (11 lines) not declassified]
III. False alarms in our warning system.
—Since activation of BMEWS in 1960, there have been seven false
alarms. The CINCNORAD “assessed confidence” was “no” in all cases.
—The last false alarm was December 1976.
IV. [1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]
V. Secretary Brown’s communication checks with you when you are away
from Washington.
—During the first 24 hours after your arrival at a trip location, the
WHCA trip officer normally gives the NMCC in the Pentagon a chance
to make a test call.
—The Secretary of Defense, if he makes a test call to you in the
future, will first check with your side to determine your availability.
These answers raise as many new questions as they resolve. I draw
one overall conclusion: Our “C3 I”, that is, our command and control and
intelligence warning, is not in the best shape. It needs constant review
and remedial effort. Your attention keeps up the right kinds of pressure
in the Defense Department.4
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 86, Defense: 1978. Top Secret; Sensitive. Outside the
System. The date is handwritten.
2 See Document 51.
4 Carter drew a vertical line in the right margin of this paragraph and wrote below
it: “I Agree. J.”

57.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, March 20, 1978
Attached is the five-­year ship construction program that I plan
to send forward to the Congressional authorizing and appropriations
committees. When we eliminated such a table from my defense posture
statement, I told them in my testimony that they would have it by the
end of March. You will recall your conversations along these lines in
January with Senator Stennis and Congressman Price.2
There is also enclosed a point paper that explains the basis for the
five-­year ship building program. With one exception, it is the same as
I showed Zbig and Jim McIntyre and to which they agreed. The excep-
tion is the substitution in the out years of two LSD–41s (Amphibious
Assault Ships) for some auxiliary ships and conversions. This pre-
serves, without irrevocably committing us to, amphibious lift at the
level of 115% of a one division Marine Amphibious Force (which, given
ship outages for repair, corresponds to an effective capability of one
MAF). I think we may want to reexamine this one during the course of
the year, but omitting it now from the program would cause unneces-
sary opposition in what will already be a contentious debate.
Zbig has some concerns about the rate of Trident construction as
do I. He believes that the lowering of the rate from three every two
years to one every year will raise some SALT issues. My view is that the
corresponding decline in SLBMs, which bottoms in the 1990s, needs to
be addressed, but that the best way to do so is to find a way of reducing
the cost per SLBM, rather than simply to build more Tridents. This is a
course of action that we should prepare in advance rather than surfac-
ing it now.
I would not include the material in the point paper in what I send
to Congress, reserving it instead for testimony. If, as a result of Congres-
sional actions, the FY 79 program changes, corresponding alterations
by us in both directions in the out years will maintain a properly bal-
anced program.
In accord with our conversation of last Friday,3 I think it would be
useful if you, Zbig and I (and perhaps Graham Claytor) could meet for
20 or 30 minutes later this week to discuss any questions you may have
2 See Document 47.
3 March 17. Carter and Brown participated in a tour and military exercise aboard the
U.S.S. Eisenhower. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)

before I send forward the five-­year program. Such a meeting would
give you the opportunity to call Senator Stennis to communicate your
views on the ship building program. You could suggest to him that
I meet with him, Mr. Price and Mr. Mahon together or separately to
explain the program before I send it up at the end of the month.
Harold Brown

Attachment 1

Chart Prepared in the Department of Defense4
Washington, undated
FY 1979–FY 1983 SHIPBUILDING PLAN
(Number of Ships/Millions of Then-Year Dollars)
FY 79
FY 80
FY 81
FY 82
FY 83
Total
Trident (Ballistic Missile Submarine)
SSN–688 (Attack Submarine)
CVV (Mid-Sized Carrier)
Carrier Service Life Extension Program
CGN–42 (Nuclear Aegis Ship)
DDG–47 (Conventional Aegis Ship)
DDG–2(C) (Guided Missile Ship Upgrading)
FFG–7 (Guided Missile Frigate)
LSD–41 (Amphibious Assault Ship)
AD (Destroyer Tender)
MCM (Mine Countermeasures Ship)
T–AO (Oiler)
4 Confidential.

TATU (Tug)
TAGOS (SURTASS Towed Sonar Ship)
TARC (SOSUS Cable Layer)
FY 79
FY 80
FY 81
FY 82
FY 83
Total
TAK(C) (Trident Missile Cargo Ship)
Service Craft
Landing Craft
Outfitting & Post-Delivery Costs
Cost Growth & Escalation Provision
TOTAL
(Service Life Extension of Existing Carriers)
(1 SLEP)
(1 SLEP)
(Conversions of DDG–2s and TAK)
(1 CONV)
(3 CONV)
(5 CONV)
(3 CONV)
69 New

Attachment 2

Point Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense5
Washington, undated
RATIONALE FOR THE SIZE OF THE SHIPBUILDING PROGRAM
• Two balances to consider:
• Total Navy vs. rest of DoD
• Even with planned Army add-­ons, Navy gets 26% more than
Army over 5 years
• Navy gets 16% more than Air Force over 5 years
• Diverting even more from Army or Air Force to Navy would
interfere with or prohibit our highest priority task in General Purpose
Forces—­to improve the ability of NATO to withstand a blitzkrieg attack.
• Thus, cannot divert more funding to Navy.
• If we increase the defense budget above what is now contained
in the fiscal guidance, expansion of the Navy budget will compete with
expansion of other capabilities. Such options should be considered
during the budget review later this year, but not now.
• Within Navy, near-­term vs. long-­term objectives
• Shipbuilding needed to assure long-­term forces
• But, excessive shipbuilding funding can jeopardize near-­term
capability
• Must operate current forces
• Reduction of carrier force would cut o’seas deployments
with serious effect on perceptions of continuing US commitment,
either in Far East or in Med
• Must maintain current forces
• Backlog of ships awaiting o’haul excessive now—­
degrades readiness, causes reenlistment problems.
• Must support current forces
• In recent past, haven’t had enough funding to buy more
than about half the tactical aircraft required to support the force
structure properly on a long-­term basis; in FY79, won’t be able to buy
enough to offset peacetime accidents.
• Thus, desire to build for future cannot be considered in isola-
tion of pressing current needs.
5 Secret.

• Believe that this SCN program is the biggest we can responsibly
propose
• Predicated on rough average of percentage allocation of Navy
budget to SCN during the post-Vietnam-War period, BUT
• That high an SCN allocation hasn’t allowed us to properly
maintain the ships, buy enough aircraft, etc.
• Predicated on a 3% real Growth in the budget, BUT
• That is higher than we’ve had in the past.
• Predicted on no rise in real terms of the unit cost of ships, BUT
• Real unit costs have risen in the past
• Predicated on ability of shipbuilding industry to deliver, BUT
• We’ve run into serious problems, particularly in the case of
Tridents, SSNs, CGNs, LHAs, etc.
• Thus, we feel that this program, though smaller than we’d
like to see, seems to be at the upper limit of affordability, given fiscal
constraints.
Program)
RATIONALE FOR THE MIX OF SHIPS
• The lead times in shipbuilding (4 to perhaps 10 years for combatants)
and service lives of ships (roughly 30 years) are so long that nobody
can be absolutely sure what tasks the ships we fund today will face in
the future.
• Therefore, we must strive for flexibility in the fleet
• The missions we assumed in developing this plan are substantially
the same as the Navy has carried out in the recent past:
• Maintain forward deployments in peacetime
• The new CVV, and the SLEPs for existing carriers will allow us
to continue to keep 4 carriers deployed o’seas
• Protect the Sea Lines of Communication
• SSNs, FFG–7s, T–AGOSs, and T–ARC will improve our ASW
improve our AAW capability.
• Maintain our capability to respond to crises
• This program will result in more than 500 active ships through
the early 1990s when the last ships in this SCN plan will have been
delivered.
• By holding the SCN program to this level, we will improve our
ability to maintain and operate the existing and newly finished ships.

• The allocation of funds within the $30 billion total is, in order of
magnitude:
• Roughly $8½ billion for AAW forces, including:
• 8 Aegis-­equipped ships
• 11 conversions, upgrading the existing DDG–2 class guided
missile ships
• A roughly similar funding for ASW forces, including:
• 26 FFG–7s
• 12 TAGOS ships to tow SURTASS sonar arrays, greatly improv-
ing our ability to detect and track enemy submarines
• A TARC cable layer to support our vital SOSUS system
• Roughly $6½ billion for strategic forces, including:
• 5 Trident submarines (at 1/year, also in view of shipyard prob-
lems). This will require us to extend Poseidon submarine life-­times
to avoid substantial decrease in SLBM numbers in the late 1980’s and
1990’s.
• A TAK conversion to transport Trident missiles.
• Roughly $2½ billion for aircraft carriers, including:
• One new CVV in FY80—­to be followed by a second in the
out-­years
• The first 2 SLEPs of existing carriers.
• The remaining $3½ billion covers
• Other ships (5 Mine Countermeasures Ships, 2 Amphibious
Assault Ships, 2 Tugs, an oiler, and a destroyer tender)
• Craft (Service craft and landing craft)
• Provisions for outfitting and post-­delivery charges, and for
cost growth and escalation.
• The construction rates of both SSBNs (for strategic purposes) and
SSNs are lower than we would like. But the way to improve that sit-
uation is to reduce their unit cost by reducing some of the expen-
sive requirements, and then build more of them within the amounts
shown.
THE NEED TO REDUCE UNIT SHIP COSTS
• The cost of 3 ships alone—­one Trident submarine, one Nimitz carrier,
and one CGN–42 class guided missile cruiser—­is almost exactly equal
to the entire proposed FY79 shipbuilding budget.
• It is clear that we cannot continue to build such expensive ships on
the one hand, and hope for higher force levels on the other.

• This is not a new development—­the trend to extremely expensive
ships has been going on for more than a decade.
• The issue is the balance between the capability of individual ships
and the size of the Navy.
• In our judgment, the current balance is much too far in favor of high
unit capability and small forces.
• There are actions we can take to improve that balance:
• Instead of Trident, build something similar to the SSBN–640
(Poseidon)
• Instead of SSN–688s, build something similar to the SSN–637
• Instead of CGN–42, build more DDG–47s
• The capability of the substitute ships is individually less than the
ships they would replace, but the capability of the force built and oper-
ated for the same cost, we believe, is higher.
SUMMARY
• We believe that this SCN program:
• Is the largest we can propose within the fiscal guidance.
• If the Defense Budget is increased over the present guidance,
other forces should compete with naval forces for the increase.
• Strikes a proper balance between near-­term and long-­term needs.
• Will help preserve enough funds to meet current commitments
and keep our forces maintained and ready, while
• Providing an increase in the number, and an even bigger increase
in the capability, of our ships for the future.

58.
Memorandum From the Acting Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff (Jones) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
JCSM–95–78
Washington, March 21, 1978
SUBJECT
SALT and Essential Equivalence (U)
1. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff have been carefully evaluating the
impact which the emerging SALT II agreement could have on essen-
tial equivalence, strategic stability, and, ultimately, the US deterrent
posture. Their concerns stem primarily from past and projected force
trends but are compounded by recent international events.
2. (TS) The period since the signing of the SALT I agreement has
been marked by a fundamental difference in the manner in which the
United States and the Soviet Union have approached force modern-
ization within the letter and the spirit of negotiated arms control. The
chart below summarizes the key trends:
STRATEGIC FORCE MODERNIZATION (1972–1977)
ICBM
USSR
—4 new systems deployed
—Throwweight advantage further increased
—Megatonnage lead increased
—Accuracy substantially increased, reducing US advantage
—5 new systems being developed
US
—MINUTEMAN III procurement terminated
—Hardening/accuracy improvements
—MX development slowed twice
SLBM/SSBN
USSR
—1 new SLBM deployed
—3 new SSBNs deployed
—3 new SLBMs and 1 new SSBN being developed
—Marked increase in launchers
US
—POSEIDON deployment continued
—TRIDENT I and II SLBM developments slowed
—TRIDENT SSBN development slowed
BOMBERS
USSR
—Deployment of intercontinental-­capable BACKFIRE begun
US
—B–1 canceled
—Cruise missile development accelerated
STRATEGIC DEFENSE
USSR
—Vigorous ballistic missile defense (BMD) R&D
—Modernized active air defenses
—Aggressive civil defense
—ASAT capabilities developed
US
—BMD site deactivated
—Moderate BMD R&D
—Active air defenses reduced
—Quiescent civil defense program
advantages (e.g., MIRVed systems and accuracy) previously enjoyed
by US Forces have been eroded. Past US restraint has failed to moderate
the qualitative and quantitative pace of Soviet modernization. In fact,
tinuing Soviet momentum during the period of the anticipated SALT II
treaty.2 Projections into the 1980’s can be summarized as follows:
ICBM
USSR
—Continued deployment of new systems
—Accuracy comparable to US
263, CIA Files, National Intelligence Estimates and Related Reports and Correspondence,

US
—Continued development of MX (option to deploy)
—MK–12A reentry vehicle
SLBM/SSBN
USSR
—3 new SLBMs deployed
—1 new SSBN deployed
US
—TRIDENT I SLBM deployed
—TRIDENT SSBN deployed
—Continued development of TRIDENT II SLBM
BOMBERS
USSR
—New heavy bomber deployment likely
—BACKFIRE available in relatively large numbers
US
—Cruise missiles deployed (possibly range-­limited)
—Cruise missile carrier option
—Continued reliance on aging B–52
STRATEGIC DEFENSE
USSR
—Continued vigorous BMD R&D
—Continued improvements in active air defenses
—Expanded protection of critical facilities/personnel
US
—Continued moderate BMD R&D
—Continued peacetime airspace surveillance and control (no
“unopposed access”)
—Modest improvements in civil defense planning
4. (TS) There is a particular disparity in the projected improve-
ments for the systems not included in the 1,320 sublimit. The Soviets
have extensive modernization programs across the board, in contrast
to very limited US activity in this area.
5. (TS) In summary, the NIE projects that Soviet strategic forces
will become more powerful and flexible than they are today and,
even under constraints along the lines now being negotiated in SALT,

estimates that Soviet intercontinental offensive strength will grow in
relation to that of the United States between now and the early 1980’s.
6. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe these trends are very serious
and merit particular scrutiny in the context of other Soviet behavior.
Soviet intransigence on a variety of international issues is consistent
with a growing Soviet perception of a shift in the relative balance of
power in their favor.
7. (TS) The Soviets appear to be actively seeking such a shift. NIE
“insure that their strategic forces and supporting elements . . . will sup-
port the perception that the strategic balance is continuing to shift in
the USSR’s favor.” If this objective were to be attained, the framework
of essential equivalence would be undermined. As you indicated in the
Consolidated Guidance summary for the President, the consequences
might well be attempted political coercion of the United States and/or
US allies.
you specified the following four conditions for essential equivalence:
a. Soviet strategic nuclear forces should not become usable instru-
ments of political leverage, diplomatic coercion, or military advantage;
b. Nuclear stability, especially in a crisis, should be maintained;
c. Any advantages in force characteristics enjoyed by the Soviets
should be offset by US advantages in other characteristics; and
d. The US posture should not be in fact, and should not be seen
as, inferior in performance to the strategic nuclear forces of the Soviet
Union.
9. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff agree that satisfying these condi-
tions would preserve essential equivalence. They believe, however, that
purely statistical measures of theoretical destructive potential should
not be allowed to substitute for a more comprehensive assessment of
the strategic balance, including offsetting capabilities, the role of per-
ceptions, and differences in production base. Of particular concern
should be the “breakout” potential of the Soviets to expand their strate-
gic offensive and defensive capabilities rapidly in time of crisis.
10. (TS) Any SALT agreement must be viewed in the context of the
above events and trends. In addition to adequate verification, which
is fundamental to any SALT agreement, a most significant measure
of the acceptability of a SALT agreement must be whether it provides
a framework which allows both sides to exercise rights to maintain
strategic stability. The emerging agreement generally provides this
framework. However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are concerned with: the
additive potential strategic contribution of BACKFIRE, which may
3 See Document 48.

not be counted in the strategic nuclear delivery vehicle aggregate; the
adverse strategic potential created by the Soviet retention of the asym-
metrical rights to heavy ICBMs; and the disparity in the respective US
and Soviet modernization programs. The strategic nuclear equilibrium
in the 1980’s can be made possible by an equitable and verifiable agree-
ment, but such equilibrium can only be assured by continued force
modernization under the terms of the agreement.
11. (TS) Accordingly, the Joint Chiefs of Staff urge the following:
a. Favorable resolution of key SALT issues in line with the views
expressed previously in memorandums to you and the President.4
b. Reassessment of the Five Year Defense Program strategic force
programs in light of the latest evidence of Soviet capabilities and inten-
tions. These programs should be structured and paced in such a man-
ner as to offset Soviet actions projected under a SALT II agreement.
c. Adoption of a strong administration position to modernize US
strategic nuclear forces to the extent permitted and required to maintain
essential equivalence as you have defined it, concurrent with continued
negotiations for equitable and reciprocal reductions in nuclear arms.
12. (U) The Joint Chiefs of Staff request that you support their
views and forward them to the President.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
David C. Jones
4 Attached but not printed is a list of references to prior memoranda.

59.
Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre) to President Carter1
Washington, March 22, 1978
SUBJECT
The Naval Shipbuilding Plan
As we have discussed, Secretary Brown will be sending you this
That plan, costing about $30 billion, can be accommodated within our
current long-­range budget projections for Defense. I have reviewed the
plan and, while I have some reservations about it, I recommend that you approve
it. Harold’s proposal does not change the $4.7 billion shipbuilding pro-
gram included in your 1979 budget. It essentially takes the Navy’s long
term goals and goes about purchasing the requisite ships at a slightly
slower rate than that suggested in the Navy’s report to Defense. The
plan deemphasizes the extremely costly nuclear surface combatants
favored by the Armed Services Committees. As you know, both Armed
Services Committees in recent days have suggested the Administration
consider a budget amendment increasing the 1979 shipbuilding pro-
gram. (Both Committees recommended about a $2 billion increase in
the Defense $126 billion total to the Congressional Budget Committees
last week).
I have four specific concerns which I believe you should consider
as we set our long range Navy policy:
Naval Forces Study: Secretary Brown’s plan is supported by the
recent Navy Forces Study.3 I found this study disappointing in that it
did not question existing Navy missions or examine alternative ways
of performing those missions. The Study argues for a completely flex-
ible force in the future, making no real judgments as to the relative
merits of the various competing interests within the Navy (carriers,
surface combatants, attack subs, etc). The recommended building rate
ships in the 1990’s. The Navy’s earlier long term goal of 600 ships
would not be reached, however, beyond the year 2000. Ship retire-
ments in the Century’s final decade would, when combined with the
recommended annual building rate, lead to an ultimate 400–450 ship
2 See Document 57.
3 Not found.

force. In conjunction with our Allies, this force level will in our view
be sufficient to assure naval superiority over the Soviet Union and its
allies.
instead of the earlier planned 7, primarily because of construction
difficulties at Electric Boat,4 but also for overall cost reasons. Given
the potentially serious strategic signal associated with such a reduc-
tion, it may be premature to reduce the plan at this time. By rephas-
ing Trident procurement, we could continue to plan for seven in the
1979–83 timeframe. This would avoid an alarmist reaction by those
who fear that our strategic posture relative to that of the Soviets is on
the decline. If you decide to continue plans for 7 Tridents, Defense is
likely to request additional funds above the $30 billion. If you desire to
keep 7 Tridents in the plan, I recommend that a rephasing such as cited below
be followed, and that you ask Harold to adjust other ships to stay within your
fiscal guidance:
TRIDENT CONSTRUCTION
OPTIONS
Total
Current Plan
Harold Brown Proposal
OMB Alternative
Cost Growth: The plan includes no funds for cost growth result-
ing from overruns in prior year programs. Over the last 8 years, an
average of $643 million has been added annually to the budget for such
cost growth. Ship deliveries continue to be delayed and these delays
will require more money than is currently budgeted. As a result, cost
growth will continue to be present: Over the 5-­year period, we should
anticipate $2–3 billion of such growth. Again, Defense is likely to press
for increased funding to cover the cost increases. We recommend that the
$30 billion plan be held firm regardless how much cost growth Defense expe-
riences. Only in this way will adequate incentive exist for the Navy to address
their serious overrun problems.
Congressional Salability: The proposed plan is likely to encounter
considerable opposition in the House Armed Services Committee. That
Committee favors a greatly expanded shipbuilding program, especially
more nuclear-­powered ships. The Senate Armed Services Committee
also is likely to favor more ships, but may support the plan if Secretary
Brown forcefully argues for it.
I believe that it is important that we communicate explicitly our
4 Electric Boat, owned by the General Dynamics Corporation, had its major subma-
rine manufacturing center in Groton, Connecticut.

Harold’s five-­year plan (which, including cost growth, averages over
that (a) NATO-­related Army and Air Forces are of first priority, and
(b) the Navy’s severe shipyard problems (multimillion dollar claims
and delays of up to two years in many deliveries) warrant at least one
year of caution as to just how many billions of dollars we can continue
to channel to the problem shipyards in the midst of such difficulties.
In sum, I believe the Defense recommendation strikes an appropriate balance
between long range Navy goals, mid-­term fiscal constraints, and near-­term
shipyard problems.
60.
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Science and
Technology Policy (Press) to President Carter1
Washington, May 1, 1978
SUBJECT
M-X and Minuteman Vulnerability
There is growing acceptance within the Pentagon of the conclu-
sion of our OSTP Vulnerability Panel last fall2 that a commitment to
full-­scale development of the M–X trench mobile system would have
been premature since there were major unresolved vulnerabilities in
this system. A Defense Science Board task force has completed a pre-
liminary analysis of the M–X trench system and has concluded that “it
has disadvantages compared with other proposed concepts sufficient
to rule it out in our view.”3 As a result, emphasis in the Pentagon is
shifting to other multiple aim point systems such as building a large
number of silos (perhaps twenty) for each ICBM so that the Russians
would have to expend a very large number of RVs to threaten our land-­
based ICBM force.
Like the M–X trench system, these alternatives may involve verifi-
cation as well as vulnerability problems. For example, the multiple silo
system would require modification of SALT limitations on numbers
of launchers and on-­site inspection to verify the numbers of missiles
the upper right corner of the memorandum.
2 See Document 43.
3 Carter wrote “I agree” in the right margin next to this sentence.

actually deployed. Other alternatives such as placing a bigger missile
with a larger number of RVs in current Minuteman silos; developing
defensive measures for Minuteman; or shifting more of our strategic
deterrent to the SLBM and cruise missile forces also need to be thor-
oughly examined.
Nevertheless, there may be growing urgency in reaching a deci-
sion on ICBM modernization as a result of recent flight tests by the
Soviets of new SS–18 and 19 RVs which appear to have significantly
improved accuracy. The degree of improvement in these new systems
is uncertain since analysis of data has not been completed; however,
it seems clear that Minuteman may be seriously threatened on an ear-
lier timescale than projected in our report. As a result, I plan to recon-
vene my Panel in the near future to examine Minuteman vulnerability
in light of these developments and to consider alternatives for ICBM
modernization.4
4 Carter wrote “good” in the right margin next to this sentence.
61.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, May 5, 1978
A number of events this week suggest that public attitudes toward
our defense situation, as well as our foreign policy, are changing. It also
seems to me that these issues may play a larger part than usual in an off-­
year Congressional election, although I continue to believe that domes-
tic economic issues, particularly inflation, will be the most important.
Three votes on the budget resolution in the House on Wednesday2
are worth considering. A proposal to shift $4.8B from Defense to other
142). Most significant, Congresswoman Holt’s proposal to cut all the
wrote in the upper right corner of the memorandum: “Harold, OK—I agree. J.”
­Brzezinski sent Brown a copy of the memorandum with Carter’s comment under a
May 9 covering memorandum. (Ibid.)

These votes are consistent with my conclusion that (1) because of infla-
tion there is an overriding concern in the House about the size of the
budget deficit, and therefore a reluctance to add to the overall budget;
(2) there is greater support than ever in recent years for shifting more
expenditures within the budget total toward Defense.
I note also that Joe Kraft in his column yesterday3 said that
although he has long supported detente, he now is deeply concerned
about Soviet military and political gains. Such a change of position is
consistent with the Congressional indications. Both suggest to me that
while public sentiment will still support your decisions about the level
of the Defense budget over a substantial range around our level, there
is now much less leeway on the down side of that level than there was
a year ago.
A group of Republican Senators, after an Easton, Maryland con-
ference, has issued a lengthy “Declaration” critical of Administration
national security and foreign policy.4 They announced that all thirty-­
eight of the Senate Republicans support it, though several have not yet
signed it. This looks to me like an opening gun of a major campaign. I
have said to Zbig that (whether we use it now or pieces of it later) he,
Cy, and I need to put together for our use and yours a response to the
major points raised.
I also see a confluence of questioning and some loss of confidence
among our allies which compounds and feeds back into the domestic
concern about these issues.
I report these attitudes rather than analyzing their causes or sug-
gesting detailed solutions at this point. We have had successes—­the
Panama Canal Treaties, the B–1 decision, the beginning of programs
to revitalize NATO—­and are likely to have more. I believe that most
of our foreign policy and defense decisions, taken singly, have been
correct and that all have been justifiable. Taken together, however, they
have been distorted by some into signals of a weakening in our strength
and resolve.
Part of the problem is, as we have all noted before, that the pub-
lic and the Congress do not have a clear picture what we consider the
relative proportions of the competitive and cooperative aspects of our
relations with the Soviet Union, or of precisely where we propose to
cooperate and where to compete. We should, and I will, place more
emphasis on the new things we are doing in the defense area, to counter
the charges that we merely kill programs. I urge that we try to present
4 The resolution alleged that Democrats had supported “unilateral U.S. disarma-
ment in the face of mounting Soviet military aggressiveness.” (George F. Will, “Republi-

a uniform policy along the lines of your Wake Forest speech,5 and that
our actions on foreign policy issues as well as on Defense program and
budget issues be as consistent with that approach as we can make them.
Visits by you to U.S. forces in Germany, and to Ft. Bragg or to Ft. Hood
and Nellis Air Force Base, which I am proposing in detail in a separate
memo,6 can reinforce this approach.
I believe it would be extremely useful for us to talk about these
observations, which I take very seriously, along with Zbig, Cy, Ham
Jordan, Frank Moore, or anyone else you think should be present.
Harold Brown
1980, vol. I. Foundations of Foreign Policy, Document 72.
6 Not found.
62.
National Intelligence Estimate1
Washington, May 9, 1978
[Omitted here are the cover pages, table of contents, and the
preface.]
KEY JUDGMENTS
1. Soviet leaders appreciate that military strength is the foundation
of the USSR’s status as a global superpower, and will remain through
the coming decade the key to its prospects in the world arena. They are
sensitive to the view of some Westerners that other, nonmilitary factors,
particularly international economic ones, may be acquiring a dominant
role, and they know that the Soviet Union has little hope in the foresee-
able future of becoming truly competitive with the advanced nations
rity, Huntington, Box 44, Net Assessment II: Strategic Balance, US/USSR. Secret; Noforn;
Nocontract. According to one of the cover pages, the Director of Central Intelligence sub-
mitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of the National Foreign Intelli-
gence Board, unless noted otherwise in the text. The Central Intelligence Agency and the
intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Treasury, Energy, and Defense,
and the NSA participated in the preparation of the estimate. The Assistant Chief of Staff
for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Director of Naval Intelligence, Department
of the Navy; and the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force,
also participated in the study.

of the West in economic, technological, and social-­cultural sources of
influence and attraction. But they are persuaded by Soviet ideology,
Russian history, and by their own life experiences to see political con-
flict involving the use of force or conducted in its shadow as the motor
driving development both within states and in the international sys-
tem. Their self-­interest as well as their beliefs lead them in the con-
duct of foreign affairs to press global and regional issues of security,
in which the weight of their military power can be brought to bear to
political advantage.
2. To the extent that comprehensive comparisons are possible, it is
clear that the USSR on balance has overcome its past military inferiority
in relation to the United States. The Soviets know the USSR still lags
in many defense-­related technologies. They are envious and appre-
hensive about the latent technological potential of the US as a military
competitor. But they have learned from their long experience of mili-
tary competition with the United States that powerful domestic polit-
ical pressures, of a kind to which they are largely immune, reinforce
American criteria of military sufficiency, which are different from their
own, in inhibiting fuller exploitation by the US of its enormous military
potential.
3. The Soviets judge themselves to have a robust equality with the
US in central strategic nuclear forces in which numbers and some char-
acteristics, such as missile throw weight, compensate for technological
deficiencies in their forces. Most important, the buildup of Soviet forces
over the past 15 years has created a situation in which the US could
not plausibly attack the USSR without the virtual certainty of massive
retaliation.
4. While the Soviets are aware that the converse is also true, they
are conscious of emergent strategic capabilities that could by the early
1980s be perceived to give the USSR marginal advantages in a central
strategic conflict—­for example, active and passive defenses, a surviv-
able command and control system, and superior countersilo capabil-
ities. Beyond that time frame, however, they are concerned that US
progress in areas such as cruise missiles and advanced ICBMs could
work against them should the US successfully exploit its present tech-
nological advantages.
5. The regional military balances that most concern the USSR are
with Europe and China. In both regions the Soviets are relatively con-
fident that they possess clear military superiority, subject to important
qualifications. In Europe, Soviet superiority presupposes successful
conduct of a swiftly initiated offensive drive to the west that could,
however, be thwarted if it triggered large-­scale NATO use of nuclear
weapons or if it failed to achieve victory before NATO could bring its
larger economic and population resources to bear on the course of the

war. In Asia, Soviet military superiority would permit the USSR to
defeat Chinese military forces in a wide range of conflict situations. But
it could not at the nuclear level assuredly prevent China from striking a
limited number of Soviet urban areas; nor would it permit the USSR to
invade and occupy central China.
6. The Soviets have made steady progress in building naval capa-
bilities to operate in the world’s oceans beyond the coastal defense
regions traditionally dominant in their planning. While this effort was
driven largely by the pursuit of strategic defensive objectives in the
central nuclear competition, it has carried the Soviet Navy to a role of
distant area operations where showing the flag in peacetime and a con-
tingent capability to disrupt US naval and maritime operations in the
event of hostilities serve Soviet foreign policy interests.
7. Growing military aid efforts have served as the main conveyor
of Soviet influence into the Third World. Under permissive conditions,
Soviet military assistance and support to proxies have come to be an
effective form of bringing Soviet power to bear in distant areas. Recent
large-­scale support to Cuban expeditionary elements in Africa has
shown Soviet willingness to press forward, and to explore the limits
of the USSR’s ability to project military power short of direct combat
involvement.
8. The irony of the Soviet military situation overall is that, on
one hand, direct comparison between the USSR and its major oppo-
nents shows the USSR in increasingly favorable positions, but, on the
other hand, Soviet military doctrine and security aspirations continue
to present exceedingly heavy demands. Thus, in the strategic nuclear
arena, Soviet doctrine posits the real possibility of a central nuclear war
and of one side prevailing in such a conflict. This in turn sets to Soviet
policy the task of providing effective war-­fighting capabilities, beyond
those of pure deterrence, that are difficult to attain against a deter-
mined opponent. Similarly, unremitting Soviet defense efforts are seen
as required for confident superiority over NATO and, in less degree,
over China. The military policy of the USSR continues to be influenced
by a deeply ingrained tendency to overinsure against perceived foreign
threats and to overcompensate for technological deficiencies. But no
less than these influences, the ambitious standards of Soviet military
doctrine, deriving from tenacious notions of international competition,
drive Soviet military efforts and sustain Soviet anxiety about prevailing
military balances.
9. The Soviets see their growing military strength in general as pro-
viding a favorable backdrop for the conduct of foreign policy. It causes
the USSR to be perceived as a natural and legitimate participant in
the development of global and regional security arrangements. Soviet

leaders ascribe the progress of Moscow’s policy of detente since the late
1960s in large measure to the growth of their military power.
10. Where a palpable Soviet military preponderance can be
achieved, the Soviets believe that it will, over time, encourage regional
actors to seek security arrangements based on Moscow’s good will,
with attendant political and military concessions, especially as the
alternatives of military self-­help and countervailing alliances prove less
attractive. They view this as a long-­term process best promoted by per-
sistent diplomatic efforts and the steady amassing of military strength
to alter the security environment gradually while avoiding unwanted
crises. But the Soviets know that this process is subject to disruption by
circumstances they can neither foresee nor be wholly confident they
can control. In any crises that may supervene, military power is seen by
the Soviets as necessary for defending their interests and for levering
crisis solutions in directions acceptable to them.
11. Soviet foreign policy has long displayed both conservative and
assertive behavior. Soviet leaders themselves see their foreign policy
as essentially revolutionary, resting on the expectation of fundamental
changes in the international system and within the states that constitute
it, and deliberately seeking—­though cautiously and intermittently—­to
help bring these about. Their ideology and their experience in world
affairs impart to Soviet leaders a mentality that permits near-­term tem-
perance and agile pragmatism to coexist with a deep sense of manifest
destiny for Soviet power in the world. It sustains Soviet policy in steady
pursuit of systemic shifts in the world through small steps, and guards
its fundamental beliefs against demoralization and massive reapprais-
als in the face of reversals. The Soviets see the sweep of postwar inter-
national affairs as broadly confirming their convictions about the march
of history. Because their beliefs about the course of world politics have
deep cultural roots and stem from an ideology that confers domestic
political legitimacy, even profoundly novel or disconcerting develop-
ments, such as the appearance of nuclear weapons and the defection of
China, have not undermined their governing orthodoxy.
12. On balance, the performance of Soviet foreign policy under
their rule is rated by present Soviet leaders as a success, and much of
this success is attributed to the cumulative political impact of growing
Soviet military power. This judgment is drawn in the light of a previous
history of gross inferiority and desperate conditions in which options
for assertive foreign policies were seriously constrained. Not only did
Soviet policy succeed in averting disastrous possibilities, but it secured
acknowledged coequal superpower status with the United States and
moved the Soviet Union steadily into new areas at relatively low risk.
13. Although they expect fluctuations in their fortunes abroad, the
Soviets still see basic trends in the world as positive for themselves and

negative for the United States. In seeking to capitalize on these trends,
however, they are beset by problems of various kinds. In areas where
they have actively sought to advance their influence they have suffered
a number of setbacks, some of them very costly. Events of recent years
in Egypt, Sudan, and Somalia provide examples. Elsewhere, as in Viet-
nam, Angola, and Ethiopia, they have been more successful. Although
not oblivious to the costs and risks incurred by these enterprises, the
Soviets see them as the inevitable accompaniment of a forward policy
in the Third World.
14. While the Soviets have won recognition as the strongest mil-
itary power in Europe and a legitimized role in the management of
European security, they have not succeeded in winning the full respect
for Soviet interests and preferences that they have sought. Some domes-
tic developments in Western Europe, particularly the rising fortunes of
Eurocommunism, give new promise of weakening NATO, but at a pos-
sible cost of further diminishing Soviet influence over European Com-
munist parties and eventually of contaminating Eastern Europe.
15. To Soviet leaders the strategic meaning of US-Soviet detente is
the management of change in world politics in ways that control costs
and risks while constraining as little as possible Soviet efforts to exploit
fresh opportunities for gain. Such processes as the strategic arms lim-
itation talks (SALT) and US-Soviet cooperation in regional security
negotiations allow the superpower competition to be monitored and
modulated. On occasion, they offer Soviet leaders opportunities for
exerting by diplomatic means influence that might not otherwise be
available or require more costly or risky measures to pursue. These
processes also oblige Soviet leaders to calibrate their own competitive
behavior against the risks of disrupting detente, particularly in areas
where core US interests are perceived to be deeply engaged. This con-
cern does not, however, appear to have reduced the USSR’s willingness
to pursue competitive advantages vigorously in areas such as Africa,
where Moscow may perceive US interests to be less deeply engaged or
US policy more hamstrung by domestic political constraints.
16. The Soviets probably expect to continue the military programs
they have pursued in the last 10 years, with some marginal shifts in
emphasis. They probably expect to improve somewhat on their present
strategic relationship with the United States, at least temporarily in the
period 1980–85; to keep their overall advantages in relation to China
and NATO; and to make steady progress in the kinds of forces and
access necessary for projection of their influence in third areas.
17. Soviet international behavior in the 1980s is likely to include
a purposeful, cautious exploration of the political implications of the
USSR’s increased military strength. Soviet policy will continue to be
competitive and assertive in most areas of engagement with the West.

In crisis situations, the Soviets are likely to be more stalwart in defense
of their declared interests than they have been in the past, particularly
during the Khrushchev period. They will probably continue to assert
the right to experiment with unsettled political-­military conditions, as
they have recently in Africa, in search of enduring new beachheads of
influence.
18. On the whole, such a prognosis, while projecting some increase
in the assertiveness of Soviet external behavior, represents a fairly nat-
ural evolution of the USSR’s foreign policy. The changes from past
behavior that are implied are gradual and unbroken, and are rooted
in the basic perceptions and values that have long informed Soviet
policy. It is therefore essentially a prognosis of continuity, taking into
account, however, the greatly enhanced military capabilities and more
insistent claims to a global role associated with the USSR’s emergence
as a superpower.
19. Soviet leaders are aware that current trends they now discern in
international relations could be disrupted by large discontinuities they
can envisage but not predict. Among those that would present major
challenges to their interests are: reversion of the US to a “cold war” pos-
ture, large-­scale Sino-American military cooperation, new wars in the
Middle East or Korea threatening Soviet-American military confronta-
tion, and widespread violent upheaval in Eastern Europe. Other abrupt
changes could present major new opportunities: Sino-Soviet accom-
modation, revolutionary regime changes in Saudi Arabia or Iran, and
defection from the US alliance system of Japan or a major West Euro-
pean state. Soviet leaders probably regard their military investments as
both a hedge against possible adverse contingencies and as providing
options for exploitation of possible windfalls.
20. Soviet leaders are sensitive to a range of domestic problems
that seem likely to become aggravated in the coming decade, but evi-
dently do not now see them as having the potential to raise challenges
of a fundamental kind to the conduct of their foreign policy. In Soviet
conditions, uncertainty, if not crisis, inevitably attends political succes-
sion, which will soon be upon them. Agriculture remains a major drag
on the economy, serious energy and manpower problems are looming,
and Soviet economic growth has slowed to the point where it proba-
bly already lags behind the growth in military spending. Far-­reaching
solutions to these problems might in the future require important shifts
in the pattern of resource allocations and corresponding modifications
of Soviet foreign and military policies, but the Soviet leadership as yet
shows no signs it is preparing for radical new departures.
21. During the coming decade a substantial renovation of the top
Soviet leadership is virtually certain. While the new Soviet leaders will
have been promoted from the same political and social milieu as their

predecessors, generational differences could affect their outlook in
ways important for the future conduct of Soviet foreign and military
policies. To a successor leadership, the USSR’s superpower status may
appear not so much the culmination of prolonged and costly efforts
that must above all be consolidated, but as a point of departure from
which to exert more pervasive leverage on world affairs. Alternatively,
but less likely, younger leaders, lacking the conditioning preoccupa-
tion of their elders with the experience of confronting external threats
from stronger opponents, may be inclined to give overriding priority to
the solution of internal problems which their predecessors allowed to
accumulate.
22. In any event, the new leaders, relatively inexperienced in man-
aging the USSR’s external affairs, will be impressionable in the early
post-Brezhnev years and strongly influenced by their perceptions of
the opportunities and risks of more venturesome foreign policies, on
one hand, and of the costs and benefits of seeking more cooperative
relations with the West, on the other. The quality and effectiveness of
US international policies, particularly in areas of defense, in alliance
cohesion, and in the Third World, are likely to be the principal external
factor shaping the perceptions of new Soviet leaders.
The Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State,
agrees with the general thrust of this Estimate that the USSR will continue
to insist on being treated as a military coequal of the United States and that it
will be no easier—­indeed, perhaps more difficult—­to deal with in the coming
decade. However, he believes this Estimate tends to overemphasize the Soviets’
perceptions of their own military power and undervalues political and eco-
nomic considerations.
Specifically, the Director, INR, believes that the Soviets have a less posi-
tive, even more ambivalent view of the military balance in Europe and would
be less confident of the superiority of the Warsaw Pact’s forces over those of
NATO than the net judgments of the Estimate suggest. INR believes that, in
assessing the balance in Europe, the Soviets are very conservative in their cal-
culations and make a number of assumptions which highlight their own weak-
nesses and Western strengths; the Soviets have greater fear of Western attack
than the Estimate suggests. For these reasons, INR would draw the following
implications of Soviet perceptions of the European balance:
—INR believes that Soviet programs to improve tactical aviation, upgrade
armored forces, and enhance tactical nuclear capabilities are intended to rem-
edy what Moscow evidently regards as weaknesses rather than to maintain
or enlarge existing advantages. If so, Soviet motives would appear to be more
compelling than the text suggests, and Moscow’s efforts may be more intense.
—We doubt that the Soviets consider themselves to be in an appreciably
better position militarily—­and hence possibly more inclined—­than they were
15 years ago to link a crisis in a third area to Europe. In terms of strategy, Mos-
cow could easily manage to assemble a much superior force against the Western

garrisons in Berlin, just as it could have done in earlier decades; moreover,
the Soviet reckoning of the results of escalating such a localized confrontation
would not be very different from what it was before. The Soviets would still
have to count on the dangers of a major engagement of large ground forces and
its potential for escalation to one or another degree of nuclear warfare.
In addition, INR would note that the arms control motives attributed
to the Soviets in the Estimate are essentially those which would apply to any
participant in arms control negotiations. For example, they reflect a desire to
prevent or slow the competition in areas where they are disadvantaged, and
the desire to trade minimal restraint on their side for maximum restraint on
the other. The Soviets probably see a range of potential benefits—­political and
economic as well as military—­in arms control. At the same time, however, they
also realize that there are practical limits to what arms control negotiations can
accomplish.
[Omitted here is the body of the estimate.]
63.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 9, 1978
SUBJECT
National Security Council Meeting and Lunch with the JCS—Wednesday, May 10.
You are having lunch tomorrow with Harold and the JCS, followed
by a half-­hour NSC meeting. The central focus of both meetings is the
Defense Consolidated Guidance (CG). The lunch will also give you
the opportunity to touch on some particularly sensitive matters with
the JCS, especially those related to SALT and CTB; you may also want
to use the lunch to cover some of the broader policy issues raised by
the CG. At the NSC meeting you may want to move into some of the
more important program issues raised in the CG. Your book contains
back-­up material and NSC analysis of the CG, though it is not essential
that you read this material for these meetings.
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 101, Meetings: President/V-B-B & Turner Breakfasts,
Luncheons & Meeting Topics: 1978. Secret. The date is handwritten. Carter initialed the
first page of the memorandum and wrote at the bottom of it: “Perceptions NATO PRC—
ANZUS—ASEAN—Japan—Korea MidEast/Persian Gulf Eastern Europe Turkey/
Greece.”

The CG is a practical document designed to produce programs and
budgets. Your review of the CG is to allow you to see that major defense
program guidance properly reflects your overall national security pol-
icy, early enough in the defense program/budget process so that pro-
grams can be easily adjusted to reflect your concerns.2
Since the Services are currently drawing up their programs on the
basis of the CG, this is not the point to make specific decisions on weap-
ons programs; but rather to examine the underlying policy assump-
tions and ensure that an adequate range of options is maintained and
examined. You will have further opportunities to examine defense pro-
grams during the OMB Spring Review, your review of DOD’s Status
Report in September, and the final budget review in December.
I think it likely that the Chiefs will make a strong pitch for more
money, based on Soviet military programs and political activity, for
example in the Horn and Afghanistan. While you should take the
opportunity to affirm your interest in doing what is necessary to pre-
serve a strong defense posture regardless of cost, I don’t believe you
should make firm commitments at this point.
The following annotated agenda may help you structure the lunch
and the NSC meeting.
Lunch
1. CTB. You should seek to neutralize any JCS opposition to our
CTB position—­a five year treaty with a review conference in the fifth
year plus Senate ratification of any extension, strong safeguards and
Presidential assurance that any reliability testing required after five
years could be carried out.
2. SALT/Strategic Programs. The Chiefs will be looking for specific
weapons decisions to show that SALT does not imply a slackening in
US efforts to maintain strategic equivalence with the Soviets. The CG
suggests that their concerns would be significantly moderated if we
were to improve our air defenses as an answer to Backfire, commit our-
selves to a new ICBM as an answer to Minuteman vulnerability, and
establish options for a significant expansion of our strategic forces in
order to maintain essential equivalence. The danger is that we could
find ourselves committed to potentially open-­ended programs and still
face military opposition to SALT.
—On air defense, I suggest that you ask the Chiefs how much of
an improvement in air defenses is needed before you make any commit-
ments to air defense improvements.
—On the new ICBM, I suggest that you should not agree to pro-
ceed with full-­scale development of M–X until a survivable basing
2 Carter drew an arrow in the right margin pointing to this paragraph.

mode is identified. However, you may want to reiterate your interest
in examining the possibilities for a Trident II missile that can also be
used by the Air Force. I would also recommend serious consideration
of further improvements in systems that could make the launch-­under-­
attack strategy a less risky proposition if we must eventually adopt it.
—On essential equivalence, I suggest that you endorse develop-
ment of options to expand strategic forces, while reserving on the spe-
cifics. The current political environment would be improved by such
actions; we can drop the options later if the Soviets curtail their strate-
gic build-­up.
3. Navy. This question involves enormously complicated issues
regarding the appropriate missions for the Navy and the forces required
to carry them out. It also involves important questions of foreign and
domestic policy. Unfortunately, the Navy and OSD have become so
polarized on this issue that neither can produce an adequate analyt-
ical basis for making decisions which will be politically credible. For
this reason, I believe you should direct the National Security Council to
develop a plan of action for resolving the larger Navy issues, perhaps
through the PRM/SCC process or through a special NSC organized
group with experts from outside the government.
NSC Meeting
Assuming that you are able to finish the above agenda during the
lunch, you may want to turn to the following topics during the NSC
meeting.
4. NATO Issues. The emphasis of our defense policy on NATO is
manifested in new programs: to expand POMCUS; to increase mod-
estly the size of the Army; to mechanize an additional infantry division;
and to respond to Allied interest in long-­range theater nuclear capabil-
ity. Harold is seeking your affirmation of the relative priorities in the
CG that motivate these programs: NATO over worldwide contingen-
cies; NATO central front over the flanks; early combat over sustaining
capabilities.3
—Priority on early combat capability was stated in PD–18;4 this
priority has been reinforced by recent estimates on reduced warning
time. One of the PD–18 follow-­on studies is examining the sustainabil-
ity issue, including the trade-­off with early combat capability; it will be
ready for your review in the fall. I suggest you reserve judgment on any
changes in this priority until you have reviewed this study.
3 Carter underlined “NATO,” “NATO central front,” and “early combat” in this
sentence.
4 See Document 31.

—Our studies prior to PD–18 revealed severe deficiencies on
NATO’s central front, while finding that the flanks could be defended,
but with some loss of territory. The strategic value of France and Ger-
many also imply a higher priority to the central front than the flanks.
Though the need for some priority on the central front is established,
the CG recognizes that it does not provide an analytical basis for judg-
ments on the relative priority accorded the flanks and the central front
and promises further work.
—To meet the PD–18 directive to maintain a force for global contin-
gencies in Korea, the Middle East, and the Persian Gulf, the CG asserts
as tentative guidance that a corps-­sized force (one Marine and 2 Army
divisions) with support for 60 days would be needed.5 Given the fact
that we have not analyzed the requirements for such contingencies, I
do not believe you should go beyond the general guidance of PD–18.
Several difficult questions are apparent—­what political circumstances
might cause us to employ military forces outside of NATO, what deter-
rent forces would be necessary to inhibit warfighting, and what are the
political ramifications of seriously thinking about such contingencies?
Cy and I need to work with Harold on these problems in the coming
year so as to provide us a better basis for future force planning.
While I believe you can safely endorse Harold’s programs as use-
ful planning targets and as appropriate reflections of your defense pol-
icy, you should probably avoid blanket endorsements of the degree
to which Harold has implemented these priorities: all three impact
directly on the missions and required force levels of the Navy.
On theater nuclear forces Secretary Brown is directing the Air Force
to plan on European GLCM deployments in the early 80s—­specifically
the Tomahawk, which is capable of 2500 km though this range could be
shortened. He also directs the Air Force to develop a plan for a new 2000
km MRBM—­which would probably be available in the late 80s. This is
a crucial issue that could shape the nature of our relations with Europe
for a decade. However, this guidance heavily prejudices any future
decisions on NATO long-­range strike capability. First, it establishes a
requirement for long range capability, which you have not yet decided
is needed. Second, it tilts the decision toward GLCM because (1) the
new MRBM should not be available until well after GLCM, and (2) the
range of the MRBM is shorter than GLCM. Nonetheless, MRBMs could
have a number of military advantages compared to GLCM (speed of
flight, penetration) and political advantages (fewer arms control prob-
lems, more direct response to SS–20 and therefore more difficult to pro-
pagandize against).
5 Carter underlined “Korea” and “Middle East” in this sentence, and wrote “PRC”
below.

For this reason, I suggest that you ask DOD for a less definitive
statement of a long-­range requirement and a more evenhanded treat-
ment of the hardware options, including examination of a 1500 km
MRBM6 based on the existing Pershing system that could be available
in the same time frame as GLCM; and an entirely new missile with the
same range as GLCM (2500 km) that would be available later. How-
ever, you need to be careful neither to endorse a requirement for more
NATO long range capability while asking for more options nor to give
the impression that you oppose such a requirement.

Enclosure

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter7
Washington, May 5, 1978
You and I and Charles Duncan will be meeting with the Joint
Chiefs of Staff for lunch on Wednesday, May 10th. This will be followed
by a meeting of the NSC (Dave Jones will be the only Chief present) to
which Jim McIntyre has also been invited. The announced subject in
both cases is the Consolidated Defense Guidance. I hope that the bulk
of the discussion in both sessions will center on the elements of that
guidance that deal with foreign policy, defense strategy, and defense
programs, though inevitably the fiscal guidance portion is also likely
to be touched upon.
If you care to examine some materials in advance of the meeting, I
suggest that you re-­read the 10-­page summary of the major issues and
features of the DOD Consolidated Guidance for Fiscal Year 80–84 and
my accompanying memorandum to you dated 10 March.8 (Copies are
attached.)
The Chiefs, I think, may be more outspoken than at previous meet-
ings. My impression from their remarks to me is that they value the
opportunity to interact with you, but have concluded from their past
experience that these interactions have not produced decisions they
consider favorable. They were particularly disappointed with the bud-
get decisions in the Fiscal 79 budget—­decisions that some of them saw
as contrary to the points that they raised in their December 14th break-
fast with you. They are rather pessimistic in general about the prognosis
6 Carter underlined the phrase “examination of a 1500 km MRBM.”
7 Secret.
8 Attached but not printed is Brown’s March 10 memorandum to Carter, which is
printed as Document 54.

(from the U.S. point of view) concerning Soviet politico-­military actions
throughout the world. You can expect to hear that changes even since
March in the Horn of Africa and in Afghanistan have reinforced their
pessimism. They may well raise the issue of whether we are doing
enough in Defense to meet your direction in PD–18 that the United
States will “maintain an overall balance of military power between the
U.S. and its allies on the one hand and the Soviet Union and its allies on
the other at least as favorable as now exists.”
Dave Jones may note that the current program guidance corre-
sponds roughly with the enhanced budget level of the fiscal guidance.
After a 2% budget scrub, the enhanced level is about 5% above the five-­
year top line that you have approved at the beginning of the period,
and about 9% above at the end of that period. This implies that at the
approved budget levels for the out-­years, substantial cuts in present
program plans will be required. By mid-­summer, after the Service
requests have been submitted to me and reviewed, I expect to be able to
present a clearer picture of just what each Service and the Department
of Defense as a whole would be able to do with funding levels higher or
lower than that now approved by you for the out-­years.
Dave Jones may also want to speak to the strategic balance and to
intra-­theater airlift. Jim Holloway is likely to talk about the size of the
Navy, and its role on the NATO flanks; Bernie Rogers may speak to the
question of sustainability.
What the Department of Defense most needs from you at this
point is your reactions to some of the issues raised in the Consolidated
Defense Guidance Summary, particularly your views about which geo-
graphical areas we need to concentrate on and what assumptions are
justified about how we would plan to support our interests in these
areas.
Harold Brown

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense9
Washington, undated
DOD FISCAL GUIDANCE
If not the most important issue in the Consolidated Guidance (CG),
the size of the Defense budget in FY 80 through FY 84 is certainly high
on the list. In accord with an earlier agreement with the OMB, the basic
Fiscal Guidance for DoD planning is based on the $126 billion submis-
sion to the Congress for FY 79. For the five years covered in the CG, it
grows at slightly less than 3% annually in terms of real TOA.
I think it is clear that the Defense program must grow in real terms,
given the obvious and continuing growth on the Soviet side. The par-
ticular growth rate allowed in the CG is tied more to the commitment
we have jointly undertaken with our NATO allies than it is to any firm
conviction that it will assure, in the words of PD–18, that “the United
States will maintain an overall balance of military power between the
United States and its allies on the one hand and the Soviet Union and its
allies on the other at least as favorable as that that now exists.” That is
an important goal, and one to which I firmly subscribe. Unfortunately,
it is hard to measure that balance in any precise and unambiguous way.
And of course we cannot be sure as to what the Soviet forces of the
future will turn out to be. Thus, there is inevitably a lot of judgment
involved in deciding whether the Fiscal Guidance in the CG is or is not
enough for us to be able to meet that basic objective stated in PD–18.
To further complicate the issue, it is not merely a question of
whether you, or I, or the Joint Chiefs of Staff feel that the Fiscal Guid-
ance is high enough to assure maintenance of the current balance. The
perceptions of that balance—­and particularly of the trend in that bal-
ance—­on the part of Soviets, on the part of our allies, on the part of the
third world, and even on the part of the United States public, can have
a major effect on what actually happens on the world scene. So we have
to judge not only how we view the trend in that balance, but also how
we think others will view it.
Though there is no way to make such a difficult and critically
important judgment simple, I do hope to illuminate the issue some-
what better than it has been in the past. This year, instead of asking the
Services to submit only programs to match the basic level of the ­Fiscal
Guidance, I have asked them also to submit modifications of those
9 Secret.

programs to meet both higher and lower spending levels. The spread
on either side of the basic level will start out at ±5% in FY80, rising to
±9% by FY84. This should allow us to consider two kinds of possibil-
ities: reallocations within a given budget level; and net changes in the
total budget level. For example, if one Service should propose a par-
ticularly attractive program at its augmented level, we could consider
adopting part or all of it, and selecting in compensation an offsetting
amount of the other Services’ programs at the decremented level.
On the other hand, we will be able to combine all the incremented
programs (or portions of them) to see what larger Defense budgets
would buy, or combine all the decremented programs to see what we
would have to give up with smaller Defense budgets. I am sure we will
be able to do that much—­to describe the effects in terms of force struc-
ture. I will also do my best to describe for you what those effects imply
in terms of practical capability.
Therefore, I think that then, rather than now, will be a better time
for you to judge the adequacy of the Fiscal Guidance. For the moment,
there are two things in this connection of which you should be aware.
First, the Fiscal Guidance represents a cut of roughly 5% from the pre-
vious Five Year Defense Plan (submitted by the Ford Administration in
January 1977 and revised by us in a rather pro forma manner in Febru-
ary of 1977). It will thus force compensating cuts in previously planned
procurement, force structure, operations, R&D, or whatever. While that
is hardly a palatable prospect for the Military Departments, I think it is
important that the Five Year Defense Plan be kept realistic rather than
fanciful.
The second point is that the current Fiscal Guidance is particularly
tight in the case of the Department of the Navy. The CG notes that there
is a real possibility that our current naval force structure cannot be sup-
ported for long within the fiscal limits implied by the CG. The basic
problem is that the unit costs of Navy hardware as a whole—­ships,
aircraft, submarines—­are rising faster than the Defense budget and the
Navy’s share of it. Three ships we are considering for the FY80 pro-
gram (a Trident submarine, a nuclear-­powered cruiser, and a mid-­sized
conventional carrier) would alone cost almost $4 billion—­not much
less than our entire FY79 program (though that program is somewhat
smaller than normal). In recent years the Navy has been able to buy
only about half the tactical aircraft it needs to support a properly mod-
ernized force on a long-­term basis; in FY79, it will not be able to buy
enough aircraft even to offset its expected peacetime losses. The CG
directs a 14% cut in our amphibious assult shipping force in an effort to
reallocate funds to higher priority needs.
This situation faces us with something of a dilemma. On the one
hand, we could decide just to do the best we can at the current level of

funding. Though I suspect we might see some reduction in near-­term
naval capability as a result, the full effects would manifest themselves
only a decade or more from now when deliveries of the relatively small
number of ships we can fund today will prove inadequate to replace
the ships that will have to be retired then, and force levels will have to
drop.
On the other hand, we could fund the Navy at a higher level—­
perhaps $3 billion higher annually just to meet the Navy’s desired ship-
building program—­today. If that were done within the current DoD
budget by transferring funds from the other Services, I have no doubt
it would jeopardize our efforts to improve our capability (and partic-
ularly our early capability) in the Central Front of NATO—­one of our
most important objectives, and a key thrust of the CG (which I will
discuss further below). If it were done not by transferring funds from
the other Services, but by adding to the DoD budget, we would still
be faced with the question of whether we would rather spend that $3
billion that way—­to maintain the Navy’s capabilities a decade or more
from now—­or whether those funds should not also be applied to our
immediate, pressing needs for the Central Front or to ground and air
forces for contingencies elsewhere.
That, of course, is a classic problem of balancing near-­term against
long-­term goals. Though I can describe the alternatives for you, the
judgment has to be subjective, and you should be aware of the problem.
I would like to turn next from the general subject of the level of
the Defense budget to some other fundamental issues, starting in the
strategic nuclear field with the perennial question of how much is
enough. By any reasonable calculation, we are able today, and will be
able tomorrow, to absorb a Soviet nuclear strike and still inflict damage
in retaliation that we would consider catastrophic and intolerable for
the Soviet Union. That should be enough to accomplish our ends if we
have bought sufficient insurance to offset Soviet ASW, air defense, civil
defense, attacks on our command and control, etc., and if the Soviet
leadership viewed the world precisely as we do. But the evidence, such
as it is, is that they do not. We therefore simply cannot be sure that dam-
age predictions that we may view as awesome would, in fact, deter the
Soviet leadership from nuclear attacks.
I noted above the importance of how the Soviets, our allies, the
third world, and even we perceive the overall balance of military
power. That applies as well—­indeed particularly—­to the strategic bal-
ance. Should that balance be perceived as significantly in favor of the
Soviets, it is conceivable that they would be emboldened to attempt
political coercion, not only of us, but of our allies, whose will to resist
could well be undermined should they perceive our strategic forces to
be markedly inferior to those of the Soviets.

Thus, the CG notes that the ability to inflict “unacceptable” damage
in retaliation against the Soviet Union is a necessary but not sufficient
criterion. It directs, therefore, that we maintain essential equivalence10
(as does PD–18). This policy has a fundamental effect on the design
of our strategic forces. It is quite different from the so-­called mutual
assured destruction policy we had in the ’60s, and certainly very differ-
ent from a minimum deterrence policy, as indeed it should be.
The need to maintain essential equivalence leads directly into three
related issues discussed in the CG: the Cruise Missile Carrier (CMC);
the SLBM force; and the ICBM force. The CG directs the Air Force to
program the development of a CMC based on transport aircraft, either
military or commercial. We are looking at an option to deploy 100 CMCs
with about 6,000 cruise missiles by FY 87, though we could deploy them
more rapidly [less than 1 line not declassified]. Thus, the CMC gives us
one option to match a very considerable increase in future Soviet forces.
The SLBM force faces a more difficult problem. The Trident build-
ing program has run into serious delays. Its costs have risen to the
point where the Trident program we really need is increasingly diffi-
cult to accommodate within the Navy’s shipbuilding budget without
displacing other important ships (though I view no other ship as equal
in importance to a Trident), and our existing Poseidon submarines are
growing old. If we are limited, either by the budget or by yard capacity,
to one Trident per year, and if we also find we must retire Poseidon
boats at age 25, the CG shows that the number of SLBM launch tubes
will begin to fall after FY87, and be smaller by FY90 than the number
we have now. (The destructive capability of the force, however, though
suffering a temporary dip in the early ’90s, would continue to grow.)
These problems with the SLBM force are troubling. Because of the
tightness of the Navy budget, I have told Secretary Claytor that he can
consider dropping the current Trident building rate from the current
1½ per year to one per year if he feels that the budget level leaves him
no other choice, but that in that case he must also address the problem
of maintaining SLBM launcher levels in the early ’90s. That means, of
course, finding a way to assure that the Poseidon SSBNs can be oper-
ated beyond their planned retirement dates.
The ICBM force issue turns on the growing vulnerability of the
Minuteman force to the increasing number and accuracy of Soviet war-
heads. By FY84, we would expect [less than 1 line not declassified] attri-
tion in the silos if we decided to ride out an attack. Within the next six
months or a year, we will have to decide what to do, and we are study-
ing the issues and running tests in the field to help us with that deci-
sion. Land-­mobile basing of one sort or another with either Minuteman
10 Carter underlined the phrase “maintain essential equivalence.”

or MX missiles is one possibility (MX thus far appearing to be the better
choice). The questions of which basing mode looks best, and of cost, of
vulnerability, of land availability, of ecology, etc., need more study. But
one thing is clear: with a land-­mobile system, it will take at least [less
than 1 line not declassified] to restore the ICBM retaliatory capability, [less
than 1 line not declassified] that we have today. If we feel we must restore
the balance more rapidly so as not to be perceived to be in an inferior
position, we could deploy MX in silos, possibly as early as 1984. If we
had to depend significantly on these missiles in retaliation, we would
probably be driven to a launch-­under-­attack policy.
Another issue in the strategic nuclear area involves defense of
the continent against Soviet bombers. Our policy in recent years has
been not to invest heavily in continental air defense on grounds that it
makes little sense in an era when we are defenseless against ICBMs and
SLBMs.11 However, we have maintained a modest force dedicated to
air defense, and we would plan to supplement it in a crisis with fighter
aircraft that could be made available from the General Purpose Forces
in the CONUS. That policy has been likened to a “Coast Guard of the
air”—­the intention being to prevent overflight provocations and “free
rides”, without really aspiring to substantially reduce US casualties in
an all-­out attack.
While the General Purpose Force aircraft that might be available
the Soviet Backfire has changed the character of the possible threat. In
response, the CG now directs that the equivalent of a wing (nominally
72 aircraft) of F–15s from the Tactical Air Command be made available
for a crisis. There are SALT ratification implications to this issue.
One final strategic issue has to do with civil defense. As you know,
the Soviets have shown great interest and considerable activity in this
field. While I do not believe that that effort significantly enhances the
prospects for Soviet society as a whole following any full-­scale nuclear
exchange, it has obviously had an effect on international perceptions,
particularly in contrast to our small and static civil defense program.
For that reason alone, I believe at least modest efforts on our part could
have a high payoff.12
But beyond perceptions, our studies this past summer have shown
that a relatively modest program, centering on evacuation and some
fallout protection, could increase US survivors from roughly a fifth of
the population to at least half, given a week’s warning of impending
11 Carter underlined “continental air defense” in this sentence, and drew an arrow
in the right margin pointing to it.
12 Carter drew an arrow in the right margin pointing to this sentence.

attack (trying to protect against a bolt-­out-­of-­the-­blue attack would be
immensely expensive). Whether such evacuations are really practical
we cannot tell, but since they may occur spontaneously in a deep crisis,
I believe some planning along those lines would be a wise precaution
in any event. Accordingly, the CG directs the start of such a modest
program in FY80. Its extra cost—­beyond the roughly $100 million we
now spend annually—­would start at about $50 million, rising to about
$200 million a year by FY84.
These strategic issues, and more, are covered in the first of the two
attached excerpts (Section B) from the CG. The second excerpt (Section
C) covers the next general issue I would like to discuss—­our military
participation in the NATO alliance. My memorandum of December
10th to you (“NATO Initiatives and Improvements”) covers a good deal
of the background, and I will not repeat that here. But the CG contains
some important decisions of which you should be aware.
NATO
Planning for NATO in the last administration was based primarily
on a scenario in which a) the Warsaw Pact would mobilize for 30 days
prior to an attack on NATO, and b) NATO would detect and react to
the Pact mobilization a week after it started, and thus have 23 days
to mobilize before war breaks out in Europe. Though we might quar-
rel with some of the details of such a scenario, we do not question its
underlying plausibility. What we do question, however, is the concept
of basing so much of our planning on that single scenario, since it is
but one of many equally plausible scenarios. Therefore, we now plan
instead on being able to meet a Warsaw Pact attack under a variety of
scenarios under the following assumptions.
We believe (and thus assume) that we would be able to detect any
full-­scale Warsaw Pact mobilization in one day after it starts. We next
assume that, within one day thereafter, the NATO nations would begin
to act on that intelligence in at least limited ways, such as increasing
readiness, deploying some forces forward, etc., but not necessarily
mobilizing. Obviously, mobilizing at that point would be very much
to NATO’s advantage, but we recognize that coming to such a momen-
tous decision might take time. (In Europe, mobilization traditionally
bears even more ominous connotations than it does in this country.)
Indeed, we do not want to plan forces that cannot tolerate any delay in
the mobilization decision. Our assumption, therefore, is that that deci-
sion might take as long as four days (i.e., on the 5th day of the Pact
mobilization) unless, of course, the Pact attacks sooner than the 5th day.
Though we make some provisions for earlier (and thus smaller)
attacks, the earliest attack we program against is one of 40 divisions on
the Central Front 4 days after Pact mobilization starts. We also specify

larger possible attacks starting after longer periods of mobilization,
based on our analysis of Warsaw Pact force readiness and logistic con-
straints behind the inter-German border. Our objective now is to be able
to cope not just with an attack occurring after one particular mobiliza-
tion time (and thus of one particular size on D-Day), but rather with an
attack varying appropriately in size and occurring after any mobiliza-
tion time from the 4-­day minimum onward.13
This change has had major ramifications in our planning. With 23
days to prepare before the fighting breaks out, we could do a lot with
mobility forces (particularly with airlift) to move divisions to Europe
and reinforce NATO for the coming attack. But when the problem gets
down to much less than a week’s warning, there is really only one prac-
tical solution: we must preposition equipment in Europe. We have the
passenger airlift to move the troops quickly (especially by comman-
deering our vast commercial fleets under the CRAF program), but there
is no practical way to move their heavy equipment in that short a time.
(This does not mean that cargo airlift has no further utility. It is still just
as important for deployments in non-NATO contingencies, for inter-­
theater lift, possibly even for intra-­theater lift, and it is still needed for
a NATO war, though we cannot count on it for our early requirements.)
The CG thus lays plans for prepositioning equipment for all the
active combat divisions planned for deployment to Europe except for
two very light divisions (the 82nd airborne and the 101st Air Assault)
and the 2nd Division after its withdrawal from Korea.14 This is an ambi-
tious program, and thus it is still in the tentative stage. We need further
analysis of where in Europe we are going to store all that equipment;
we need to make sure it’s not vulnerable;15 we need to make sure our
tentative plan to get all this done by FY84 is practical. Thus, what we
have so far is the outline of a plan that is subject to change. But I has-
ten to add that this is a serious plan, and one of the key elements in
improving our contribution to the alliance. Consequently in the Fiscal
Guidance to the Services, I have diverted funds from the Navy and the
Air Force to the Army to pay for this prepositioning.16 If later analysis
indicates that the scope or timing of this tentative plan is too ambitious,
I will return an appropriate amount of funding to the Navy and Air
13 Carter underlined “attack” and “after any mobilization time from the 4-­day mini-
mum onward” in this sentence, and drew an arrow in the left margin pointing to it.
14 Carter underlined “prepositioning,” “all,” “except,” and “two very light divi-
sions” in this sentence, and drew an arrow in the left margin pointing to it.
15 Carter underlined “vulnerable” and drew an arrow in the left margin pointing
to it.
16 Carter underlined “diverted funds from the Navy” and “for this prepositioning”
in this sentence.

Force. But for the moment, the assumption in the CG is that we will
carry out this important and ambitious program.
Similar reallocations in the Fiscal Guidance have been made for
two other programs to improve our NATO capability. The first is to
the capability of our active heavy divisions. Armored and mechanized
strength is particularly important in Europe, and this is a way of adding
to our real combat power without having to add the overhead involved
in creating new divisions.
The other change in the Fiscal Guidance is to fund the conversion
of the 9th Division from infantry to mechanized. This is still a tentative
program, and we have delayed the start until FY81 to give us time to
finish a study before we commit ourselves to the conversion. The issue
is the proper balance between heavy and light divisions, and a major
factor in that balance is what sorts of forces we need for non-NATO
contingencies—­the subject of the study. At present, the active force
(including the Marines) consists of 8 light and 11 heavy divisions. The
light divisions are preferred for jungle or mountainous terrain, and for
fighting in cities. They are also more easily transported, but are some-
what less mobile on their own. Arguments for conversion of the 9th
to a heavy division are that a larger number of heavy divisions would
help us not only in NATO, but probably also in the Middle East or the
Persian Gulf area, which are likely areas for heavy armored warfare,
and in Korea where, even if the terrain is mostly mountainous, the ROK
forces are likely to need armored or mechanized reinforcement more
than infantry. However, I will reserve judgment on mechanizing the
9th Division. If we should decide against it, I will, of course, return the
funds now set aside for it to the Navy and Air Force.
A major thrust in our NATO planning is our emphasis on early
combat capability. As the CG says, “Our near-­term objective is to assure
that NATO could not be overwhelmed in the first few weeks of a blitz-
krieg war, and we will invest and spend our resources preferentially
to that end. When that assurance is reasonably in hand, we will turn
our attention to whatever additional capability NATO might need to be
able to fight for at least as long as the Warsaw Pact”.
That policy has important ramifications. Our emphasis on prepo-
sitioning is one such, but there are many others. We do not plan to buy
ammunition to sustain our capability to fight in Europe well after our
NATO allies will have run out.18 Much of our antisubmarine warfare
17 Carter underlined “add 9 new heavy battalions,” and drew an arrow in the left
margin pointing to it.
18 Carter underlined “We do not plan,” “ammunition to sustain our capability,” and
“after our NATO allies will have run out” in this sentence, and drew an arrow in the left
margin pointing to it.

capability, which involves long lead times, is planned more against the
future, when we expect to turn our attention to sustaining capability,
than it is against the present, when we must first make sure that NATO
is not overwhelmed even before the first convoys from the United
States can arrive. The utility of low-­readiness reserve units in this kind
of a NATO war would be dubious at best, and we will thus try to move
as much funding as we can to units that can be kept ready enough to
meet our critical early requirements.
There are two justifications for this emphasis. The first is simple
enough: it doesn’t matter how much long-­term sustaining capability
we may have if we cannot hold out for the first few weeks. And we
may not be able to; the current balance of forces gives no cause for
complacency, so our first task is to improve it. The second reason is, I
think, equally practical: our NATO allies have traditionally shown lit-
tle interest in building a sustaining capability, preferring to rely on the
deterrent of nuclear warfare.19 I believe they are now seriously inter-
ested in trying to improve their conventional capability, at least for the
initial fighting.20 But there must be real—­not just planned—­progress in
improving that initial capability, and more confidence on their part that
the Soviets can be held, before they will show any interest in preparing
for a longer war. To face them with both requirements at once would
increase the risk that they would do neither. And until they are ready
to improve their sustainability, there would be little use in our trying to
go it alone: If it’s at all uncertain that the coalition as a whole can stop
the Soviets, it’s obvious that United States forces can’t do it alone (nor
should we).
I mentioned above that the balance of forces in Europe gives no
cause for complacency, though the improvements we are planning will
help. As things stand, it looks as if NATO will be outgunned on the
days after Pact mobilization. The offense traditionally requires a force
superiority, but whether the 80% advantage is enough to tempt them to
attack is unknowable. It is certainly worthy of our concern. We do hold
an advantage in the air-­to-­ground capability of our tactical airpower,
but they outnumber us in terms of aircraft that can be used in air-­to-­air
combat.21
There is one other important issue in connection with NATO. We
have concentrated heavily on the Central Front, yet NATO also faces
threats on its flanks. Aside from military threats, the flank countries
19 Carter underlined “NATO allies” in this sentence.
20 Carter underlined “now,” “interested,” “improve,” and “conventional capability”
in this sentence.
21 Carter underlined “We,” “hold,” “advantage,” “air-­to-­ground,” “they outnumber
us,” and “air-­to-­air combat” in this sentence.

face political pressures from the East. Should they lose confidence in
NATO’s ability to cover the flanks as well as the Central Front, they
may find it more tempting to reach individual accommodations of
one kind or another with the Soviet Union—­to become “Finlandized”.
Once that process of political fission starts, it is hard to predict where
it might end.
We have not neglected the flanks in spite of our concentration on
the Center. However, on the Southern flank, the problems between the
Greeks and the Turks, and the uncertainty of the future complexion of
Italian governments make it difficult to develop any firm fundamental
plans. To the north, the CG recommends planning for the augmentation
of Norwegian defenses with Marine forces and Air Force tactical air, as
well as planning to assure that the Soviets could not overwhelm Iceland
in an effort to control the Greenland-Iceland-United Kingdom gap—­the
site of one of our most important barriers to the entry of Soviet air and
naval forces into the Atlantic.
Nonetheless, the proper balance between attention to the Central
Front and attention to the flanks is also a subjective matter. Our present
concentration on the former is due to a conviction that that is where we
face the greatest threat, and that that is where we risk the most serious
defeat.
I cite all this not to give the impression that the cause is hopeless.
I believe, in fact, that it is more hopeful today than it has been at any
time in the recent past because I believe NATO is beginning to take the
threat seriously, and to do something about it. The problem is soluble;
it will take time, and money, and—­most importantly—­our leadership,
but I believe we are on the right track.
Just as we have a difficult judgment to make, within our planning
for NATO as a whole, as to how much of our effort and attention we
should concentrate on the center as opposed to the flanks, we face a
similar question as to how much of our effort and attention we should
concentrate on NATO as opposed to other contingencies. There are
three other geographical areas of primary concern: the Far East; the
Middle East; and the Persian Gulf. With some exceptions, our analyses
of potential contingencies, our understanding of the effects that differ-
ent kinds and amounts of military force might have, and our explora-
tion of the military alternatives for the United States in those areas are
far less well-­developed than they are in the case of the Central Front of
NATO. We are working to make progress here before the issuance of
next year’s Consolidated Guidance.
In the Far East, the CG notes that our withdrawal from Southeast
Asia, and our planned drawdown of ground forces from Korea, have
led to concern on the part of nations in that area—­allied with us and
otherwise—­as to our continued interest and commitment. The CG

affirms that, to allay such concerns to the degree we can, there will
be no further withdrawals of forces from the Western Pacific beyond
those already scheduled for Korea. (I might note, in that connection,
the strong effect that that policy has on our aircraft carrier force level.
It means that we will have to continue to deploy two carriers in the
Western Pacific. Those, combined with the two deployed carriers in
the Mediterranean, translate into a total carrier force requirement of
12, given practical rotation and overhaul factors. Reducing the carrier
force level to less than 12 would require us to reduce these overseas
deployments in one way or another.) The CG also directs the already
announced increase in Air Force fighter aircraft (from 60 to 72) in Korea,
planning for joint exercises in the analysis of Korean logistic require-
ments, and the examination of low-­cost hedges against the possibility
of ground force redeployment. The Far East section of the CG also dis-
cusses the issue of a Sino-Soviet war, as well as the implications in that
region should we become involved in a world-­wide war with the Soviet
Union.
The Section in the CG on the Middle East notes that while Arab
inventories of military equipment are expected to remain considerably
larger than those of Israel, the ratio is improving for the Israelis, and
we would expect them to prevail in any war at least through 1983. The
CG also notes that the outcome of any associated naval confrontation
between the United States and the Soviet Union would depend heavily
on the amount of prior reinforcement on either side. The normal two-­
carrier force we keep in the Mediterranean would have to be doubled
for us to have confidence in its survival if opposed by the Soviets in
the Eastern Mediterranean. [4 lines not declassified] The CG discusses
both the Soviets’ and our capability to intervene with military force in
a Mid-East war, and directs that we maintain the capability to counter
Soviet intervention.
The concern we attach to the Persian Gulf area is noted in the very
front of the CG with the words: “events in the Persian Gulf could soften
the glue that binds the (NATO) alliance together as surely as could an
imbalance of military force across the inter-German border”. The sec-
tion in the CG covering the Persian Gulf outlines the military forces in
the area, including the local Soviet threat, and discusses United States
options, such as the possible resupply of Iran, defense of oil facilities
and sea lines of communication, and even the use of US forces in the
area. However, pending results of current studies, we are not at the
point of being able to draw many conclusions with confidence. For the
moment, the CG directs maintenance of the current Middle East Force,
intermittent naval and tactical air deployments to the Indian Ocean
with joint exercises, and limiting construction for Diego Garcia to that
already programmed.

A final important point in the CG is the direction that we plan for
“1½” simultaneous contingencies; the one refers to NATO, the half to
a lesser contingency outside of NATO, such as in one of the three areas
discussed immediately above. The word “simultaneous” means that we
will program enough forces so that we would not be forced to abandon
a non-NATO contingency, and pull out our forces, should a NATO-War-
saw Pact war break out. This policy is also in line with PD–18, and its
effect is that we earmark and design a portion of our forces especially
for such contingencies. For planning purposes, the CG identifies those
forces as a Marine Division/Wing team, two Army divisions (one light
and one mechanized) with appropriate support including a heavy
brigade, three Air Force tactical wings, and three Navy carriers and
accompanying support. (Though earmarked for non-NATO contingen-
cies, these forces could be used in Europe as well.)
Further details on all these and other matters, of course, will be
found in the Consolidated Guidance.

64.
Summary of Conclusions of a National Security Council
Meeting1
SUBJECT
Defense Department Consolidated Guidance
PARTICIPANTS
The President
net Room at the White House. No minutes of the meeting were found.
State
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Defense
Secretary Harold Brown
Deputy Secretary Charles Duncan
JCS
General David Jones
CIA
Admiral Stansfield Turner
White House
Zbigniew Brzezinski
OMB
James McIntyre, Director
Randy Jayne, Associate Director
NSC Staff
Reginald Bartholomew
Victor Utgoff
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
Navy Carrier Force Levels
For planning purposes, we should assume a continuation of the
current force level of 12 carriers.
Navy Shipbuilding Problems
OMB is to study the possibility that changes during construction
are responsible for much of the cost overrun problem that has been
experienced in Navy shipbuilding. OMB is to carry through an analy-
sis of the data detailing the history of the construction process for sev-
eral of our ships, and prepare a report on its findings for discussion in
a meeting with the President and concerned parties in the Navy and
Defense Departments.
The Mission of the Navy
Dr. Brzezinski is to prepare terms of reference for a PRM on the
Navy’s missions. These terms of reference will be discussed with Secre-
taries Vance and Brown and subsequently forwarded to the President
for approval.

Congressional Session on Foreign Policy
Dr. Brzezinski is to arrange for a Presidential session on foreign
policy with selected Senators and Congressmen for the second week
in June.
NATO Center vs. NATO Flanks
There was a general consensus that the balance in emphasis
between the Center and the Flanks is about right. Secretary Brown
noted that while we cannot do much more on the Southern Flank,
because of its political weakness, the Northern Flank could be helped
by earmarking for it the Marine forces General Haig now carries as a
strategic reserve.
Congressional Support for NATO
Secretary Brown and Secretary Vance are to work up a strongly
worded draft resolution of Congressional support for NATO.
NATO Prepositioning and Storage
There was a discussion of NATO prepositioning and in particular
the problem of finding storage space for equipment within the FRG. It
was agreed that the storage question would be raised during the NATO
Summit or in the July meeting with Schmidt.
Persian Gulf Contingencies
Secretary Brown is to do a paper for consideration by the SCC on
the following three questions:
1. To what extent could or would the Iranians and Saudis help each
other in various military contingencies, including a Cuban assault on
Saudi Arabia from South Yemen?
2. What might we do in the event of an attack by 10,000 Cubans
from South Yemen against Saudi Arabia, acting on our own? and
3. What would the Egyptians and Saudis have had to do and what
kind of backing would we have had to provide if they had been willing
to intervene in the Ogaden war?
This contingencies issue is especially sensitive and should be
treated accordingly.
Simpler Weapons Systems
There was a brief discussion of the possibility of placing more
emphasis on simpler weapons systems. It was agreed that a paper
would be provided on this subject, looking to future discussion.
Process for Review of DOD Budget
Secretary Brown and Jim McIntyre are to provide a memo to the
President delineating an improved process for review of the DOD
budget.
Zbig Brzezinski

65.
Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom)
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 15, 1978
SUBJECT
SAC/NORAD Trip
My recent trip to SAC and NORAD turned up a menu of concerns
too great for a single memorandum. Here is a selected number of items,
that should become part of your awareness:
—The C3 problem.
—Secure Reserve Force planning.
—Thinking about LNOs.
—IVORY ITEM impact.
—NORAD reorganization.
The C3 Problem
The latest RISOP–SIOP analysis (that is, a Soviet attack on the U.S.
and a U.S. response at the SIOP level) has been reported to us largely
as dynamic interaction between weapons inventories on both sides.
Another aspect of the analysis has not been highlighted: Soviet doctri-
nal concern with attacking C3 with a higher priority than attack on U.S.
nuclear delivery systems. I have generally been aware that our C3 is
designed to get off a retaliatory response [11 lines not declassified].
This, of course, raises doubts about our ability to ride out an attack
and then retaliate. Paul Nitze’s scenario,2 where we lose our ICBM force
to a Soviet first strike and then would not want to retaliate because the
Soviets could then attack our cities, [5 lines not declassified].
To put it in a different way, it is usually argued that “stability”
exists when neither side can expect to attack and greatly limit damage
to itself. [5 lines not declassified]
Secure Reserve Force Planning
The SAC staff is fairly candid about its lack of attention to and its
long neglect of how to plan and use a reserve force. Attention has been
so fully concentrated on the SIOP spasm response that little planning
side the System. Sent for information. Brzezinski wrote at the top of the memorandum:
“pp 2, 3. ZB.”
2 See Document 1.

has been devoted to the next steps, i.e. what we do thereafter. For
example, how do we assess the results of our attack on the USSR? We
have these tidy criteria—[1 line not declassified] but no way to know if
we achieved even part of that outcome. At what will we shoot reserve
weapons?
[2 lines not declassified] They want an LNO capability without a war
fighting doctrine. Their logical escape from this paradox is to accept an
“assured destruction” doctrine, but they do not want that. Moreover,
they are slowly beginning to realize that Soviet changing capabilities
may be eroding a de facto “assured destruction” capability (e.g. a C3
attack combined with a political and diplomatic gambit that undercuts
both our capability retaliate and our desire to retaliate.)3
Thinking About LNOs
[1 paragraph (21 lines) not declassified]
IVORY ITEM Impact
The impact of IVORY ITEM drills has been far-­reaching. It has
forced the CINCs at SAC and NORAD to take a very close look at
the short warning situation, C3, and Soviet doctrine. General Hill at
NORAD made me sit down in his chair at the NORAD command center
and go through a drill to appreciate certain artificialities IVORY ITEM
places on him in answering questions from the President. In working
out his own role in such a personal way, he has, I believe, become aware
that we are indeed on a threshold of change from the old view of the
SIOP execution to4 a new view of a much more complicated world of
command and control.
The same development has occurred at SAC in a different form.
The new concerns with C3, less than SIOP exchanges, have derived in
no small part from the IVORY ITEM experiences. Several of the gener-
als at SAC simply admitted that they have not worked into these areas
sufficiently. They are breaking ground, but they are nervous about
how far to go because of the enormous doctrinal, forces structure, and
budget implications. They know that they cannot lead in the doctrinal
development. That must finally come from the NSC and the Secretary
of Defense.
NORAD Re-­organization
General Hill is terribly concerned that the Air Force will combine the
[2 lines not declassified]. I know nothing of this proposed re-­organization,
3 Brzezinski drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this paragraph and
one in the right margin.
4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to the preceding sentence
and this sentence up to this point and wrote: “What are they?”

but clearly it is a concept that should be considered thoroughly before
taking action.5 Do you and the President want the SAC commander
both assessing the attack and also commanding the forces for a U.S.
strike? In principle that would allow him to bias the attack development
either way: under-­estimating the warning because he has a subjective
hesitation about executing our SIOP or over-­estimating the warning
because he is itching for a fight. I am inclined to favor the preservation
of an independent CINC with only one task: judge the seriousness of
our warning data in deciding whether to sound the alarm.
An Afterthought
[1 paragraph (12 lines) not declassified]
5 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to the preceding two sen-
tences and wrote: “Why.”
66.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 23, 1978
SUBJECT
Memo from Harold Brown on M-X/Trident II Commonality Study
In response to the request you made during the OMB Spring Bud-
get Review, for information on the feasibility of developing a common
M–X/Trident II strategic missile, Harold Brown has sent you the memo
at Tab A. The main points made in the memo are that:
—Taking all factors into account, a common missile appears to
offer a significant net savings, and
—A detailed study to determine performance specifications and
costs is already underway and should be completed this August.
Harold’s memo, the ongoing study it is drawn from, and feedback
my staff is getting from the Pentagon all suggest that the common mis-
sile option is getting the high-­level attention it needs if we are to over-
come Service biases against the common system.
Tab A

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter2
Washington, June 17, 1978
SUBJECT
M–X/TRIDENT II Commonality Study (U)
We are conducting a detailed study to determine the extent of
commonality we should require in the M–X missile (currently in the
advanced development phase) and the TRIDENT II missile (currently
still in the design phase). There is a significant difference in the perfor-
mance and physical characteristics of these missiles as they are now
envisaged. [5 lines not declassified]
The estimated developmental cost of each of these missiles is about
$6 billion. If we developed only one common missile we could achieve
cost because of the larger production run. On the other hand, our total
M–X system costs would probably increase because we would have
to deploy more of the common missiles than of the M–X missile if we
believe we have to provide the same total throwweight as now planned
for the M–X. On balance it appears that the common missile would
offer a significant net savings, but the study has not yet determined
either the cost or performance details.
I will keep you informed as the study progresses; we expect to
have final results by this August. Enclosed for your information is a
status report on the study. It includes the study ground rules, a listing
of the baseline missile parameters, and some preliminary conclusions.
Harold Brown
2 Secret; Formerly Restricted Data. A copy was sent to Press.

Enclosure

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense3
Washington, undated
M–X/TRIDENT II Commonality Study
1. Major design considerations for a possible common missile
[5 paragraphs (26 lines) not declassified]
2. Study Ground Rules
—Common missile to meet all key requirements per above.
—[1 paragraph (1 line) not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]
—Management plan to be based on one service taking the lead,
with its existing organization, to develop the system and be the acqui-
sition agent. Each service will have its respective weapon system inte-
gration responsibilities.
—System cost-­effectiveness evaluation to be consistent with evalu-
ation methods for baseline, dedicated missiles.
3. Study Output
—Common Missile Definition
—Assessment of Expected Accuracy
—Cost and Performance Comparisons
—Technical, Schedule and Management Plans
—Identifications of Technical and Management Problems
4. Common Missile Parameters
[2 columns (16 lines) not declassified]
5. When the common missile study is completed, we will consider
variations which would involve modifying the common missile (e.g.,
extra stage, new stage, liquid bus) for the M–X application, thereby
achieving additional payload at a relatively small increase in develop-
mental cost. This probably will be necessary (and possible) to avoid
major degradation in M–X potential capability.
3 Secret; Formerly Restricted Data.

67.
Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, July 15, 1978
SUBJECT
Planning and Coordination: Crisis Management
This is in response to your memorandum on planning and coor-
dination which requested a list of issues for discussion. The following
issue areas are appropriate for crisis management:
I. White House Emergency Procedures.
General: This area is in reasonably good shape, but it is important
to have another IVORY ITEM exercise sometime before late fall.
Plan D: This concerns successors and continuity of government. It
is a travesty of neglect. Mitchell, Director of FPA, has discovered this
and wants to do something. So does OMB. Short-­term “fixes” may be
possible this fall, but a larger solution is possible as FPA goes into the
new Federal Emergency Management Agency. By late summer I hope
to have a scheme for launching a major but closely held review of these
Plan D deficiencies.2
C3I: This area is the revolutionary front. The DOD is beginning to
wake up to it. I get into it through both WHEP and telecommunications
policy. How we approach C3I will be indicative of how we intend to
structure our forces, strategic and general purpose, for the rest of the
century. It will also be indicative of continuity or change in our military
doctrine. Presently, our C3I vulnerabilities are staggering, even for only
a retaliatory doctrine. This year’s C3I budget issue review is an upcom-
ing opportunity to do something in this area. I am working with Utgoff
on it.
II. Telecommunications.
General: This has been a quiet front. OSTP has the emergency pre-
paredness management functions [6 lines not declassified]. Possibilities
are:
—Leasing satellites for DOD instead of buying them.
—Tactical radio systems and Commerce’s role in setting the
standards.
2 An unknown hand drew two vertical lines in the right margin next to this sentence.

—[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]
III. Terrorism.
General: Things are in overall good shape. That is, we have a struc-
ture in place. The way it works is not always satisfactory. The following
list identifies some of the problems:
—We have a new Executive Committee Chairman, Tony Quainton,
at State. This is a promising change.
—DOD now has a rather impressive military capability but how
it will be tied to the other elements in an incident is not all that well
worked out. McGiffert and others in DOD, including the General Meyer,
cry out for national level exercises, CPXs. I have been less enthusiastic
for this before DOD decides its own internal questions. For example,
does the Secretary of the Army have the executive agent responsibility
as he does for “domestic order”? Or is the link to Harold Brown and the
JCS? Justice has procedures for working with the Army but not with
JCS. I will be pressing on this front.
—Responding to foreign requests for counter-­terror training. This
one may get sticky. CIA already has its own rather broad program
which is not understood by State. Quainton, following Isham’s lead,
wants State to “coordinate” our counter-­terrorism foreign training pol-
icy. Quainton has asked for all agencies to report what programs they
have abroad. This is leading to a possible clash between State and CIA.
I am in touch with Henze to try to prevent it.
—Intelligence for terrorism. The Executive Committee is believed
by many to handle counter-­terrorism intelligence. I set it up so that an
informal sub-­group of the committee can do so. The only problem is
that when something like the question of aid for Italy comes up, I am
not kept abreast of what you and Hunter are doing. Thus, things were
not always under control, and the agencies gradually learned that we
were not tied together properly at the NSC. The impression of discon-
nection got as far as some of the Senate Intelligence Committee staff
apparently. I would like to pull intelligence for terrorism together. I
have pushed the CIA to stop taking a purely passive attitude to intelli-
gence on terrorism and to look for positive ways to use what we know
more effectively. Their reaction is favorable, but they hesitate about
how to respond. After a day with the DDO, the IAD chief, and the head
of terrorism group, I came away with a better, but not encouraging,
sense of the realities out there. I greatly need your support and backing
in this area, and I would like to push it.
—A related item, not terrorism but intelligence, is the beginning of
a coordinated CI effort on our embassy construction in Moscow. Sam

Hoskinson expressed unusual enthusiasm for some of my schemes in
approaching this task. I did the background work for that SCC item,
learning that in fact my schemes are feasible and highly desired by the
agencies. Unless they are laced together by a small group—­one repre-
sentative from CIA, State, DOD, and the NSC—­they will not succeed,
and only then will they succeed if they are executed with full awareness
of all other US-Soviet activities.
IV. Net Assessment.
I am back into this area for the update of PRM 10.3 The need for a
net assessment capability on the NSC was not apparent to me for some
time. Now I see why it is. Without it, our intelligence appreciation for
longer run policy and strategy will be no better than the PDB, NID, and
the INR Summary, i.e., current events. I don’t know where you want
to go in this area, but it merits some thought. Some practical examples:
—Awareness of the oil technology transfer issue to the USSR comes
from net assessment.
—Sensitivity to the C3I vulnerabilities comes from net assessment.
—The DOD targeting study flounders because it is not driven by
net assessments.
—Where we go with the PRM–314 results will depend on con-
tinuing net assessments which exploit the directed new FBI and CIA
attention to technology.
V. Crisis management at the in-­between-­levels (i.e., between SIOP
and the small terrorist event).
General: Our ad hoc system works reasonably well I suppose, but
it could have more rigor. I would prefer to talk rather than write about
this one.
3 See Document 4.

68.
Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron) to President Carter1
Washington, July 28, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #68
1. Opinion
SALT Support Strategy
After meeting with Hamilton, Jody and Frank Moore, I met with
Harold Brown and Charles Duncan to see how our defense decisions
could be coordinated to build a more positive Congressional climate
for SALT. Harold welcomed this initiative and, together, we have iden-
tified the following issues which will shape public and Congressional
perceptions of our defense posture and the acceptability of a SALT
Agreement.
—What should we do about the vulnerability of our land-­based
missile force; deploy new systems (such as MAP or some other mobile
missile) or switch our doctrine away from the Triad?
—What do we do about increasing Soviet lead in counterforce
capability; deploy a hard-­target MX, Trident II, or a hybrid? Would
improving our ICBM survivability suffice?
—What do we do about a future manned, penetrating bomber? (I
understand Zbig has talked to you about Air Force ideas on this.)
—Harold also feels that the overall size of the budget is import-
ant—­in particular, the size of the component devoted to strategic forces.
As you can see, these involve some of the most difficult strategic
decisions this country has ever faced. Ideally, we would want more
time to decide them, but SALT is forcing our hand. Some policies, such
as whether to try to maintain a survivable ICBM force, we might only
decide in principle leaving our hardware options (e.g., MAP, Mobiles)
open. At the minimum, we will have to identify those issues which
might be decided early-­on to shape public opinion and those which
should be reserved for later to have more direct impact on SALT accept-
ability in Congress.
The following are the key decision events.
Sensitive. Carter initialed the memorandum in the upper right corner.

—Your mid-­term review of the Defense budget in late August/
early September.
—The Defense review of MX and MAP in October.
—The Defense budget decision in December/January, and
—The Secretary’s Posture Statement in February 1979.
The August/September budget review emerges as particularly
important. Harold suggests that it provides an opportunity for you
to announce some general lines of policy that would start creating a
more positive atmosphere on defense issues. He also feels it would be
extremely helpful if you could indicate at least privately to him the
direction you are inclined to take on the key MX/MAP/bomber issues.
This would enable him to better control the Defense bureaucracy and
project a more orderly and systematic image to enhance confidence in
our decision-­making process. It also might be desirable to be more open
about the decisions that we make along the way so as to pre-­empt the
inevitable leaks. Harold recognizes that this procedure might conflict
with OMB’s prerogatives but emphasized that the more guidance he
can get the better, even if actual formal decisions are not taken until
later.
We agreed that I should draw up a draft “scenario” for coordinat-
ing Defense actions in support of SALT which I will clear with Harold
for presentation to you prior to your August/September budget review
session.
2. Alert
Defense Budget Status
On the basis of the Consolidated Guidance (CG), the military
services submitted draft five-­year programs in their Program Objec-
tive Memoranda (POMs). In the spirit of ZBB, the CG called for three
programs—­basic, decremented and enhanced. The CG basic program
and enhanced levels were set at ± 5% around that level.
The POMs reflect a good deal of “goldwatching” by the Services,
especially the Air Force. “Goldwatching” is the label given the long-­
standing Service device of protecting or beefing up their budgets by
structuring them in such a way that programs of special importance
for the civilian authorities require net additions to the budget. Thus, in
the current POMs, many programs have been placed only in enhanced
program or are not in any program at all. Examples are M–X/Trident
II, ALCM, Cruise Missile Carrier, strategic mobility programs, and
GLCM. As a consequence, most of the OSD staff alternatives appear to
add to the basic level of the budget.
This poses Harold with a difficult problem. Your tentative bud-

have to remove $3B, while adding back many of the expensive “gold-
watched” programs. We can expect some tough infighting that is likely
to spill out into public view—­with a possible adverse effect on the
image we want to create in Defense for SALT (see item one).
3. National Security Affairs Calendar (See Tab A)2
2 Attached but not printed is a calendar for national security affairs in August and
September.
69.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, July 31, 1978
SUBJECT
The Diminishing U.S. Lead in Total Number of Strategic Warheads
These are some thoughts to bear in mind as we think about the
future strategic balance and about the importance of SALT limits on RV
fractionation.
Our projected lead throughout the 1980s in total numbers of strate-
gic warheads is based on intelligence estimates that assume very little
increased fractionation by the Soviets. You should realize that there are
few data to support that assumption. In the absence of SALT fraction-
ation limits, it is quite possible the Soviets may deploy, or at least test,
modifications of ICBMs and SLBMs with much higher payload frac-
tionations than those of current systems. Even with SALT limits they
can make considerable progress in this direction. They might do so (1)
in order to eliminate our lead in the perceptually important number
of warheads, (2) because of a “technological imperative” to go beyond
what they have now, or (3) to make MAP less attractive by forcing it
to absorb more attackers—­or for a combination of these. Looking at
past estimates, one sees that until testing began the intelligence com-
munity projected the number of RVs on follow-­on ICBMs (those we
Chiefs of Staff Jones, Box 60, SecDef Memo Jul 78. Top Secret. Copies were sent to Vance,
Brzezinski, Brown, Seignious, and Turner.

actual; respectively). Therefore, the number of Soviet missile warheads
could increase substantially by 1985.
The United States at present has about a 2:1 advantage in total stra-
tegic warheads [less than 1 line not declassified]. The NIE Best Estimate
(assuming a SALT II agreement with a 1,200 MIRV limit) projects a U.S.
1985. This estimate assumes an SS–NX–18 and Typhoon missile with
three and four RVs, respectively. The Soviets recently demonstrated
a potential capability to deploy seven RVs on the SS–NX–18: at least
two tests released four RVs and simulated three additional releases.
With seven RVs per SS–NX–18 and Typhoon missile the Soviets would
another way, our lead could be eliminated entirely if, for example, the
Soviets increased the number of RVs on the SS–NX–18 and Typhoon
would probably be feasible on follow-­ons to existing missiles and on
the new Typhoon SLBM.
The ban on increasing numbers of RVs on existing types which
we have proposed in SALT would make this erosion of our lead far
more difficult because it would prevent fractionation of the payloads of
existing types. However, even our current SALT fractionation proposal
(limiting new ICBMs to 10 RVs and new SLBMs to 14 and freezing frac-
tionation of current ICBMs and SLBMs) still permits the Soviets even-
tually to catch up with us in warhead numbers by replacing all existing
systems with permitted new types with the maximum permitted RVs
Soviet tests of existing systems with more RVs before signature would
pose a problem (though formally our position takes the pre-April 15,
1978 level as the base).
We should therefore recognize that our lead in strategic warheads
could largely dissipate by 1985, or even disappear altogether if the
Soviets chose that course. This capability could be delayed by SALT but
is unlikely to be blocked entirely. Our ability to claim future strategic
equivalence on the basis that their lead in throw weight is offset by our
lead in warhead numbers, is thus fragile.
We do, however, have several options available to counter a Soviet
push to close the gap in numbers of warheads. The Cruise Missile Car-
rier (CMC) program provides an option for a major and rapid increase
in strategic capability. For example, a deployment of 100 CMCs. [2 lines
not declassified] This deployment level could be achieved by FY 1987
with an orderly program, and earlier if extraordinary effort is deemed
necessary. The current U.S. SALT position would count each CMC as
one in the 1320 aggregate. The Soviets have proposed a limit of 20 cruise

missiles per aircraft. As you are aware, Secretary Vance recently pre-
sented our position that there could be no limitations on the number
of cruise missiles per CMC as long as there are no limitations on air
defenses.
Another alternative is the Ground-Launched Cruise Missile
(GLCM) for which we currently have very tentative plans for initial
missiles, each with a variable yield warhead up to [less than 1 line not
declassified]. If we have to respond quickly to a rapid Soviet buildup in
total RVs, this program, or a similar one involving surface-­ship launch,
could be quickly and greatly expanded. The production rate can be rap-
idly multiplied, and is not restricted by SALT after the Protocol expires
(though it could pose other political problems).
In sum, we must be aware that the Soviets could largely negate
our lead in warheads by 1985. However, there are SALT-­permitted
options available to maintain our lead in strategic warheads, if we
so desire.
Harold Brown
70.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency2
Washington, August, 1978
[Omitted here are the cover pages and table of contents.]
Estimated Soviet Defense Spending
Trends and Prospects
Key Judgments
Total Defense Spending. Our estimates of the ruble cost of Soviet
defense activities during the 1967–77 period indicate that:
• Soviet defense spending, defined to correspond to US budget-
ary accounts and measured in constant 1970 prices, grew at an average
Assessment Center prepared the assessment. Carter initialed the cover page.

• Defined more broadly, as Soviet practice might require, defense
in 1977.
Economic Impact. The defense effort has had a substantial impact on
the Soviet economy:
• During the 1967–77 period, defense spending consumed an
cent, depending on how defense spending is defined.
• Defense investment consumed about one-­third of the final prod-
uct of machinebuilding and metalworking, the branch of industry that
produces investment goods as well as military hardware.
• Between 65 and 75 percent of the males reaching draft age were
conscripted into the Soviet armed forces. Uniformed military service-
men and civilians working for the Ministry of Defense constituted 3 to
4 percent of the total labor force.
• Defense takes a large share of the economy’s best scientific, tech-
nical, and managerial talent and large amounts of high-­quality materi-
als, components, and equipment.
The armed forces accounted directly for a small share of total Soviet
energy consumption. Less than 5 percent of the refined petroleum and
less than 5 percent of the heat and electricity consumed by the USSR
went to the armed forces.
Composition and Allocation. Ruble estimates provide insight into
the resource composition of the Soviet defense effort and the trends in
resource allocation among the services. Analysis based on the narrower
definition of defense—­for which the estimates are more precise—­
indicates that during the 1967–77 period over one-­half of total spending
went for investment, a little over one-­fourth for operating expenditures,
and over one-­fifth for research, development, testing, and evaluation.
Examination of defense spending according to service indicates
that:
• The Air Forces and the Ground Forces received the largest shares
of investment and operating spending. The share going to the Air
Forces increased during the period as a result of increased spending
for Frontal Aviation. The Ground Forces’ share was relatively constant.
• Spending for the Navy and the National Air Defense Forces
grew more slowly than defense spending as a whole. As a result, the
shares of investment and operating spending going to these forces were
smaller in 1977 than in 1967. Most of the growth in spending for the
Navy was allocated to ballistic missile submarines, while most of the
growth in spending for the Air Defense Forces was allocated to inter-
ceptor aircraft.
• The Strategic Rocket Forces received the smallest share of invest-
ment and operating spending among the five services. Spending for
the SRF was primarily determined by deployment cycles for ICBMs

and fluctuated more than that for any other service. By the end of the
10-­year period, spending for this service was only slightly higher than
in 1967.
Examination of defense spending for intercontinental and regional
forces indicates that:
• Spending for intercontinental attack forces subject to SALT II
limitation constituted a little over 10 percent of total defense spending
and grew at a slower pace than the total.
• Spending for Ground Forces and Frontal Aviation in the NATO
Guidelines Area constituted less than 10 percent of total defense spend-
ing but grew at about twice the rate of the total.
• Spending for Soviet forces along the Sino-Soviet border consti-
tuted a little over 10 percent of total defense spending and grew at more
than twice the rate of the total.
Prospects. Soviet economic growth has been slowing in the 1960s
and the 1970s, and we forecast a further slowdown in the 1980s. None-
theless, all of the evidence available to us on Soviet defense programs
under way and planned suggests that the long-­term upward trend in
allocation of resources to defense is likely to continue into the 1980s.
There is no indication that economic problems are causing major
changes in defense policy. The atmosphere in Moscow with regard to
the economy, however, is one of concern, and the Soviet leaders could
be contemplating modest alterations in military force goals. But even if
such alterations were undertaken, the rate of growth of defense spend-
ing over the next five years or so probably would slow only marginally.
• For the next two or three years, Soviet defense spending will
continue to grow. Because some current ICBM, ballistic missile subma-
rine, and fighter aircraft programs are nearing completion, the annual
rates of growth in that period probably will be slightly lower than the
long-­run average.
• During the early 1980s we expect the Soviets to begin testing and
deploying a number of the new weapon systems under development.
This probably will cause the annual rates of growth in defense spend-
ing to increase to a pace more in keeping with the long-­term growth
trend of 4 to 5 percent a year.
• Conclusion of a SALT II agreement along the lines currently
being discussed would not, in itself, slow the growth of Soviet defense
spending significantly.
[Omitted here are the preface, the body of the assessment, and an
appendix.]

71.
Memorandum From Samuel Huntington of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 1, 1978
SUBJECT
PD/NSC–18 Follow-On Study on Nuclear Targeting Policy2
In general the DOD report provides an excellent description and
critique of existing targeting policy and appropriately sets forth the
major issues deserving of top-­level consideration and decision. I have
only a couple of comments on the report and on the Utgoff/Molander
review of the report.3
Two basic issues runs through the report.
The first is the need for a much higher degree of flexibility in tar-
geting policy than has previously been the case. Options for the limited
employment of nuclear weapons should be multiplied; political consid-
erations should play a greater role in the selection of targets; and, since
no plan—­particularly in these uncharted waters—­can anticipate what
will be needed in a given contingency, a high capability for Presidential
flexibility and improvisation in a nuclear confrontation should be built
into our command, administrative, and technical institutions. On these
points, I think there is general agreement among Utgoff/Molander, the
authors of the report, and myself.4
The second basic issue relates to the relative priority we should
give to targeting war-­fighting capabilities compared to war-­recovery
capabilities. Here for a variety of reasons the report criticizes what it
perceives to be our current emphasis on war-­recovery resources and
recommends greater emphasis on war-­fighting capabilities. Victor and
Roger are dubious about this conclusion; I support it.
The question of war-­fighting vs. war-­recovery comes up in two
contexts. The report emphasizes the extent to which Soviet doctrine and
practice differ from the US. This is, I think, accurate and valuable. The
report points out that the intelligence community now agrees that the
Soviets believe that “a superior war-­fighting capability, including what
Utgoff and Molander.
2 See Document 32.
3 Not found.
4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to the portion of this para-
graph that begins with “particularly” and ends with “and myself.”

US strategists would call counterforce and damage-­limiting capabili-
ties, is the best type of deterrent.” Vic and Roger argue that one cannot
extrapolate from what the Soviets see as necessary to deter a US attack
to what may be necessary for the US to have to deter a Soviet attack.
Their argument, however, presupposes a disjunction in Soviet thinking
which certainly doesn’t exist in ours and which is psychologically and
politically most improbable. We know that the Soviets stress C3 and
military capabilities, offensively and defensively, at the conventional
and theater nuclear levels as well as at the strategic level. Surely, US
ability to destroy substantial portions of Soviet C3 and strategic offen-
sive forces (before or after a Soviet attack) will weigh much more heav-
ily with the Soviets as a deterrent than US ability to destroy a few more
cities.5
The question of war-­fighting vs. war-­recovery also comes up in the
section on “General War Objectives.” The description of current policy
in this section was, for me, the most startling and disturbing segment of
the report. The report cites the 1974 NUWEP6 as identifying four prin-
cipal targets for destruction: economic and military recovery resources;
C3; nuclear offensive forces; conventional forces. Current policy sets
forth the priorities in the allocation of weapons against these targets
under conditions of day-­to-­day alert and generated forces as follows:
Table 1
Weapons Allocation Priorities7
Current Policy
Targets
Day-­to-­
day alert
Generated
forces
Desirable
Policy
SU Strike US Strike
1. Recovery
resources
3. Nuclear
­offensive
forces
4. Conventional
forces
5 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence and wrote:
“Why?”
footnote 4, Document 31.
7 Brzezinski added the columns labeled “SU Strike” and “US Strike” by hand.

In both cases, under current policy sufficient weapons will be allo-
cated to destroy Target 1 (recovery resources), before they are allocated,
with decreasing emphasis, to the other targets in the order indicated.
The paper makes the point that this order of priorities applies only
to the allocation of weapons, not to the temporal order in which the
targets might be attacked. It does, however, also seriously question
the current emphasis on targeting recovery resources. I would under-
write that concern in spades. The high priority currently given recov-
ery resources surely puts the cart before the horse. If we should get
into a general nuclear war, the first priority has to be the destruction
of those enemy forces which have the capability to do serious dam-
age to ourselves and our allies. We ought to take every measure we
can to protect ourselves so that we survive in the best possible shape
before we begin trying to prevent our opponent from recovering after
the war. Recognizing that the characteristics of our weapons may limit
the number we wish to direct towards military targets, nonetheless,
it would still make much more sense to reorder the priorities as indi-
cated in the third column of Table 1, so as to give top priority to enemy
nuclear forces and C3, while relegating recovery resources to a residual
fourth place.8
8 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this paragraph and wrote
below it: “Who strikes first?”
72.
Memorandum From Samuel Huntington of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 2, 1978
SUBJECT
PRC Meeting on Civil Defense
You should read the Summary for a quick survey of the major
issues and options. This memo covers some of the politics and argu-
ments lying behind them.
The Agenda Paper sets forth three topics for discussion.
1. Review the PRM/NSC–32 conclusions on the scope, nature, and effective-
ness of US and Soviet civil defense programs.
The conclusions on these topics set forth in the Overview Report
and the Summary are generally agreed to by all agencies, except for
ACDA which dissents vigorously from almost everything, and possibly
State, which questions many things in more muted fashion. The basic
facts in Chapter II on Soviet civil defense come from the IIM on this
subject; the basic facts about the US program are also not in dispute.
What these mean, however, is highly contentious.
ACDA makes four principal points.
1. Civil defense is meaningless because the amount of protection
that any CD program can provide will be minor compared to the abso-
lute levels of destruction resulting from a nuclear war. In fact, how-
ever, everyone is guessing when it comes to estimating the amount
and character of the destruction resulting from a nuclear war, and it
is better to provide some modest protection on the assumption that
it may work, than do nothing at all. In addition, there is interagency
agreement (set forth in Table S–2 on page 6 of the Summary and Table
III–1 in the Report) that feasible and modest civil defense measures
can make a difference in terms of tens of millions of lives. ACDA will
then say that the survivors of a nuclear war will envy the dead; and
the answer to that is that that is something for the survivors, not us, to
decide.
2. ACDA will argue that the Report and the Summary neglect the
longer-­term effects (after 30 days) of a nuclear war. In fact, however,
these are not neglected; they are referred to in both the Report (page
any judgment as to what the world will be like 30 days after a nuclear
war has to be 90 percent conjecture. The response to the previous point
applies here.
3. ACDA will argue that the Report overestimates Soviet civil
defense capabilities in that it makes a “best case” assumption that
Soviet CD will work the way in which it is planned to work. In fact,
with respect to some issues this is the case, and both the Report and
the IIM, on which it is based, make that clear. On the most important
issue, however, of population protection, the IIM and the Report (pp.
II–10–14) emphasize how dependent the Soviet program is on warning
time; they provide evidence for a variety of scenarios.
4. ACDA will say that unlike the Soviets, the US need not plan for
population relocation because in the event of a crisis, Americans in tar-
get areas will hop into their automobiles and head for the hills as they
do on the Fourth of July weekend. In fact, some spontaneous evacuation
in a crisis undoubtedly will occur, and all the figures in the Report and

Summary on US population fatalities assume a 10 percent spontaneous
evacuation of urban population in addition to that resulting from any
planned CD program. Also, however, evacuation is relatively meaning-
less unless evacuees go to host areas which are prepared to house them,
protect them (against fall-­out), and feed them for up to 30 days. That is
what the proposed Program 3 is designed to do.
Most importantly, there is interagency agreement on the broad
difference which civil defense makes in terms of population survival.
Given current US and Soviet programs, in the mid-1980s, a major
nuclear exchange would probably leave the US with 35–65 percent
of its population initially surviving, while 80–90 percent of the Soviet
population would initially survive. In short, to take the median figures
in those estimates, 50 percent of the US population would immediately
survive as against 85 percent of the Soviet population.
2. Review alternative US civil defense policies and make recommendations to
the President.
Four policy options are set forth in the Summary (pp. 8–10) and
Report (pp. V–8–12):
(1) The myth of civil defense, i.e., civil defense is useless.
(2) Insurance, which has been the prevailing US approach, and
which can run from low cost/high risk insurance to high cost/low risk
insurance.
(3) Equivalent survivability, which says that the proportions of US
leadership, population, and economy surviving a nuclear war should
be roughly equivalent to those of the USSR surviving the war.
(4) Equivalent program, which says that the US should essentially
duplicate the Soviet civil defense program.
ACDA will probably opt for the Myth of Civil Defense; State and
OMB will probably go for Insurance; virtually everyone else (i.e., JCS,
DCPA, FPA, CIA, and NSC) opted (at least in the Working Group)
for Equivalent Survivability. Since the NSC originated the concept of
equivalent survivability and developed the arguments for it (Report,
pp. V–10–12), I hope you will be persuaded by its logic!
One option which is likely to come forward in the discussion of
policy options is simply to make no decision on policy and to proceed
directly to a decision on program. Policy, after all, it can be said, is sim-
ply rhetoric, it’s program that counts. Policy is also much more conten-
tious than program. A no-­decision outcome on policy could become
unavoidable, but it is also undesirable because:
(1) It will provide no basis for rationalizing program decisions or
linking them to broader strategic issues. It will not provide a means for
either the NSC or DOD to exercise any policy guidance over the new
Civil Emergency Preparedness Agency and, as a result, that agency will

undoubtedly follow its natural tendencies to give priority to its natural
disaster functions rather than to its civil defense functions.
(2) It will open the way for OMB to undermine a decision in favor
of Program 3 by pleading the need to cut costs and maintain only the
present level of spending when budget time comes. A decision in favor
of Equivalent Survivability as a policy would prevent this, since exist-
ing programs and spending levels quite clearly do not provide equiva-
lent survivability.
3. Review alternative US civil defense programs and make
recommendations to the President.
Five alternative programs (one of which has two variants) are set
forth on pp. 10–11 of the Summary and in Chapter VI of the Report.
Two of them (Programs 4 and 5) involve such substantial increased
expenditures that they are undoubtedly not politically feasible, and
Program 5 is undesirable in any event. One thing which might be
worth suggesting, however, is a study of the longer-­term desirability
of a program like Program 4, that is, incorporating shelters into new
construction. This is what the Soviets are doing; it is also what the Ger-
mans and some others are attempting to do. It would not be a pleasant
situation to be in if by the year 2000 we were the only major country
which did not have a shelter capability for a substantial segment of its
urban population.
Program 1, Minimal Civil Defense, can also be excluded, since no
one except ACDA is likely to support it and since the President has
already said that he is in favor of a strong civil defense.
The differences between Programs 2a and 2b are relatively minor,
involving the extent to which, within existing funding levels, efforts
are concentrated on population relocation planning. In terms of output,
under Program 2a existing planning activities would be completed in
the mid-­to-­late 1980s; under Program 2b they would be completed by
the mid-1980s. Under both programs, there would have to be a surge
period of about one year to implement the plans. State is likely to sup-
port either Program 2a or Program 2b. OMB will definitely support
Program 2b with the argument that there are a lot of kinks and uncer-
tainties in relocation planning which should be worked out before it
would be worthwhile to embark on Program 3.
All the other agencies will support Program 3. Harold Brown
has, indeed, already endorsed the population relocation segment of
this program within the DOD, and DCPA is, presumably, going ahead
implementing this decision. In effect, PRC approval of Program 3 will
ratify Harold’s decision on an interagency basis and thus help DOD
ward off the OMB budget cutters this Fall. The other smaller segment
of Program 3 is devoted to continuity of government and is designed

to enhance our currently very weak and fragile leadership protection
programs.
All told, Program 3 will involve expenditures of $193 million in FY
next five years, total expenditures for Program 3 would be $1,625 mil-
expenditure, however, will buy a major increase in civil defense
capabilities:
the US population would immediately survive, as against 35–65 per-
cent (and the percentage of survivors with Program 3 is likely to be
much closer to 90 percent than 60 percent; ACDA insisted on the low
lower bound). Just taking the median figure in these estimates, 75 per-
cent of the US population would immediately survive with Program 3,
additional survivors.
—The survivability of US leadership goes from low to probably
high.
—Of great importance, the surge time required to achieve the
above results declines from one year to one–two weeks. Unless we can
assume that the Soviets will give us a year’s warning the next time they
plan to spring a Berlin blockade, Berlin wall, Cuban missile deploy-
ment, or October War on us, this reduction in surge time is absolutely
essential to having a meaningful civil defense program.
Attached is a table indicating probable agency positions as they
have manifested themselves in the Working Group.
PROBABLE AGENCY POSITIONS ON
CD POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
Myth
Insurance
Equivalent
Survivability
Equivalent
Program
ACDA
2a
State?
2b
OMB
DCPA (2)
DCPA (1), NSC,
FPA, JCS, CIA?

Attachment

Summary of a Report Prepared in the National
Security Council2
Washington, undated
PRM/NSC–32 CIVIL DEFENSE
OVERVIEW REPORT
Summary
This summary is not designed to be a section by section precis of
the Overview Report. It is rather designed:
1. to present a brief summary description of current US and Soviet
civil defense programs;
2. to provide answers on the basis of the Overview Report to the
key questions posed at the beginning of that report;
3. to lay out briefly the options for US civil defense policy and pro-
grams set forth in Chapters V and VI of the Overview Report.
I. US AND SOVIET CIVIL DEFENSE PROGRAMS
US strategic doctrine has consistently emphasized deterrence of
nuclear war, rather than effective defense. The US civil defense pro-
gram has been viewed as insurance providing some capability to
enhance population survival should deterrence fail, thus fulfilling the
government’s statutory responsibility under the Federal Civil Defense
Act of 1950 (as amended).3
The Soviets integrate civil defense into an overall scheme of the
likely origins, course, and consequences of nuclear war. Soviet strategy
relies on convincing potential enemies that they cannot win a nuclear
war against the USSR. Should nuclear war occur, civil defense is meant
to help: (1) maintain a functioning logistical base for operations by their
armed forces to “win” the war; and (2) enable Soviet recovery from war
damage, to improve their postwar position vis-­a-­vis the US and other
adversaries.
At the present time US civil defense efforts are directed primar-
ily to population and leadership protection. These programs, currently
divided among several federal agencies, are now scheduled to be
2 Secret.
Resources Board and expanded civil defense in the context of possible nuclear conflict.

consolidated with natural disaster functions in an independent agen-
cy.4 Civil defense responsibilities are shared with state and local gov-
ernments. The population protection program is slowly being modified
to shift the emphasis from reliance on in-­place fallout protection to cri-
sis relocation planning for high-­risk areas. Either program would take
about a year’s “surge” preparation during a crisis period to reach full
effectiveness. Essential governmental functions will be protected by dis-
persal of personnel, some by relocation to hardened facilities; the hard-
ened facilities are relatively few in number and relatively vulnerable to
direct attack. Minimum efforts are being directed to the protection of
industrial plants and equipment and to preparations for rehabilitation
and recovery. Federal expenditures for the above programs are about
$140 million per year; state and local governments spend an additional
$80 million.
Soviet civil defense efforts are much more comprehensive. The
Soviet program has established ambitious goals to protect the civilian
leadership, shelter a portion of the essential industrial labor force, and
evacuate the urban population. The program is centrally administered
under military leadership, and civil defense goals are influenced by
military objectives. The activities of the Soviet civil defense organiza-
tion include: the development of evacuation and shelter plans; training
for civil defense units, leadership and the population at large; coordina-
tion of civil defense exercises; testing and evaluation of command and
control; shelter construction; and implementation of general directives
from the central leadership. The effectiveness of Soviet civil defense
measures is highly dependent on the amount of warning time avail-
able. Soviet civil defense doctrine also espouses effective protection
of industry through hardening and dispersing, but such measures are
being implemented slowly or, in some cases, not at all. It would cost
about $2 billion per year to duplicate the Soviet civil defense program
in the United States; about three-­fourths of this amount would be for
personnel.
The most probable results of a massive US–USSR nuclear exchange
in 1978 involving an initial Soviet counterforce/countervalue attack on
the US and a US counterforce/countervalue response are set forth in
Table S–1.
merged federal planning for both natural disasters and civil defense.

Table S–1
EXPECTED RESULTS FROM MASSIVE US/USSR
NUCLEAR EXCHANGE, 1978
Population Survival
US (In-Place)
USSR (Evacuated)
Initial Survivors (%)
Immediate Fatalities (106)
Leadership Survival
Personnel Uninjured
Less than 40%5
High
Facilities Undamaged
Less than 20%6
High
Economic Survival
Low
Low
II. KEY QUESTIONS
A. What is the Role of Civil Defense in Strategic Policy?
Significant differences exist as to the role of civil defense in relation
to strategic policy. Some analysts argue that civil defense capabilities
influence an opponent’s perception of the strategic balance and may, in
the extreme, reflect on the credibility of a deterrent. They further con-
tend that the lack of population protection could reduce stability and
inhibit decision-­making.
This argument rests on the following assumptions:
1) Defensive as well as offensive capabilities contribute to the stra-
tegic balance. Civil defense will therefore be calculated into the balance
of forces.
2) The effectiveness of population protection will figure into the
cost/risk thinking of an opponent.
3) There is a positive correlation between surviving population
and a nation’s ability to recover.
4) Deterrence rests, in part, on a willingness to act. An inability to
protect a population will inhibit decisions to act, by inducing doubts
and increasing the perception of risks.
5) The Soviet ability to provide civil defense might put them in
a position to coerce the United States. An asymmetry in civil defense
capability will undercut US confidence in a crisis and will encourage
Soviet risk-­taking and intransigence.
In contrast, others contend that civil defense plays no role in the
perception of a nuclear balance. They argue that the population protec-
tion that civil defense can provide is insignificant in light of the mag-
nitude of destruction following a nuclear exchange. They argue that
civil defense gets no consideration in crisis decision-­making and has no
5 Assuming Emergency Operating Centers are not targeted. [Footnote is in the
original.]
6 Assuming Emergency Operating Centers are not targeted. [Footnote is in the
original.]

impact on stability. Moreover, willingness to act will be influenced by a
variety of political and military factors; uncertain estimates of popula-
tion survival will play a relatively minor role in such a decision.
This argument is based on the following assumptions:
1) Given the magnitude of offensive power passive defense will
receive little or no consideration in calculating the strategic balance and
the absence of ABM defenses further undermines potential effective-
ness of passive defenses.
2) Given the massive levels of destruction contemplated, the
amount of population protection will be insignificant in an estimation
of costs and risks.
3) There is no demonstrable correlation between population sur-
vival and national recovery.
4) The ability to protect a population has had little impact in cal-
culating the potential willingness to use a deterrent. In past crises the
availability of civil defense has had no influence on crisis decisions or
the willingness of US leaders to act.
5) The absence of a US civil defense effort would not pose a threat
significant enough to inhibit or coerce policy-­makers.
Still a third group argues that civil defense contributes to the insta-
bility of the nuclear balance by fostering among policy-­makers the illu-
sion that the destruction resulting from nuclear war can be limited and
hence encouraging them to take greater risks of nuclear conflict. This
argument rests on the assumption that a major gap will exist between
civil defense capabilities in reality and the perceptions of them by policy-­
makers. Carried to the extreme, unrealistic claims for the effectiveness
of civil defense could have a more adverse effect on perceptions—­and
thus on stability—­than could a civil defense program itself.
B. Can civil defense measures make a significant difference in the
outcome of a nuclear exchange?
There remains considerable uncertainty as to the extent that civil
defense measures would make a difference in the outcome of a nuclear
exchange. Questions center on each nation’s ability to fully carry out
plans in times of crisis and on the longer-­term prospects for recovery
and reconstitution. Civil defense measures would not prevent mas-
sive damage to each nation’s economic, political, social, and military
structure, given the immense nuclear arsenals possessed by the US and
USSR and the immovable physical plant associated with each of these
areas in a modern industrial society. Civil defense measures designed
to improve immediate population, work force and leadership sur-
vival through a combination of dispersal and fallout protection would
be effective to the extent that plans could actually be implemented
(attack timing, availability of transportation, etc., are uncertainties). In-­
place shelters hardened against blast and fallout would provide good

protection unless directly targeted. Spontaneous evacuation, a phe-
nomenon often postulated for the automobile-­rich US, could reduce
immediate casualties if the net result was movement out of risk areas.
Long-­term prospects for the immediate survivors in both nations would
be uncertain and would depend not only on the availability of subsis-
tence levels of food, medical supplies, etc., but also on how quickly they
could adapt to what would probably be a radically unfamiliar environ-
ment and severely damaged social structure.
Specifically, properly implemented civil defense measures could:
(1) enhance population survival against the immediate effects of a nuclear
attack (blast, radiation, fallout). Given sufficient warning time (about
a week) and a successful evacuation (80% was used in the analysis)
from urban industrial targets, the majority of each nation’s population
would survive the immediate effects of a massive US/USSR nuclear
exchange. For a mid-1980’s massive nuclear exchange, analyses of the
attack-­related effectiveness of civil defense show that:
a. In the US, successful population evacuation (for which the US
does not now have plans) would provide for initial survival of 60–90%
of the population, compared with 35–65% survival for the population
in-­place and protected only from fallout.
b. In the case of the USSR, survival levels would be about 80–90%
with the population evacuated, for which the USSR does now plan,
compared to 60–80% survival with population in-­place. The differences
between estimated US and USSR population survival rates are due pri-
marily to the differences in megatonnage assumed to be delivered by
each nation.
(2) enhance work force survival against the immediate effects of nuclear
war. Losses among those remaining in industrial target areas during an
attack would be high; however, the losses among those who had been
evacuated out of target areas would be low. In one sample of Soviet
industrial facilities, however, hardened shelters existed for 12 to 24% of
the peacetime work force. As in the case of a general population evacu-
ation, the US does not currently have an operational plan to protect its
work force through either evacuation or hardened shelters.
(3) enhance leadership survival among those elements of national/local
leadership not directly targeted. Leadership in shelters identified and tar-
geted directly would not be expected to survive; however, leadership
in shelters not targeted and reasonably hardened (as in the Soviet civil
defense program) would have a good chance of surviving.
On the other hand, civil defense measures would not:
—­prevent massive damage to each nation’s economic, political,
social, and military structure, that is, damage levels of 70–90% against
the identified industrial target base of each nation. Protection of indus-
trial and most military facilities against nuclear attack is virtually
impossible or prohibitively expensive. Only in the case of extremely

hard facilities (ICBM silos, for example) or highly mobile units can a
nuclear target maintain a chance of survival. Protection of some criti-
cal economic equipment and supplies might be feasible and might aid
in postwar recovery. However, such efforts would be effective only in
peripheral areas, not in areas directly attacked.
Combined analytical results for a massive nuclear exchange occur-
ring after the current US and Soviet civil defense programs are projected
into the mid-80s and implemented as planned (i.e., Soviet evacuated
and US in-­place, with 10% spontaneous evacuation) are summarized
below in Table S–2. A US evacuation scheme is expected to increase
initial survivors to 60–90%. Spontaneous evacuation out of risk areas in
excess of 10% would lower US in-­place casualty figures.
Table S–2
MID-80s CIVIL DEFENSE PROGRAM EFFECTIVENESS
Population Survival
US (In-Place)
USSR (Evacuated)
Initial Survivors (%)
Immediate Fatalities (106)
Leadership Survival
Personnel Uninjured
Low
Probably high
Facilities Undamaged
Low
Probably high
Economic Survival
Low
Low
C. What civil defense measures appear to be most useful? Can these
measures be countered by altering the attack?
Civil defense measures that attempt to reduce vulnerability
through in-­place hardening (rather than by redistribution, which pro-
liferates potential targets and increases the cost, in terms of weapons
required, significantly for attaining a given level of damage) tend to be
less effective and more sensitive to changes in the attack lay-­down. For
example, in-­place sheltering and hardening measures can be overcome
by changes in the type and/or number of weapons used against a given
target, changes in weapon height-­of-­burst, etc., or by targeting such in-­
place hardened elements, if they were not already targeted. As noted
previously, only through extreme hardening, concealment, or mobility
can a resource remain a target and maintain a chance of survival.
Civil defense measures that distribute leaders, people, and indus-
trial resources, as significantly to reduce the efficiency with which
these elements can be targeted, are the most useful and less suscep-
tible than other measures to being overcome by alternatives in the
attack laydown. For example, population evacuation that significantly
reduces the number of people at risk to a given nuclear weapons not
only enhances population survival against an economic attack, but also

retains significant effectiveness should an attacker re-­target to kill pop-
ulation per se (see Table S–3).
Table S–3
IMMEDIATE SURVIVORS OF A MAJOR NUCLEAR EXCHANGE
IN THE MID-1980S (% OF TOTAL POPULATION)
Population Status
US
USSR
In place and targeted
In place and not targeted
Evacuated and not targeted
Evacuated and targeted
If the US launched an attack at the mid-­point of a Soviet evacu-
ation, it would cause 30 million more fatalities than an attack when
evacuation was complete. The use of large yield weapons would also
increase blast and residual damage and consequently increase fatali-
ties. Detonating weapons on or near the ground could result in an addi-
tional 15 million fatalities in the Soviet Union due to early fallout.
There is uncertainty about the feasibility of sustaining popula-
tion evacuation for a long time (more than about a month), either in
a continuing crisis with no nuclear attacks or one with nuclear attacks
repeated every few days. Soviet evacuation planning aims to keep
industry in operation, but some feel the discomfort and inconvenience
of temporary housing and the transportation problems engendered in
moving workers to and from their factories would lead to great inef-
ficiencies, low national morale, and eventual economic stagnation.
Adopting a repeated attack policy would require alterations in current
US employment plans.
D. What important aspects of civil defense and attack strategies remain
unexamined?
The relationship between survival and recovery poses unexplored
questions. Some argue that initial survivability is not a good measure of
longer-­term recovery and reconstitution, and that, for example, a large
initial surviving population would quickly deplete strategic stockpiles
and may so overburden the severely damaged medical and industrial
resources of a nation’s postwar economy that recovery could be hin-
dered rather than helped. Others contend that manpower is the most
basic of a nation’s recovery resources and military strength, and that
initial differences in leadership and population survivability will prob-
ably be translated into similar differences in reconstitution.
Another question concerns the relationship between initial survival
and longer-­term survival. Some contend that longer-­term problems
and “neglected” effects will be so severe that many initial survivors will

not live to usefully contribute to postwar recovery. Others contend that
the great majority of initial survivors have a good chance of eventually
returning to useful work.
The role and significance of civil defense for escalation control,
in the event deterrence fails, needs further examination. In addition,
uncertainty exists about the feasibility of sustaining population evac-
uation for a long time (more than about a month), either in a continu-
ing crisis with no nuclear attacks, or one with nuclear attacks repeated
every few days or weeks and so forcing population to remain sheltered.
Finally, this assessment of civil defense is based on calculated
assumptions about the size, extent, nature, and impact of nuclear
exchanges between the US and the Soviet Union. A number of poten-
tially important alternative possibilities have not been carefully exam-
ined. They include:
1) The nature of protracted nuclear campaigns;
2) The effects of forward based systems, reserve forces and/or
third country forces;
3) Major differences in weapons yield and level of attack from
those we postulated.
These issues will require further study before their implications for
civil defense can be determined.
III. US CIVIL DEFENSE POLICY OPTIONS
Civil defense policy sets forth the assumptions, goals, and ratio-
nale underlying program choices. Four alternative policies were identi-
fied in the analysis and are briefly summarized here.
1. The Myth of Civil Defense: This policy option is based on the
assumptions:—­that civil defense would be ineffective in protecting pop-
ulation, given the characteristics of the US and Soviet nuclear arsenals
and the longer-­term effects of a massive US-Soviet nuclear exchange;
that civil defense is neither a significant element of the strategic balance
nor a significant factor during a crisis; and that there are no indications
that the civil defense postures of the superpowers have a significant
effect on the perceptions by other countries of the strategic balance.
For some, the implications of adopting this policy go beyond
merely eschewing a civil defense program. They would claim that the
analytical results presented in Table S–2 are dangerous because they
could lead to false conclusions about limiting casualties and thereby
weaken deterrence. They would prefer declaratory policy stressing
that the massive absolute levels of destruction expected in a nuclear
exchange, coupled with the longer-­term effects, make recovery and sur-
vival of the two societies a moot question. Such a declaratory policy
could also assert the US intention to monitor closely the Soviet civil
defense program and to make adjustments in our offensive forces or

targeting policy in order to negate Soviet future civil defense improve-
ments as necessary.
2. Insurance: This policy is based on the assumption that the gov-
ernment’s statutory responsibility to protect its population and enhance
national recovery, coupled with the chance that a large number of ini-
tial survivors might live long lives thereafter, is adequate justification
for making the modest investment in a workable program to increase
the number of initial survivors among the US population. In the same
light, it is argued that, because initial survival of federal leadership
and related continuity of government functions will likely enhance
population survival in the longer term, a small investment to enhance
leadership survival is also prudent. This policy of “insurance against
the failure of deterrence” assumes that civil defense will have neither
a positive nor negative effect on deterrence nor a significant impact on
crisis management. It also assumes that there is no need to relate US
civil defense policy and programs to those of the Soviets. Instead, deci-
sions on the scope and character of the US program should be made,
like decisions on insurance generally, on the basis of: (1) the type and
severity of the damage that could occur; (2) the probability of the dam-
age occurring; and (3) the costs of the insurance. Different judgments
on each of these factors can lead to different conclusions as to what
insurance is desirable. The insurance rationale was used to support
and as well as the modest Nixon program of FY 1974 ($115 million in
FY 1979 dollars).
3. Equivalent Survivability. Equivalent survivability exists if the pro-
portions of the leadership, population, and economy of the USSR sur-
viving a nuclear exchange are roughly equal to the proportions of the
leadership, population, and economy of the US surviving the exchange.
This policy starts from the finding that at the present time US policies
and programs do not provide for equivalent survivability. Such a goal
is, however, in US national interests and is a necessary corollary of
US strategic forces policy. Achievement of that goal requires new civil
defense measures.
Current US strategic policy is directed towards the maintenance
of essential equivalence. A marked asymmetry in the vulnerability of
strategic forces would be incompatible with this goal. So also is marked
asymmetry in the vulnerability of leadership and population, which
would make it difficult or impossible for the US to achieve an outcome
of a nuclear exchange “on the most favorable terms possible” or one
likely to maximize US postwar power relative to the enemy. Marked
asymmetries in survivability could also undermine the credibility of
the US nuclear deterrent with our NATO and Japanese allies. Inasmuch
as the Soviets believe that effective defenses are essential to deterrence,

a marked difference in the potential survivability of US and Soviet lead-
ership and population might also lead them to doubt the credibility
of the nuclear deterrent. Equivalent survivability as a policy does not
necessarily imply similar or equivalent programs since survivability is
also a function of the nature of the society and of the attack directed
against it.
4. Equivalent Programs: This policy is based on the assumption that
US civil defense can assure adequate security and contribute effec-
tively to deterrence and crisis management only if it is substantially
similar to and equal to the Soviet civil defense program. While it is
essential to have equivalent survivability in terms of outcome indices,
it is equally important, given the uncertainty about exactly how offset-
ting US advantages might be perceived, to have equivalent programs
in terms of input indices. A marked unfavorable discrepancy in pro-
grams would lead the Soviet and others to question the credibility of
our nuclear deterrent.
IV. US CIVIL DEFENSE PROGRAM OPTIONS
The following represent five alternative civil defense programs
(one with two variations) ranging from the very austere to the very
comprehensive. Material on the relation between these programs and
the policy options, the costs of these programs, and their effectiveness
Alternative 1: Minimal Civil Defense. Maintain little or no civil
defense (e.g., warning only) for population protection, and combine
and curtail other civil defense activities
Alternative 2a: Current Level and Program. Maintain a modest base
of civil defense activities with dual use applications. Continue current
modest start on evacuation planning, with plans to be developed by
the mid- to latter 1980s. Supporting systems needed for effective evac-
uation operations would not be enhanced, and a “surge” period of one
year would be required to implement plans.
Alternative 2b: Current Level with Emphasis on Evacuation Planning.
Maintain a modest base of civil defense activities with dual use applica-
tions. Reorient program, within current ceiling, to complete evacuation
plans by the mid-1980s, with a surge period of one year still required to
implement plans.
Alternative 3: Enhanced Population Evacuation/Continuity of Gov-
ernment Capability. Increase capabilities for crisis relocation and for
continuity of government so as to expand substantially protection of
population and leadership and so as to be able to implement plans
7 Attached but not printed.

on one-­two weeks’ notice. This capability is to be obtained by the
mid-1980s.
Alternative 4: Major Civil Defense Capability (Long Term). Over the
next two decades, develop and maintain a capability that matches
the civil defense program of the Soviet Union, through the systematic
incorporation of fall-­out and blast shelters in new construction.
Alternative 5: Major Civil Defense Capability (Short Term). Over the
next five years, develop a civil defense capability that matches or sur-
passes that of the Soviet Union, by the construction of blast shelters
(100 psi) in risk areas and of fall-­out shelters in non-­risk areas.
73.
Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom)
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 5, 1978
SUBJECT
Civil Defense—PRC Minutes
Attached at Tab A are the minutes of the Policy Review Committee
meeting on PRM–32, Civil Defense. They are fairly detailed, following
the discussion in its several digressions, zigs and zags, but I decided
that it is better to error in the direction of completeness because of the
contentious nature of the discussions.
Upon review, it is striking how an inchoate consensus favoring an
explicit policy on civil defense developed toward the end.
—Brown admitted that “equivalent survivability” is difficult to
reject but fears putting it on paper.
—Christopher would follow the Congress if Congress wants a big
program; he acknowledges “equivalent survivability” can be attained
several ways, not only with big programs, i.e., implicit support for the
concept.
—Gelb sees civil defense as part of the strategic equation.
—Tirana explains that Brown’s preferences for “no policy” but
a larger program will be implicitly understood by Congress and the
public as “equivalent survivability” and a belief that civil defense is
effective.
—Your “crisis management” argument stirred strong support from
Mitchell of FPA.
—Bill Smith, of course, came down clearly for “equivalent surviv-
ability,” the JCS position, by calling for a reduction of the present asym-
metries between U.S. and Soviet civil defense.
—Only Spurgeon Keeny was adamant in opposing “equiva-
lent survivability,” but even he admitted a need to give people some
increased probability of surviving.

Tab A

Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting2
SUBJECT
Civil Defense
PARTICIPANTS
State
Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher
Leslie Gelb, Director, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs
Defense
Secretary Harold Brown (Chairman)
David McGiffert, Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs
Lynn E. Davis, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Policy Plans and NSC Affairs
Bardyl R. Tirana, Director, Defense Civil Preparedness Agency
JCS
Lt. General William Y. Smith
CIA
Admiral Stansfield Turner, Director
[name not declassified], Office of Strategic Research Analysis
ACDA
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy Director
Al Lieberman, Chief, Office of Operational Analysis
2 Secret. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.

OMB
Bowman Cutter, Executive Associate Director for Budget
Randy Jayne, Associate Director for National Security and International Affairs
Federal Preparedness Agency
Joseph Mitchell, Director
Dalimil Kybal, Assistant Director for Research, Development and Program
Coordination
White House
Zbigniew Brzezinski
NSC
Samuel Huntington
Reginald Bartholomew
Colonel William E. Odom
MINUTES OF MEETING
Harold Brown opened the discussion by observing what we do in
civil defense to some extent is driven by what the Soviets do. He then
asked Admiral Turner to comment on Soviet programs.
Admiral Turner said the Soviets are investing in a large civil defense
effort sheltering all of the leadership and a small portion of the popula-
tion. The remainder of the population is to be protected by evacuation.
A full seven-­day evacuation effort would protect about 75 percent and
would reduce expected casualties by about 50 percent. If the evacuees
dig elementary shelters, casualties could be reduced by another half.
In the first six to thirty-­six hours of an evacuation, however, a U.S.
strike on the Soviet Union could increase the casualties slightly. From
the second day on, the number would drop rapidly. Admiral Turner
also mentioned two large uncertainties. First, we are not sure how long
the Soviets could remain in an evacuated posture. Second, we cannot
say what the impact of weather conditions would be on civil defense
effectiveness.
Harold Brown asked when and how we would know about Soviet
evacuation if it took place. Stating that the evacuation rate would be
two million people per hour for the first two days, Turner ventured that
satellite and other intelligence systems would detect such movement.
Some skepticism was expressed about detection of such a slow rate of
evacuation.
Keeney insisted that the Soviets would make a public broadcast
if they evacuate. Challenged on his report of the two million per hour
evacuation rate, Admiral Turner called on [name not declassified] who
verified this figure. Brown, Christopher, and others thought it a very
small number for a very large country.
Harold Brown moved the discussion to potential effectiveness of
civil defense and related uncertainties. Would civil defense make a dif-
ference in the outcome of a nuclear exchange? What effect would it

have on society’s survivability? Keeny responded by challenging the
paper’s3 estimates of survivors and condemned it for omitting atten-
tion to the long-­term consequences. Soviet civil defense evacuation, he
added, would give us added strategic warning. Harold Brown agreed
about the warning, observing that we could generate high alert levels
in 48 hours. Keeny suggested [4 lines not declassified].
Keeny challenged the paper’s assertion that only a ten percent
spontaneous U.S. evacuation would occur. Harold Brown observed
that a large spontaneous evacuation without a reception plan would
adversely affect longer-­term survivability. Keeny insisted that the
paper overstates Soviet opportunities to use civil defense and omits
[3 lines not declassified].
Admiral Turner observed that U.S. suburban and rural areas are
better prepared for a spontaneous reception than would be the case in
the Soviet Union. Cutter agreed and emphasized the U.S. advantage in
roads and family automobiles.
Keeny argued that evacuation in the context of this analysis cer-
tainly helps but it does not take into account the longer term effects.
Huntington added that the Working Group had discussed the long-­
term effects but happily we do not have nuclear war experience to give
us sufficient data to answer Keeny’s question.
Brzezinski emphasized the effect that any U.S. civil defense has
on the Soviet leaders. First, since the Soviets apparently believe in the
efficacy of their own civil defense, it is bad for [2 lines not declassified].
Second, the crisis management role of civil defense on both sides is crit-
ical. A superpower confrontation in the coming decade is not to be dis-
counted. In a situation where the Soviets implement a controlled civil
defense evacuation and the U.S. responds with a chaotic spontaneous
evacuation, the President’s diplomatic bargaining position would be
seriously undercut.
Harold Brown tried to defer this discussion of “perceptions” to
later discussion of policy choices. Brzezinski rejected that suggestion,
insisting that talk of civil defense effectiveness requires discussion of
mutual perceptions of civil defense effectiveness.
Secretary Brown then proceeded around the table soliciting agency
positions on the five program options, adding that he thought civil
defense and continuity of government are separate in this case.
Christopher led off for State by arguing that we cannot compart-
mentalize the discussion. Suppose civil defense is part of the strategic
balance and we frighten the public and allies by saying so. If we cannot
3 See the attachment to Document 72.

then get the Congressional support for the programs, we would be
worse off than if we had done nothing.
Christopher added that he preferred to consult with Congress
before making a program choice but that he leans towards Option 2b.4
Harold Brown said that Congress’ view is unstructured. Congress
probably would follow the Administration on any program choice
between Options 2a and 3. Lower and higher level programs might get
support but that is more dubious. Harold Brown rejected Christopher’s
request for Congressional consultations first, insisting that it had to be
the other way around: we must choose a program and then go to the
Congress.
Keeny, speaking for ACDA, favored program Option 2b, and
expressed a fear of tying our civil defense to Soviet activities.
Cutter, speaking for OMB, chose program Option 2b with reserva-
tions about civil defense effectiveness.
Mitchell, speaking for the Federal Preparedness Agency, con-
cluded that our real choices lie between 2a and 3, but that in view of
Brzezinski’s comments, perceptions are key in assessing civil defense
effectiveness. Presently, what we know about perceptions indicates that
we need a policy, program emphasis, and some movement.
Admiral Turner, speaking for CIA, responded to Brown’s question,
what is the effect of U.S. civil defense on Soviet perceptions? Turner said
there are two schools of thought. One argues that the Soviets only care
about our offensive programs. The other argues that they care about
both offensive and defensive programs. An improved new U.S. pro-
gram would, therefore, only have a mild effect on Soviet perceptions.
Lt. General Smith, speaking for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, observed
that we seem to believe that we must do more. The question is how
much. The JCS favors Option 3.
Harold Brown then asked DCPA Director Bardyl Tirana whether
we could achieve enhanced evacuation by diverting funds within the
present civil defense budget from other elements of the program. Tirana
answered that all but $40 million of the present budget is required to
buy into the state and local civil defense organizations. The remaining
$40 million is largely allocated for evacuation planning. It is politically
impossible to divert the other money from state and local organiza-
tions because they would withdraw, leaving the Federal Government
to build a replacement organization which would cost at least twice as
much in the absence of local matched funds.
[2 paragraphs (21 lines) not declassified]
Mitchell stated that he had been appalled at the neglected state of
affairs when he became Director of FPA. We cannot defer the budget
issue for long if we are serious about continuity of government. The
“Washington arc” of hard sites goes back to the Eisenhower Adminis-
tration. Little improvement has occurred since that time.
Brzezinski asked if we could postpone the decision for two weeks
and use the time to get a sufficient understanding of the “continuity of
[41 lines not declassified].
Huntington observed that perhaps Brown had in mind “assur-
ance” rather than “insurance.”
[7 lines not declassified]
Brzezinski rejoined that “equivalent survivability” makes it less
likely that we would need to evacuate in a crisis because both sides
would realize the other has an equivalent response.
Keeny insisted that evacuation would make no difference for a cri-
sis, a point that Brown challenged.
Brzezinski went on to argue that “equivalent survivability” might
not mean an equivalent civil defense program. [1 lines not declassified] In
SALT III we must eliminate both civil defense and air defense on both
sides.
Harold Brown, responding to Keeny, insisted that an option to
evacuate for civil defense is worth $100 million. Keeny replied that he
fears an insurance policy will raise expectations which are illusory.
Tirana insisted that an explicit civil defense policy is very import-
ant for explaining anything we do to the public and Congress. If we
have no public policy rationale as we increase the program, we encour-
age the public to believe that civil defense will be effective. Silence on
a policy rationale, therefore, encourages the public to believe we have
“equivalent survivability.”
Harold Brown admitted that it is difficult to reject the “equivalent
survivability” but he fears putting it down on paper. He does not worry
about Soviet civil defense being effective. If he did, he would support
a civil defense policy. There are genuine differences among us on this
point, he added.
Christopher observed that the policy choices as stated in the paper
are loaded. There are other ways to achieve “equivalent survivability.”
Brown agreed and noted that “equivalent survivability” might be
achieved on civil defense the way cruise missiles were substituted by
the B–1.
Brzezinski said that “insurance” may be all right as a policy but
its substance and definition should be that as stated in the paper for

“equivalent survivability.” We will need both the policy and the pro-
gram for SALT III, where civil defense should play the same role that
the ABM played in SALT I. If the Soviets will not cut back their civil
defense, that is a sure sign of their seriousness about their war fighting
doctrine and program efforts.
Brown rejected Brzezinski’s assertions on this point. Brzezinski
once again emphasized the crisis control problem in which we could
find ourselves between the two unhappy choices of war or surrender.
Brown then tried to express the spirit of the policy. It should be
“equivalent effectiveness of civil defense when added to our strategic
forces.” Tirana reasserted the need for a policy rationale for state and
local leaders. Cutter insisted that the local leadership will not under-
stand “equivalent survivability.” Keeny added that they can under-
stand “insurance.”
Brown remarked that civil defense is part of the strategic bal-
ance. Keeny agreed that the option for evacuation may be useful but
expressed fears that the costs are understated.
Brzezinski observed that if we initiate civil defense talks now, the
Soviets probably would not respond, but with a U.S. program enhance-
ment, they probably will respond in a year or two.
Brown, answering Keeny, insisted that the cost figures for Option 3
would provide some real evacuation capability.
Keeny insisted that the Soviets have never practiced evacuation.
[name not declassified] supplied the intelligence information that in fact
a major civil defense exercise was held in Moscow last April and that
urban exercises for parts of cities are frequent. Keeny still insisted that
Soviet civil defense is wholly ineffective.
Harold Brown said that we are in a position to recommend pro-
gram Option 2c with a question about how much to add for “continuity
of government” which should be left to be answered by a short study.
On the policy question, he added, we want something like “insurance
of the strategic balance.”
Brzezinski insisted that the rationale of “equivalent survivability”
with some policy word like “insurance” is what we need.
General Smith observed that we need to reduce the asymmetries
between Soviet and U.S. civil defense postures and, therefore, a policy
must rationalize such a reduction.
Brzezinski added that “equivalent survivability” as it is defined in
the paper is more clear about our purposes.
Gelb stated that civil defense is part of the overall strategic balance;
equality of civil defense programs is not what we are after in a policy.
Brzezinski insisted that we will need a short follow-­up meeting on
continuity of government and a new policy statement.

Harold Brown expressed hope that it would be a very short meet-
ing, if a meeting at all.
Harold Brown then noted some other things which are not on the
agenda for this PRC but relate to the new civil defense organizational
location in the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA):
1. The effect on civil defense and strategy of the organizational
changes in the U.S. civil defense set-­up.
2. The long-­term effects of a nuclear strike, after two months, three
months, six months, etc.
3. The feasibility and difficulties in sustaining a civil defense pos-
ture where the population has been relocated from urban centers.
After the meeting had officially ended, a number of remarks about
procedures and positions were expressed.
Keeny said that the PRM does not adequately reflect ACDA’s posi-
tions. It should not be considered a final document.
Christopher observed that the PRM does not include a full repre-
sentation of agency views.
Huntington responded that the views of agencies are so diverse
that every agency can make the same complaint as Christopher. There
is no practical way in a single document to represent fully this diversity.
Christopher explained that his concern is more about the docu-
ment falling into the hands of the New York Times.
Tirana observed that the best way to prevent that is to preempt it
with an unclassified statement on a civil defense policy decision.

74.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, August 7, 1978
SUBJECT
FY 1980–1984 Defense Program
As you know, the Defense Department’s Planning, Programming,
and Budgeting System is somewhat different from that used in other
Departments. In particular, we make much more extensive use of a
programming phase (now nearing completion) during which we set-
tle major issues before we enter the budgeting phase during which we
settle details. The programming phase addresses not only the coming
year, but the next five, and it is cast in “programmatic” terms (e.g., Stra-
tegic Forces, General Purpose Forces, etc.) rather than budget category
terms (e.g., Military Personnel Army, Other Procurement Navy, etc.).
Last March I issued my Consolidated Guidance to the Services as
the basis for the preparation of their 5-­year programs. You will recall
that I sent you a 10-­page summary of its key points, and we discussed
it over a luncheon with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, followed by an NSC
meeting last May 10th.2
In response to that Consolidated Guidance, the Services have now
submitted their recommended programs. I have reviewed them and
will, during the second week in August, be discussing with them and
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff modifications that I have in
mind. Following that, and—­insofar as we could—­having settled the
major issues of the Defense program, we will be ready to turn to the res-
olution of its details through the budgetary process. However, before
taking that next step, I again need your guidance.
This year we have extended the principles of ZBB3 to our program-
ming process, and have prepared not one, but three complete, alterna-
tive Defense programs at significantly different fiscal levels. While I do
not think you want—­or need—­to concern yourself with all the differ-
ences between those alternative programs, I think that an appreciation
the heading to the top of the memorandum and wrote: “Harold—NSC format best—­after
I have paper for a day or so. J.”
dential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No minutes of the meeting were found. The
NSC meeting that followed is Document 64. For Brown’s 10-­page summary of key points
of the Consolidated Guidance, see the attachment to Document 63.
3 Zero-­based budgeting.

of the major ones, not only with respect to cost but also the implica-
tions for effectiveness, is essential prior to your decision on what the
Defense program should be. This whole process—­everything we have
been doing since last November—­has been designed expressly to give
you that appreciation, and it is now ready for decision.
With that in mind, I propose to send to you by August 15th a mem-
orandum of between 5 and 10 pages. It will describe the highlights of
what we could achieve at the basic program level, as well as the effect
of a higher program level and what that would cost, as well as what we
would have to sacrifice at the lower program level and how much that
would save.
Each of the three program levels would be, in my view, internally
balanced. At the same time, alternative levels for particular categories
(strategic forces, naval forces, etc.) have been considered in arriving at
the proper program for each of the three levels. Some of these program
decisions have sufficient national importance and foreign policy impact
to warrant your personal attention and guidance now. The memoran-
dum would highlight the items I see falling into that category.
Following your receipt of that memorandum, I would like to meet
with you during the latter half of that week, before you leave Wash-
ington. After a discussion of the issues raised in the memorandum, I
would like to make my recommendations to you and get from you at
least a tentative decision on the budget level for FY 1980 and the pro-
gram through FY 1984. One possibility is an NSC meeting.4 Another is
to use the breakfast of Friday, August 18th for this purpose.
I know you face difficult decisions this year. Among them are the
need to respond to the severe effects of a rising inflation rate, to the
growing costs of domestic programs, and to the massive buildup of
Soviet military power. I cannot make decisions about such responses
simple, but I do think you will find that the review of the outcome of
our programming process that I am proposing will be informative and
useful. Moreover, I believe it should precede the budget scrub; such
program decisions are more properly associated with foreign policy
issues.5
Harold Brown
4 Brzezinski underlined this sentence, drew an arrow to the bottom of the memo-
randum, and wrote: “We propose to use the NSC meeting to introduce this review. Z.B.”
5 Brzezinski sent the memorandum back to Brown under cover of an October 10
memorandum in which he wrote: “Attached is a copy of your August 7 memorandum
to the President on FY 1980–1984 Defense Program. Please note the President’s com-
ment.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 5,

75.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, August 13, 1978
SUBJECT
The Defense Program—Request for Guidance
This is the memorandum promised you in my note of August 7.2
Its purposes are to report to you on progress to date on the formulation
of the FY 80–84 Defense five-­year program and, more importantly, to
obtain your guidance as we move to the next step in this process which
so vitally affects the security of our country.
As was explained in my note, I directed the preparation this year
of balanced five-­year defense programs at three different fiscal levels,
to permit comparison of how much change in military forces (and, as a
result, in military risk) each involves—­not only the effect during 1980–
84, but implications for subsequent years as well.
The three fiscal levels used are termed the basic, enhanced and
decremented. The basic level was developed last November in coor-
dination with OMB, by starting with the $126 billion you requested
for defense for FY 79, plus real growth of slightly under 3%, plus a
6% allowance for inflation based on the estimates then available. The
does not adequately allow for the inflation rate now forecast, as is noted
more fully hereafter).3
The enhanced level adds approximately 4%4 to the basic defense
program for FY 1980, with slightly greater additions in each intervening
year so that the enhanced level by FY 1984 is 6% greater than the basic.
the top of the memorandum Brzezinski wrote: “VU, FE. (The P. has seen.) ZB.” Brown
sent the memorandum to Carter under an August 13 covering memorandum in which he
wrote: “Attached is my memorandum on the Defense program and its implications, as
background for the NSC meeting on Tuesday and for subsequent discussions. I have fur-
nished copies only to Cy and Zbig, and have asked them to treat it as for their eyes only.”
On Brown’s covering memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “Sun. p.m. Since Harold wants no
staffing, I have underlined those key passages that bear on the forthcoming NSC meet-
ing. Z.B.” Next to Brzezinski’s comments, Carter wrote: “Emphasize US achievements.
Map—US vs SU influence. ACDA Dir.” (Ibid.) For the record of the NSC meeting, see
Document 76.
2 See Document 74.
3 Carter wrote “?” in the left margin next to this paragraph.
which do not affect such other fixed DoD accounts as retirement pay, and by raising it
annually up to an increase of 9% for FY 1984. Because these enhancements affected only

The decremented level is calculated in a converse manner—­it is 4% less
levels (covering a range of some $95 billion in total program through
FY 1984) permit us to consider a reasonably wide range of defense pro-
grams, and to have a better understanding of the implications of differ-
ent levels of the Defense program.
The next step is one of particular importance. The three are pro-
gram benchmarks to define what capabilities would be added at the
higher levels, or sacrificed at the lower. Recognizing the other claims on
our national resources (though no other claim can match in importance
that of protecting our physical security), I need your guidance as to
what the level of the Defense program for the next five years, and the
budget for the next year, is to be. Your selection of a level now, followed
by my staff’s preparation of the balanced program corresponding to it,
will lead to the final step in the process: preparation of the FY 80 budget
for submission to the Congress next January.5
I have prepared this memorandum in three parts. The first summa-
rizes briefly the present military context in which your decision will be
taken, and the trends which have led to that military posture.
Part II, the main portion, summarizes the conclusions from eight
months of intense effort by me and many others in the Department,
including the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the JCS, and the Mil-
itary Departments. It describes the implications, mainly in hardware
and force structure terms, of the choice of one or another level of five-­
year defense program—­what really happens to our forces and defense
capability, and in what particulars, if you decide to expand or contract
the commitment to the country’s defense.
Finally, in Part III I have appended my thoughts on the domestic
and international considerations of a nature not entirely military which
bear on the implementation and the effects of the defense decisions
which you take.
part of the DoD budget, the divergence from the basic level DoD budget is only, as noted,
4%–6%. [Footnote is in the original.]
5 These programs of course represent only three specific points on a continuum of
possibilities. Because of the large effort involved, I have not tried to build other properly
balanced programs intermediate to these. By preserving these three as points of reference,
we will be able to accommodate quickly to any intermediate level you might choose now,
or adopt later. [Footnote is in the original.]

I. BACKGROUND FOR DECISION
A. The Military Balance
Our military capabilities relative to the Soviets’ are still in the zone
of “essential equivalence” that you directed in PD–18,6 but the general
trend of the military comparison is quite unambiguously against us,
and is widely recognized as such both here and abroad.7
This degradation is not due to any sudden surge on the part of
the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union has been increasing its defense
expenditures in real terms at a steady rate of 3% to 4% every year, com-
pounded, for the past 20 years.
What we are seeing today is the cumulative payoff of those many
years of steady effort on their part—­an effort whose persistence is
matched only by its breadth. In strategic offensive forces, the Soviets
have deployed new ICBMs, SLBMs, and manned bombers, with a
large and continuing R&D program for the future. In strategic defen-
sive forces, they have a serious civil defense effort,8 are deploying new
SAMs and interceptors, and continue R&D in the ABM field. Their the-
ater nuclear forces now include camouflaged mobile SS–20s, able to
strike all the capitals of Europe, deployed in the Soviet countryside. In
land forces, they have deployed large numbers of new tanks, armored
personnel carriers, self-­propelled artillery, and attack helicopters. Their
tactical air forces used to be limited primarily to defense; but now they
are being equipped with offensive aircraft more nearly like ours. The
Soviet Navy, having moved well beyond coastal defense, now is taking
tactical aircraft to sea, and developing modern ships and landing craft
for amphibious assault. The pattern of growth seems to touch all areas
of the Soviet armed forces, and though there may be doubt as to its pur-
pose, there can be no doubt whatever as to its presence.9
The Soviets now spend substantially more on defense than we do—­
this year 20% to 40% more, depending on how the calculation is made.
In terms of that portion of defense spending that represents investment
in military weapons and R&D, the Soviets are outstripping us even fur-
ther. Much more of our Defense budget than of theirs, of course, goes
simply for pay and retirement. Their investments in military forces, as
6 “The United States will maintain an overall balance of military power between
the United States and its allies on the one hand and the Soviet Union and its allies on the
other hand at least as favorable as that that now exists.” [Footnote is in the original. For
PD–18, see Document 31.]
7 Brzezinski underlined “general trend,” “is quite unambiguously against us,” and
“is widely recognized as such both here and abroad,” and drew a vertical line in the left
margin next to the second half of this sentence.
8 Brzezinski underlined the words “serious civil defense effort” and wrote “?” in
the right margin.
9 Carter drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this sentence.

measured by the hardware output, are about double ours. (See Figure
Overall spending is a crude measure, representing a combination
of present capabilities (current accounts) and the piling up of future
ones (investment accounts). But its very crudity makes it the simplest
and most visible measure of military power. And we see the cumulative
effects in many specific additions to Soviet military capability, as noted
above. At the same time, over the same twenty-­year period, our defense
spending in real terms, after rising because of costs of the Vietnam War,
was when John Kennedy took office. Our Army has fewer personnel
than it did before the Korean War. Our Navy has fewer ships than at any
time since before World War II.
I do not wish to sound unduly pessimistic. I fully recognize that
there are other factors—­for example, the contributions of our allies and
the fact that some Soviet forces are stationed on the PRC border—­that
tend to mitigate the trend toward imbalance. I am concerned, however,
not just by the current balance but by the trends. They do, in my opin-
ion, involve increasing military risk to the security of the United States.
10 Carter underlined the words “double ours” and wrote “Totals, incl. Allies?” in the
margin. Figure 1 “Defense Investment Outlays,” is attached but not printed.
11 Figure 2, “Defense Budget Trends,” is attached but not printed.
12 Figure 3, “Defense Totals,” is attached but not printed. Parts II and III of the mem-
orandum were not found.

76.
Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1
SUBJECT
U.S.-Soviet Relations: Policy Implications of Interaction of Political Trends in Key
Regions with Soviet Conventional and Strategic Buildup
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
tholomew. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House. Carter ini-
tialed the upper right corner of the minutes.
2 See Document 62.
State:
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Defense:
Secretary Harold Brown
ACDA:
Mr. Paul Warnke
JCS:
General David Jones
CIA:
Admiral Stansfield Turner
White House:
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Mr. Hamilton Jordan
NSC:
Mr. Reginald Bartholomew
(notetaker)
The meeting started with Brzezinski making the point that the pur-
pose of the meeting is to examine the implications for U.S. policy of the
interaction of political trends in key regions with the Soviet strategic
and conventional buildup. He then suggested that the President call
upon Stan Turner to initiate a discussion in regard to the three regions
mentioned in the agenda given in the recent NIE.2
Turner: The Soviets are more assertive because of their power;
because they feel that the U.S. is not as competitive. They are aware of
the limitations of their power but they see detente as permitting effec-
tive competition. Moreover, their increasing war fighting capability
gives them greater confidence. They are buoyed by their experience in
Africa. Moreover, abroad the perception is one of change in the balance
of power.
The President: Are the Soviets better off today than they were a few
years ago? Are they better off now in Africa than they were three or
four years ago?
Turner: The record in Africa is mixed, but one should note Ethiopia
and Angola.

The President: Let’s consider where the Soviets are now stronger
than they were, where their political influence is greater.
Turner: I think they are clearly in a stronger position in Africa, in
India and Pakistan, and in Southeast Asia.
The President: Even considering what happened to them in Egypt?
Turner: Yes.
Vance: I don’t agree. Look at what happened to them in Egypt,
Somalia, Guinea and the Sudan. They tried to block the Namibia settle-
ment but it went ahead. In India, Desai has replaced Gandhi and Desai
is more to the center. It is not clear at all that their position around the
world is better today than it has been.
Brown: Their position in Ethiopia is better. And certainly their role
in Rhodesia compared to five or seven years ago is greater and more
troublesome. On Namibia, the outcome remains to be seen. In North
Africa, Qhadafi is a wild card and they have some influence with him.
The Soviets are shipping substantial arms to Libya. The picture is mixed
politically in the Pacific.
Brzezinski: We have to compare the present Soviet position and
action with what it has been in the past. Under Stalin the Soviets con-
centrated on areas in immediate proximity to them (above all Europe)
and we contained them. Then Khrushchev tried to use Sputnik and
general Soviet momentum to launch a political, ideological appeal
of global dimensions. This effort failed and in this Cy Vance is right.
But today we face an ominous development in which the Soviets are
compensating for the decline in their economic and ideological appeal
with military pressure—­massive arms, insertion of troops. It is a clear
sign of their confidence in the military dimension of the balance that
they moved to insert Cuban troops in Africa. This has major political
implications.
The President: I sense that three or four years ago the Soviets saw
Sub-Saharan Africa as an open field. Now, if the Soviets intrude, they
face opposition from us, Black leaders elsewhere in Africa, and from the
world. So they cannot see Africa as an open, unimpeded avenue. Also,
in Europe they face the problem of Euro-Communism. And in Eastern
Asia I think their influence has weakened.
Turner: But they are in a much stronger position in Vietnam and
this is the dominating consideration in Southeast Asia. I think there is a
standoff in Japan. But I think they are in a better position in India and
Pakistan.
Vance: North Korea leans more towards China than in the past. The
Japan-China PFT was a blow to them in the world generally.
The President: If I look at things from Brezhnev’s perspective, I
would feel that what causes us problems also causes him problems. He

doesn’t want to see Angola or Cuba or Vietnam or China turn to the
West; or have Mozambique turn to us for trade; or to see trade between
us and Eastern Europe build up. If I were Brezhnev, I would hate to see
these things happen. We have to take advantage of our opportunities
and it is for this group to see that we do.
Brown: The Soviets are not a likable partner. When they get in, they
seek to dominate. But if you compare their situation with five years
ago, they are better off even if they do have the problems the President
cited. Their influence with India, Pakistan and so forth, depends on
their military power. They don’t have much in the way of economic
power. Though the Soviets do have real worries, they do have levers—­
above all the military. In all of the places we have talked about, they
feel the Soviets are relatively more powerful, vis-­a-­vis the U.S., than
they were five years ago. There is a certain ambivalence in response: for
example, it has moved the Europeans to spend more. The Soviets are
respected and feared, not loved, but they have options. So the Soviets
may have certain apprehensions but do think they are much better off
today than they were.
The President: We should enumerate the areas where we think
we have a problem—­political, trade, or military influence. We should
approach each country or area as a separate question to be addressed.
Congress is more aware of the need for peaceful competition with the
Soviets than ever before. We should plan our political strategy on this
basis and consult with Congress and get them aboard. For example,
Mozambique and Angola are good cases for moving. What are others?
We need to do this on a country-­by-­country basis: where we should
move, what the problems are, the key Congressional elements to get on
board, how to win public approval for our efforts. Our strength should
help us. Brezhnev is vulnerable to competition. We have gotten the
Allies to go with us. We should explore how we can do this with others.
I want to discuss our military presence abroad. I want to consider
places where we can make it felt without direct military confrontation.
I have no feel from Harold Brown or the JCS of the consequences of
a military base in the Sinai. If at Camp David there is no agreement,
there will be fear for the future and a U.S. base could be stabilizing. I
don’t know if we should do it, or how rapid the Soviet reaction would
be. This is one place for a military presence and there may be others in
the world. We should publicize our military presence elsewhere in the
world.
Twelve months of our propaganda against the Cubans in Africa
has led to worldwide pressure on them to get out. They are moving out
of Ethiopia and it will be hard for them to stay in Angola.
Our reputation for weakness, vis-­a-­vis the Soviets, is not deserved.
Many of us are guilty of this. For example, at defense budget time, we

tend to play up Soviet military capabilities and downplay our own.
When we decided to have a public demonstration of our defense capa-
bilities, the cruise missile test failed. We need a careful public relations
effort to show that we are strong militarily as well as economically and
politically. We recognize the Soviet buildup, but we are not vulnerable
or weak. We have to put all of this into proper perspective and cor-
rect the weaknesses we have acknowledged. We have to do this in the
defense budget for 1980 and decide what is best for us.
Jones: The JCS have had a lot of discussion of this. They see a
dilemma. Things now are better than they are perceived but the trends
for the future are worse than they are perceived. And the perception of
imbalance today takes the focus away from the really serious problem
of imbalance in the future. There is a deeper underlying concern about
the military trends in the JCS than I have ever seen, and it is real and
genuine. What we do today won’t impact on the military balance until
the future, but it will affect the perceptions of the future and the present.
Brown: There is too pessimistic a view of the military balance now
and not a pessimistic enough view of the balance in 1982–83.
Brzezinski: We have to separate the global competition with the
Soviets from the competitions in peripheral areas. We will do well
enough in the peripheral areas. The Soviets will not sweep over Africa.
I am more concerned about Soviet power and perceptions in two
areas—Western Europe and the Persian Gulf—­which could affect the
overall U.S./Soviet balance. In Europe we and the Europeans are doing
more than ever before to assure a conventional balance. But internal
politics and instabilities in Europe may mean that Europe’s stronger
NATO shield will be held with a trembling hand. There are also inter-
nal difficulties in Saudi Arabia and the situation is unstable in Iran and
Yemen. Both Saudi Arabia and Iran are concerned about the power bal-
ance between us and the Soviets. They see troublesome ambiguities in
our conduct.
Vance: Some military trends are very disturbing. But we are better
off politically than we give ourselves credit for. I agree with the Pres-
ident’s presentation, but there could be serious political effects down
the road from the military trends.
Warnke: The description on pages 10 and 11 of Soviet motives in
arms control applies precisely to us as well.
Brown: Some events in Europe already can be attributed to the mil-
itary trends and Soviet power. The 3 percent defense budget increase
is one. But Norway backed off FRG participation in an exercise and,
though there are domestic reasons, I think perceptions of Soviet power
were involved. The Germans themselves may be starting to negotiate
with the Soviets on different security premises—I am thinking of Bahr

and Wehner. It is hard to see how much all this has to do with military
power, but it has something to do with it.
Turner: On the President’s remarks, the Soviets would not be both-
ered if Angola turns somewhat to the West. They would still have 20,000
Cuban troops there. The UNITA still gives them reason to remain. As
for more trade between the West and Eastern Europe, it is not a major
factor in their economy and they are now turning back to the Soviets
in any event. On Cuba, we can open relations, but Cuba will still be
so dependent on the Soviets that the Soviets cannot be replaced. The
Soviets would see all of these steps as retrograde but they would not
tremble.
Vance: I think we should work with the Germans on Poland. The
Germans just turned down a loan. Zbig and I have been discussing this.
The Vice President: I think we have made impressive progress in
Eastern Europe. In Yugoslavia, we have good relations where before
we were barely able to talk to them. The return of the Crown to Hun-
gary had a strong psychological effect.3 We have good relations with
Romania.
The President: I think our relation with Nigeria is a notable achieve-
ment in our African policy.
I sense in Harold Brown’s memo4 and in the NIE a feeling of
despair and of abject inferiority. I don’t feel this. If I look at the globe
from Brezhnev’s standpoint, I see tremendous problems everywhere,
starting with uncertain allies. I don’t feel the sense of Soviet superiority
that is in these memos. We should start to be more hard-­nosed about our
defense expenditures. There are things we can do that would cause the
Soviets concern. We should not tell Brezhnev that we are building a big
nuclear carrier and a fleet of escorts, and not GLCMs or medium-­range
ballistic missiles in Europe. We should focus our defense spending on
the most important weapons that show our strength. Our substance is
sapped by non-­weapons spending in the defense budget. We should
also consider the proportion of the Soviet budget that goes to meet
China, to control Eastern Europe, and to build a continental air defense
that we don’t have to depend on. We have done too much equivocating
with Congress on defense.
Brown: Efficient management is important. But we cannot simply
pick three or four important weapons. The total amount of money we
spend determines our military capabilities. Soviet expenditures are effi-
cient. We don’t think much of Soviet air defenses, but they have a differ-
ent doctrine and this expenditure contributes to their sense of security.
3 Documentation on the January 1978 return of the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary
is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XX, Eastern Europe.
4 See Document 75.

Brzezinski: Two points: 1) we have to make measured responses
to the Soviets on the defense level; 2) politically, we are in one of those
periods of friction with the Soviets which in the past have tended to
produce new rules governing the relationship. The Soviets may learn
from the costs they are now incurring, e.g., developments in the non-­
aligned movement and the Chinese move into Africa and now Europe.
So we need to exercise considerable caution in how we handle the Sovi-
ets in this period of friction. We should insulate SALT and other arms
control matters as much as we can. But we should be wary of initiatives
that invite the Soviets to forget what has happened (the difficulties they
have created) and make sure we make them reflect on the political costs
of their actions. If we do this it may result, as it has in the past, in greater
restraint in their future behavior. We must let them know that Third
World turbulence will be with us for a long time and that their relations
with us will be affected by how the Soviets behave. I think we are on the
right course and we should keep on it.
The President: Other than increasing the defense budget, what else
should we do to improve relations with the Soviets?
Vance: The key still is SALT. I think nothing will improve the rela-
tionship unless we have a SALT agreement.
Brzezinski: SALT may no longer be so decisive in the overall politi-
cal and military relationship.
Brown: The relationship may get somewhat worse without SALT.
But will it get better with SALT? I doubt it.
The Vice President: We have pursued human rights for more than
a year. Is it a net plus or what? By pouring it on the Soviets on human
rights, do we strengthen the people we don’t want to come to power?
U.S. opinion thinks we have overdone it with the Soviets on human
rights.
Brzezinski: What actually have we done? We have been restrained
in terms of government acts and have not talked much about human
rights in the Soviet Union, after the gestures at the beginning of the
Administration.
The Vice President: But are we strengthening the Soviet elements
we don’t like. Suslov must be arguing that Helsinki5 got them in a
lot of trouble and encouraged centrifugal tendencies in Eastern Europe
and in the Soviet Union. Now the U.S. is exploiting these tendencies to
weaken the Soviet Union. The Soviet reaction may be that we have to
get tough, we need leaders who will stand up to the United States.
The President: Our human rights stance aggravated the Soviets.
Some Allies think we did too much.

Page 25 of the NIE lists five goals of Soviet policy.6 I assume they
are still applicable today.
Brzezinski: The goal of movement into the Third World has higher
priority for the Soviet Union today.
The Vice President: The Soviets wish they had never signed Helsinki
but they are stuck with it. It is now a major factor in relations between
the Soviets and Eastern Europe as well as the West. We have to stand on
our position on the Helsinki accords. But some of the things we have to
say do strengthen the hard liners. It is a tricky road to walk. We have to
stand behind our position.
Warnke: This is partly the price the Soviets had to pay to get the
recognition of the European status quo at Helsinki.
Brzezinski: It is a mistake to punish the Soviets for their actions
on human rights and not for their actions in the Third World. Unfor-
tunately, this is the impression that was conveyed by the efforts sur-
rounding Shcharanskiy, etc.7 The prevailing impression is that we are
penalizing the Soviets for how they conducted their internal affairs
rather than for their international behavior where we are on much
stronger ground.
The President: I don’t disagree. But both are part of the successful
arousing of world public opinion against the Soviets, both speaking out
on human rights and my statements on Africa. I feel that as a result the
Soviets have lost esteem in the non-­aligned movement and in the West-
ern world. I remember when we used to be on the defensive on human
rights. We were the target and the Soviets were the great protector of
human rights. We were seen as aggressors because of Vietnam. Now
the Soviets have the onus of being intruders, especially in Africa with
the Cubans. We have done part of the job and have had a net gain on
this.
I sense in this meeting a special concern with the rate of the Soviet
military buildup and our response. But we stand well everywhere else.
We need an objective analysis of the proportion of the Soviet mil-
itary budget which is not comparable to our own needs. After all, we
don’t have to maintain a million men on the Canadian border.
6 The five goals listed were: détente diplomacy toward the United States; détente
diplomacy toward Western Europe; defense of the East European status quo; contain-
ment of China; and movement into the Third World.
labor. For documentation on the Carter administration’s objections to the treatment of
Shcharanskiy and fellow dissidents such as Aleksandr Ginzburg, who was convicted of
VI, Soviet Union.

Brown: Twenty-­five percent of the Soviet budget goes for defense
against China. But the forces they maintain in Eastern Europe are the
forces they would use for attack on Western Europe.
The President: You have about got me convinced that we need to do
more on defense. We also have to compete in other areas for minds and
hearts in different countries—­through trade, economic relations and
the like. We should delineate the things we can do above and beyond
the military, that would let us compete peacefully.
Brzezinski: We are developing with State a package of measures to
undercut the Soviets and Cubans in Africa.
The President: What can we do to assure the Saudis and Iran? We
need an NIE on the kinds of peaceful actions that can permit us to
compete around the world. It ought to assess the various nations and
regions, assess the use of our technology, and develop a propaganda
effort designed to show that our strength is greater than now perceived.
We should all make an effort to do this and to sell our position.
Brzezinski: This must entail a strategic concept: 1) continued
strengthening of our relations with the European Allies; 2) stronger
relations with Saudi Arabia and Iran; 3) stronger relations with Japan,
China, and Korea.
The President: This should be in the spirit of peaceful competition
with the Soviets. We do have to make sure that there is no need for apol-
ogy on the military side. Maybe we are deficient on this, or have been in
the past. We should remedy the deficiencies.
Brown: Military power won’t win for us. We have to rely on other
things to build our influence. For example, things are looking better
with Iraq—­they are turning to us because we have things to offer.
The Vice President: We should involve the private sector more.
American businessmen see more people around the world than gov-
ernment officials do. Our world economic position is shrinking. We
ought to particularly enlarge and expand our position in Asia and help
the private sector to do this.
Vance: We are already doing a great deal. Chuck Robinson will be
leading an OPIC group to the Far East. John Moore will be going to
Japan.
The President: We ought to use the 50 state governors, for example,
ask them to organize trade missions to various countries. They would
be delighted.
We should put together a program on what we could do in the
peaceful competition, vis-­a-­vis various countries. We need to identify
the specific countries.
Brzezinski: The countries should be identified strategically in rela-
tionship to our stance vis-­a-­vis the Soviet Union and China.

The Vice President: We should do more to compete economically.
The recent tax law means that U.S. multinational firms are hiring non-
U.S. citizens because it is easier and cheaper. This is the kind of mistake
we should work on.
The President: When Eanes came to the NATO Summit meeting,8
he was very concerned about Spain and, in answer to my question, said
we could help by getting the key conservative Spanish military leaders
to visit the U.S., and we did that. I think we should reach out our hands
to military leaders and others and do more to bring people to the U.S.
Brown: Bringing military leaders here also reassures them about
our capabilities because of what they see here.
Brzezinski: We will do a paper summarizing the conclusions of this
meeting and the things that should be done.
The President: I want to ask Paul Warnke what he thinks the impact
would be on the Soviets’ desire for cooperation with us and detente if
we were to commit GLCMs to Western Europe and establish a military
presence in the Middle East.
Warnke: The Soviets would feel that they would have to match us
with conventional GLCMs in Europe, but putting GLCMs in Europe
would not torpedo SALT. It would just accelerate Soviet development
of cruise missile capabilities. But would Western Europe feel better if
both sides had cruise missiles, rather than neither having them? I think
that there would be greater fear in Western Europe of surprise attack.
Brzezinski: Cruise missiles are not a surprise attack weapon.
Jones: Our inability to talk about command and control of cruise
missiles with the Allies—­targeting, range, and the like—­is slowing our
GLCM programs and this is what caused the slip from 1982. We need
to open a dialogue with the Allies on these subjects. The dialogue itself
would help to reassure the Allies.
The President: With reference to the trip I have asked Harold Brown
to make to Europe, I have to do a personal letter to Callaghan, Schmidt
and Giscard to find out what their thinking is and what they will do
Europe. I don’t have answers from them on these items.
I have no doubt that if the Soviets had a chance to get a military
base in the Middle East they would do it. But is it good for us to do it?
Warnke: To return to your first question, I think the main Soviet
reaction to putting GLCMs in Europe would be a very heavy ERW-­style
campaign on the Germans. They would react in this manner rather than
in SALT.

They would see an American military base in the Sinai as separate
from SALT. They don’t believe in linkage. They would not like it but
they would accept it. It would not interfere with arms control.
Vance: In my session with the SRFC, they went into the question of a
military base in the Middle East at length. I said that the suggestion had
been put to the U.S. but that we had made no decision. Glenn thought
it would be very serious, that it would change the whole relationship
with Israel and the Arabs and that it would increase the possibility of
our being involved in a conflict. The question is very controversial.
Brown: Details on any base in the Middle East will matter in reac-
tions to it. One is whether Israel and Egypt each asked for it. Another is
the kind of base—­for example, the JCS are examining a trilateral—U.S.-
Israel-Egyptian—­base for training purposes. In any event, the chances
of our being embroiled in a conflict in the area would go up if we have
a base there.
Vance: I think that if a base is critical to a security guarantee and the
linchpin that will get us a peace agreement, then we should do it. But it
should not just be thrown in at any point.
Jones: We are looking at a trilateral training base that would be
open to all.
The President: Both Begin and Sadat raised the base with me. Sadat
said that we should conclude a mutual security treaty with Israel. I
need an answer on the base question for the Camp David meeting. The
Israelis have always said they don’t want U.S. troops. But I might face
a request on the base nonetheless. I don’t know whether we want the
base option or not. Looking at our problem in reassuring Saudi Arabia,
Iran, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, do we want a land presence in the Middle
East or are our ships in the Eastern Mediterranean enough?
Brown: We have done a paper which we have given to Zbig and to
Cy’s people. There are marginal military advantages to an American
military base in the Sinai. But it does mean that we are more likely to be
involved in any conflict. If it is needed as a guarantee to secure a peace
agreement, then it is sensible and there are military advantages in rela-
tion to the region. And a peace agreement in the Middle East cancels
out the added risk that a base entails of getting involved in a conflict.
Brzezinski: A base helps secure a Middle East agreement. It also
gives Saudi Arabia and Iran reassurance.
The President: Does the U.S. want a base in the Middle East if we
can get a peace settlement without it? Do we want a base to reassure
the Saudis and Iran?
Brown: We have to be asked to establish a base by Egypt and Israel.
If we have choices in the matter, we should not establish a base if it is
not necessary to get a peace settlement.

Jones: We would prefer a base in Saudi Arabia from the military
standpoint and the critical importance of Saudi Arabia.
Brzezinski: A base in the Sinai does more for us throughout the
region. A base in Saudi Arabia will be more susceptible to internal
instability.
The Vice President: If we can get a peace settlement, we should be
ready to pay for it with a base. The Sinai accords and the electronic
systems set up are very important. Sadat would like an excuse not to
invade Israel and to help resist his hotheads. There is nothing now in
the way. An American base in the Sinai would be just a psychological,
stabilizing presence.
Vance: A base would certainly help us with the problem of what to
do with the air base in the Sinai and with the Israeli settlements prob-
lem as well.
The President: The base would be on Egyptian soil. If I thought there
were any opposition from Egypt or Israel to a base, then I wouldn’t do it.
But I do think a base would contribute to stability in the area.
Turner: Saudi support for a base will be critical. The Soviets will try
hard to split the Arabs on the issue and Saudi support will be needed to
help hold firm against this.
The President: This meeting has been helpful to me. I would like to
ask each of you to send Zbig further thoughts and comments on the
issues we discussed and on the items we talked about doing.

77.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, August 16, 1978
SUBJECT
Defense Authorization Bill
I have given further thought to the question whether the defense
authorization bill should be signed or vetoed. In terms of its effect
on our defense posture, directly and through the reductions it forces
in funds for procurement, readiness, sustainability, and research and
development, the bill has a debilitating effect on our defense posture
as compared with the budget that you submitted for Fiscal Year 1979.
In particular, addition of a nuclear carrier in the bill has two very
serious effects. First, it caused the Appropriations Committees, in order
to stay within the Congressionally approved budget limits for defense,
to displace a number of more important and urgent needs mentioned
above. Second, it continues the trend toward larger and more expensive
ships—­which inevitably means fewer ships—­in the Navy; this is true
both of the CVN itself and of the (nuclear) escorts for it that the Con-
gress will presumably feel impelled to insert into future budgets. Thus,
on substance, a veto is in order.
If we are to sustain the coherence of the defense program in sup-
port of the Administration’s priorities and the defense needs of our
country, the Congress must be encouraged to produce a better final out-
come than now looms in its defense authorization and appropriation. A
veto offers some chance of that, depending on how well we are able to
articulate our objections. It does not offer a certainty, and there is a real
possibility that the result will be worse. There is also the likelihood of
inflaming our relations with the Congress; one must set against this the
need to restrain the Congress from even more erosion of defense needs
to meet their own more immediate political pressures. There is also the
question of how confident we are that a veto can be sustained. Major
adverse consequences to our ability to manage the defense program
will follow if a veto is overridden.
A serious concern is that a veto could be seen as an Administration
move toward a weaker defense posture. Our public statements, and
ment of Defense—Subject File, Box 37, Department of Defense—Defense Authorization

particularly your veto message, would be a key in countering such a
misapprehension. I believe that we probably can show that a veto is not
intended to weaken defense, by including in the veto message a num-
ber of points, including all of the following:
a. concentrating on the nuclear carrier, about whose wastefulness
we have laid a substantial predicate over a period of six months;
b. making it clear that we urgently want to restore the more impor­
tant items that were deleted in the Congressional authorization and
appropriation process to make room for the CVN within the budget;
c. including in our proposed restoral Navy ships—­some deleted
by the Congress and some that we had anticipated funding in future
years—­to show that we can indeed get more ships if we avoid spending
too much on a few ships.
d. making it clear that we want the Congress to appropriate funds
in the full amount of $126 billion, which was your budget proposal.
We would all, of course, work hard to persuade the Congress to
return to the $126 billion level through the bill which would replace one
vetoed. But if the Congress did not, a supplemental request would be
essential, and the intention of seeking one in the event the $126 billion
level is not reached in the basic bill would be a necessary part of a veto
strategy. It is also important that this not be the only authorization or
appropriation bill vetoed.
A clear Congressional, media and public understanding of our
reasons for a veto would be absolutely essential. The public and the
Congress would need to understand that you are firmly committed to a
$126 billion level for defense for FY 79. The nature of the veto message is
an essential element in establishing such a position. I believe that with
the message whose text is attached, a veto would be appropriate.2
Harold Brown
2 Attached but not printed are undated talking points for Carter’s veto of the
defense procurement authorization bill for FY 1979 (H.R. 10929), which he announced
during an August 17 press conference in the Old Executive Office Building. (Public Papers:

78.
Paper Prepared in the National Security Council1
Washington, undated
AGENDA PAPER
The first PRC meeting on PRM/NSC–32, Civil Defense,2 left two
issues for further consideration. The purpose of this meeting is to
decide them.
1. U.S. civil defense policy: a proposed policy statement is at Tab A.
2. Whether to improve the current continuity of government pro-
gram: a statement of the choices is at Tab B and a paper setting forth the
available program analysis on continuity of government is at Tab C.3

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council4
Washington, undated
PROPOSED STATEMENT OF US CIVIL DEFENSE POLICY
Enhanced Survivability. The U.S. civil defense program will seek to
enhance the survivability of the American people in the event that a
major nuclear war occurs by providing some increase in numbers of
surviving population and leadership, thereby improving the basis for
eventual national recovery.
In addition, the U.S. civil defense program will contribute in part
to the overall U.S.-Soviet strategic balance and reduce the possibility
that the Soviets could coerce us in time of crisis. Perceptions of the over-
all balance should not be marked by major asymmetries in population
of leadership fatalities.
“Enhanced survivability” as a policy does not require similar or
equivalent programs. Survivability will depend on the nature of the
society as well as the nature of the attack directed against it.
son distributed the paper to Vance, Brown, McIntyre, Warnke, Jones, Turner, and Mitchell
under cover of an August 16 memorandum.
2 See Document 73.
3 Not found attached.
4 Secret.

Public Declaratory Policy. In support of an expanded U.S. civil
defense program, the U.S. public policy should be:
The U.S. civil defense policy, enhanced survivability, requires mod-
est improvements in our civil defense posture which will provide
insurance in the event of the failure of deterrence while contributing
to some degree to the maintenance of the overall strategic balance and
crisis management.

Tab B

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council5
Washington, undated
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT
The FPA paper for the Policy Review Committee on civil defense
provides several alternative approaches to enhancing the survival of
continuity of government elements, but it does not make a compara-
tive analysis on which to make a selection among the alternatives. It
does, however, provide sufficient analysis to suggest that the current
system needs significant improvements, probably including “mobility”
in addition to, or in place of, fixed sites.
The choices for the Policy Review Committee, therefore, are:
a. Retain the current continuity of government program, or
b. Improve the present capability to make it more survivable but
defer choice of alternatives for improvement pending further analysis.
5 Secret.

79.
Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Civil Defense
PARTICIPANTS
State
Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher
Jerome Kahan, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs
Defense
Secretary Harold Brown (Chairman)
David E. McGiffert, Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs
Bardyl R. Tirana, Director, Defense Civil Preparedness Agency
JCS
Lt. General William Y. Smith
CIA
Robert Bowie, Deputy to the Director for International Foreign Assessment Center
[name not declassified], Office of Strategic Research Analysis
ACDA
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy Director
Al Lieberman, Chief, Office of Operational Analysis
OMB
Randy Jayne, Associate Director for National Security and International Affairs
Federal Preparedness Agency
Joseph Mitchell, Director
Dalimil Kybal, Assistant Director for Research, Development and Program
Coordination
White House
Zbigniew Brzezinski
NSC
William E. Odom
MINUTES OF MEETING
Harold Brown opened the meeting with the first of the two agenda
points, a proposed civil defense policy statement. He introduced a
new State version juxtaposed with the proposed Defense version for
discussion.2
Room. The Summary of Conclusions is ibid.
2 The State and Defense versions were not found.

Keeny began the debate by declaring that there is no meaning in
the sentence, “Perception of the overall balance should not be marked
by major asymmetries.”
Harold Brown defended this Defense language, arguing that it
means we must either reduce the asymmetries or change the perceptions.
Brzezinski asked why the State version spoke of saving “popula-
tion” but omitted reference to “leadership”?
Harold Brown suggested adding “government continuity,” not
“leadership” which has political overtones raising a question of which
leaders will be saved.
Christopher objected to “coerce us in time of crisis.” He prefers the
term “crisis management” as a broader term. Harold Brown agreed, but
Dr. Brzezinski did not. He suggested inserting “to stable crisis manage-
ment” in the policy statement directly before the phrase “coerce us . . .”
Dr. Brzezinski then observed that the public declaratory policy
statement should be changed by replacing the words “modest improve-
ments” with “continuing improvements” because the word “modest”
could invite public and Congressional criticism.
Harold Brown expressed the fear that this would be an open ended
commitment.
Brzezinski replied that “continuing” or “gradual” are quite good
words in the declaratory policy for avoiding an open ended interpre-
tation. Dr. Brzezinski also proposed that “to some degree” be removed
from the public declaratory policy statement. Upon Brown’s objection
to that change, Dr. Brzezinski offered “in part” in place of “to some
degree.”
Harold Brown then proposed wording along the lines of “Although
civil defense has only a limited effect on the overall strategic balance
and crisis stability, the program should also contribute in these regards.
General Smith objected to State’s version, insisting that “surviv-
ability” would depend upon a number of factors as the last part of the
DOD proposed statement indicates. “Among other factors” is omit-
ted from the State version. General Smith wanted it included. Harold
Brown agreed.
Brown then asked Keeny if ACDA would drop its alternative
proposal?3
Keeny answered no. A real policy issue is being side stepped, he
argued. Are we tying our policy to insurance, or are we, as is the case
of the Defense and State version, tying civil defense to the strategic bal-
ance? This is not a small issue. The President should realize that it is
3 The ACDA alternative proposal was not found.

not. Furthermore, how will we explain to the public if we decide to tie
it to the strategic balance?
Brown answered that the dollar figure for a program will make
the tie and inform the public. The danger is to say that civil defense is
important and then do nothing.
Keeny agreed. He added that the Soviets are pushing civil defense;
we do not want to create pressure on this Administration by talking
about civil defense. Keeny added that he did not object to the declar-
atory policy but only to the internal policy statement which ties civil
defense to the strategic balance. The second paragraph is particularly
troublesome. It can be construed to require a civil defense buildup.
Brown replied that ACDA’s paragraph four, as an expression of
this concern, is the thought in the DOD version.
McGiffert suggested omitting Defense’s paragraph two and Keeny
agreed. Keeny added that there is so little promise in the public declar-
atory statement that policies inspired by the internal statement would
not be explainable.
Harold Brown asked Keeny if he would agree that in principle
there could be differences in U.S. and Soviet casualty figures that would
affect the strategic balance.
Keeny agreed that there are.
Brown then said that the statement is valid. Civil defense does con-
tribute to the overall balance.
Brzezinski questioned whether we must reach a full agreement on
the statement.
Brown said it would be a good idea to spare the President extra
decisions.
General Smith said the Congress, the public, and others are con-
cerned about civil defense being part of the balance and that we cannot
side step the issue as Keeny suggests.
Tirana then explained that the public must know why we have
a program and cited a recent TV program taping (60 Minutes) as an
example. State and local officials cannot be encouraged to contribute
without Federal guidance and policy rationale.
Keeny argued that this is why he is concerned. The declaratory
policy statement offers little, but the internal policy rationale promises
a lot.
Harold Brown said that we will send both policy alternatives to
the President.
Keeny refused to accept the Defense modified version even if the
words “in addition” were omitted. Keeny said that civil defense will
become a major issue, and that the President will want to be aware that
we are tying civil defense to the strategic balance.

Brown rebuttaled, “haven’t we already done so by talking to the
Russians about including civil defense in SALT III?”
Keeny said yes, but for this change to be effective, there must be
public debate. Tirana said it would cause less stir to accept the latest
modified Defense statement than to create debate by submitting two
statements for a Presidential choice.
Brown said he would include both. He also agreed with State to
include a reference to “dual-­use” in both the internal and declaratory
statements.
Dr. Brzezinski said that is a good idea.
Jayne asked if all civil defense has “dual-­use”?
General Smith said perhaps we could say “can have” “dual-­use.”
Brown then turned to the continuity of government issue. Brown,
Brzezinski, Mitchell, Christopher, and others agreed that the paper was
inadequate for choosing a program to improve the present continuity
of government posture. Brown agreed that the paper convinces him
that the present fixed posture is not enough. He then explained the
kinds of analysis that might help resolve a choice of how to enhance it.
Keeny, Mitchell, and others commented that indeed they agreed
with Brown.
Brown then said we agree on the following things:
1. We need continuity of government.
2. The fixed site program is insufficient.
3. We need cost studies on how to improve the program.
Mitchell admitted that his paper was only an exploration.
Brown said that the paper convinced him it is not foolish to improve
“continuity of government.”
Mitchell and Tirana then discussed how to get the study funds for
an outside analysis.
Brzezinski insisted that we must decide what kind of study should
be done, although Brown believed that was not for the PRC to decide.
Dr. Brzezinski said we should have a working group look into what
kind of analysis is needed and then commission it.
Tirana offered to fund a study in the 1978 time period with DCPA
funds.
Christopher then raised a question about what program option
had been chosen at the last PRC.4 Did it involve buying a one-­year
surge capability or a one to two-­week surge capability?
Tirana and Smith believed that one to two weeks was the conclusion.
4 See Tab A, Document 73.

Keeny and Christopher thought otherwise.
Harold Brown acknowledged the ambiguity but insisted that it did
not change our decision previously made. We will eventually move to
the one to two-­week posture, but the time was left open.
80.
Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom)
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 19, 1978
SUBJECT
Background for your SAC/NORAD Trip
Trip Purposes
Get a personal sense for the forces, equipment, and command
procedures; inspire the officers and troops by your personal attention
expressed in this visit—­something not to underestimate and something
you will do easily and with great impact.
Get a better sense for the relation between the realities of our forces
structure and C3I on the one hand and a number of on-­going policy
issues on the other. Some examples are the targeting study, the secure
reserve force study, adequacy of our intelligence capability, policy on
theater nuclear forces, and arms control efforts, including SALT, ASAT,
and verification.
The Larger Perspective for the Trip
Three general questions provide a larger conceptual framework
for organizing what you want to learn. They flow from the doctrinal
differences between “war fighting” and “deterrence.” They can be put
this way:
—What is different about the kinds of forces and C3I that one buys
for a “deterrence” posture as opposed to the forces one would buy for
a “war fighting” posture?
side the System.

—How would the forces and C3I for one posture interact in a con-
flict with the forces and C3I of the other posture?
—What changes and improvements in our own forces are implied
by answers to the above questions?
These questions should inspire concern with:
—The length of a war.
—What one targets.
—Flexibility in targeting.
—The coordination (or absence of it) between strategic and other
forces in the campaign.
—What the enemy will shoot at with his strategic forces.
—Survivability of C3I forces.
—Mobilization capabilities.
—Soviet views, forces, and plans.
Specific Issues and Areas of Concern
I. Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence
There are two kinds of problems in C3I. The first, most serious, is
whether the Soviets could attack our C3I in a way that would prevent us from
retaliating. Second, is our C3I adequate for “sustained war fighting?”
Could we manage flexible planning for supporting theater campaigns?
Do our intelligence assets provide timely enough information to sup-
port operational needs? And will they survive? More specific questions
you might ask on these points are:
—Where are weak links in communications with the bombers?
ICBM’s? SSBN’s?
—Can our communications equipment withstand the “electro-­
magnetic impact” (EMP) they would receive from nuclear blasts?
—For how long could the Soviets repeat and sustain EMP over
large parts of the U.S.?
[1 line not declassified]
—Should any actions be taken to enhance connectivity amongst
our critical C3I modes? What?
[1 line not declassified]
—Do we have any backup/reserve satellites ready to launch to
replace damaged ones during a campaign?
—Congressional oversight committees have concluded that our
intelligence is adequate for peacetime only—­if this is true, what should
be done to improve the situation?
—How will SAC update its intelligence after the first strike?
­Successive strikes?

—Can the air command post do more than manage SIOP-­type
options? How will its intelligence and force connectivity be kept up to
date in the weeks and months after a war begins?
—Where will surviving SAC bombers go after the initial strikes?
—If public electrical power is lost, can the ICBM force still launch?
How long can it endure without public electrical power?
II. Planning and Targeting
As the PD–18 targeting study indicates, our major planning effort
has been on the SIOP and its MAO and SAO variants. The SIOP is no
small achievement, but its great complexity also introduces rigidities.
As you recall from IVORY ITEMS, once there was a search for refine-
ments to adjust a retaliatory response to various and different situa-
tions, the rigidity became apparent—­e.g., recalling the bombers after
a couple of hours. That is still virtually undoable without calling off
every other part of the SIOP.
Another problem lies in the integration of our strategic forces
with SACEUR’s theater nuclear forces. The same problem also exists in
Korea although it does not get the same attention. Here is the problem
as I understand it. If SACEUR shoots his “general strike plan” (TNF)
in conjunction with the SIOP, things are all right. If they are fired sep-
arately, great gaps occur. The most troublesome aspect of this seems to
be the possibility of escalation in Europe which we want to hold at the
theater level. There are differing views on the adequacy of our present
planning of nuclear fires for that event.
LNO’s and RNO’s are the planning devices which are meant to
move us away from the SIOP rigidity. The ones now planned are largely
academic exercises because circumstances, military and political, will
never be exactly as assumed in the planning phase. The direction to
move with LNO’s is toward more speed in planning them for particular
situations as they arise. You should try to get a good sense for SAC’s
lack of flexibility and speed in such planning. SAC and the Air Force
like to evade this issue because it shows so clearly how they are unpre-
pared for anything but the big spastic retaliation.2
You will want to ask about “secure reserve force” (SRF) planning.3
This topic, like LNO’s, brings up the question of how long a war will
last and how to endure for the long campaign. SAC is very weak on this
matter. The planners don’t know what they would target with the SRF,
and they are not sure how they will control them. SRF is also a bone of
inter-­service contention. The Navy likes to use SRF for justifying more
2 Brzezinski drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this and the previous
sentence.
3 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence.

SSBN’s, and SAC knows that creating a survivable SRF from bombers
and ICBM’s is not promising. That is another reason SAC shows low
interest.4
On targeting priorities, you have read the memos from Hunting-
ton and Utgoff,5 and you may want to discuss “economic recovery”
versus “military forces” in targeting. This topic becomes scholastic very
quickly. Once you move to duration of the war, planning flexibility, C3I,
SRF, etc., the targeting priorities are implicitly reversed.6 The subject
remains important, however, for the structure of the SIOP.
The following list of short questions may be useful in probing the
briefers:
—How long does it take to plan an LNO from scratch?
—Who can plan LNO’s? JCS? SAC?
—Could SAC support SACEUR in a theater nuclear campaign?
Who would control planning? Where would it take place?
—How will targets be identified for LNO’s?
—How will damage be assessed after LNO’s have been fired?
—Are LNO’s coordinated with actions by other forces? Ground
offensives? If so, what is the planning link to the land force commander?
—Could we track, target, and hit a Soviet naval task force at sea
with an LNO?7
—What constitutes our Secure Reserve Force? How do we know it
is “secure?”
—What will we target with the SRF?8
—How will we assess SRF9 damage?
—Will the SRF be coordinated with theater forces (Europe) after a
SIOP exchange?
—Could surviving SSBN’s be reloaded with SLBM’s? Where?
Would it make sense to build and store extra SLBM’s? Do we have any
industrial mobilization for missile production in the event of a long
nuclear war?
—Do we have LNO’s for Soviet C3I?10
4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this and the previous
sentence.
5 Huntington’s memorandum to Brzezinski is printed as Document 71. Utgoff’s
memorandum was not found.
6 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence.
7 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence.
8 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence and under-
scored “with.”
9 Brzezinski underlined the words “assess SRF.”
10 Brzezinski circled this sentence.

—What does the increasing number of Soviet rail mobile com-
mand posts and airborne command posts mean for our targeting and
planning?11
—Does our target list have all the Soviet C3I bunkers in the USSR?
In East Europe?
—Could we launch an LNO on only Soviet theater C3I in East
Europe?
—Does SACEUR, in his RNO context, have the capability to
destroy Warsaw Pact C3I.
—How far down the command line can SAC acquire and target
command posts? Front? Army Group? Army? Division?
III. Interaction of U.S. and Soviet Forces and C3I
This topic pushes up the force structure implications of planning
and programming for a “deterrence” doctrine versus planning and
programming for a “war fighting” doctrine. I am attaching at Tab E
a special paper done for me by a concerned denizen in the depths of
CIA.12 His thoughts are based on close examination of several years of
Soviet military exercises. His most striking conclusion is the growing
Soviet interest in nuclear conflicts limited in one fashion or another.
Bob Rosenberg’s SAC/NORAD trip report (Tab D) summarizes Intelli-
gence Community growing evidence of a Soviet sustained war fighting
capability.13
Flexibility, use of nuclear forces in combination with other forces,
and scenarios allowing for slower escalation are the hallmarks of Soviet
exercise evolution.
Some questions in this area are:
—Where are the weak points in the Soviet approach?
—What changes are we making to take into account changing
Soviet capabilities and exercise practices?14
—What should be done as opposed to what is being done?
—What are the implications of ASAT developments, both Soviets
and U.S.?
—What is the consequence of the [less than 1 line not declassified].
What can be done about it? (Bob Rosenberg suggests that you discuss
11 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence.
12 Tab E was not found attached. Above this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “Sustained
limited nuclear war.” To the right of that comment, he wrote another illegible comment.
13 Tab D was not found attached.
14 Brzezinski drew an arrow in the right margin pointing to this sentence.

this with Bill Perry during the trip and initiate a “counters to damage
assessment” effort.)15
IV. IVORY ITEM and NORAD
At NORAD you should ask General Hill about his problems with
IVORY ITEM. In short, the issue is this. The JCS, in designating an
IVORY ITEM scenario, assumes a sequence of enemy actions. When
the President asks General Hill for refinements and clarifications of the
enemy action, he may not have them in his JCS brief. If he makes them
up, he risks throwing the entire scenario off base.
You might ask General Hill and General Ellis about trying some
IVORY ITEM drills where a war begins in Europe or Korea with con-
ventional forces and then escalates to the nuclear level. In other words,
can we use the IVORY ITEM format to discover more clearly our abil-
ity to “control escalation” and to keep things at the theater level? An
IVORY ITEM for an LNO scenario might also be interesting.16
V. Arms Control, Force Postures, and Doctrine
Senator Nunn has recently declared that our arms control negoti-
ating requirements drive our military programs while the Soviet pro-
grams drive their negotiating requirements. During the trip, test this
proposition. “Deterrence” ties our arms control approach to our force
developments. Is deterrence an adequate paradigm for integrating
arms control with programs? Or is it encouraging us to launch pro-
grams that do little to improve our military capabilities?
Some examples:
—MAPS for the ICBM force while ignoring C3I?
—Launch from under attack?
—Targeting policy “fixes” to compensate for Soviet civil defense?
—Targeting priority on “economic recovery” rather than flexibility
to adapt to appropriate policy objectives during a war?
15 Brzezinski drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this paragraph, and
an arrow in the right margin pointing to it.
16 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this and the previous
sentence.

81.
Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom)
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 22, 1978
SUBJECT
Appraisal of Your SAC/NORAD Trip
The full impact of your personal appearance and touch with the
officers and troops will not be fully apparent for some time, but it was
undoubtedly great. I could see that, particularly in your interaction
with the lower ranking officers and the enlisted personnel at Ellsworth
AFB.2 The SAC Wing Commander said that White House interest in
strategic forces has never been so great as in this Administration. He felt
it from the beginning and sees the persistency manifested in your visit.
The discussions on operational, planning, and doctrinal matters
was most fascinating and hard-­hitting for the briefing officers. The
strongest impact was Sunday evening at Offutt.3 Perry and Jones were
clearly nervous. General Ellis was having a great time dumping the
tough questions on the JCS, but when you nailed him on the implica-
tions of C3I vulnerability, he was very unhappy with the trap into which
he had put himself. He merely wanted to lobby you for a larger C3I
budget, not to raise the fundamental issues about how Soviet growing
capabilities are making SAC’s posture less relevant to the President’s
crisis management and war fighting needs. When I tried to pick up on
“war fighting” the next day, he evaded the question. So did Jones.
The other officers in that evening briefing were noticeably moved.
Three of them told me the next day that the discussions were the most
“interesting” they have ever heard on this topic. Coyle, Duncan’s assis-
tant, found them not only interesting but “troubling.”
Several of the one and two star generals who briefed at SAC clearly
had some idea of the direction you would probe. They could not tell me
two months ago how long it took to plan an LNO from scratch. None-
theless, your repeated underscoring of the non-SIOP scenario and the
longer campaign gave them more than they could handle. The result,
­Outside the System.
2 Ellsworth Air Force Base, near Rapid City, South Dakota.
3 August 20. Offutt Air Force Base, near Omaha, Nebraska, was the headquarters of
the Strategic Air Command.

in their mind, was a sense of our own military inadequacy for the era
of strategic parity but also a sense that more of what SAC is doing may
not help much.
One point to draw out in the question of C3I and the longer war is
the “incentive structure” in the Pentagon for C3I budgeting. C3I funds
are taken largely from the service budgets. The Air Force prefers new
bombers and fighters if asked to choose between them and new C3I
costs. So do the Navy and Army dislike surrendering their hardware
to pay for the NCA’s C3I. Thus, it is difficult to find a sustained and
powerful military interest in C3I. This is a key issue for Duncan who
is chairman of the WWMCCS Council, the group which addresses the
overall C3I budget and structure of the World Wide Military Command
and Control System.
At NORAD, things were not as sharply focused as elsewhere, but
General Hill’s briefers were pleasantly appalled to have the opportu-
nity to answer many of your questions. Drawing out the Soviet SSBN
threat to our C3I and the inherent asymmetry in the geography were
two points they obviously had not expected the occasion to make. A
number of other questions you asked gave them a chance to raise bur-
ied issues with Bill Perry. The solar interference with DSP coverage, for
example, and the escalating space activity which NORAD is asked to
monitor while much of its capability is eroding are two matters of con-
siderable importance, not only for tactical warning but also for ASAT
concerns and arms control verification.
Although General Jones’ presence was useful in many respects in
your probing and questioning, it also dampened things for you slightly.
At Ellsworth AFB and at NORAD the local command structure was
obviously as much worried about pleasing and responding to Jones as
about dealing with you. They will have to face Jones again and again,
but not you; thus they had to split their attention. Jones intimidated
General Hill by telling him that his small welcoming ceremony for
you—­involving a dozen troops—­showed that Hill has too many unem-
ployed personnel; otherwise he would not be able to afford the cer-
emony! Hill asked me several times thereafter if you were offended
by the ceremony. I told him that you probably thought of it not as a
personal thing but as a useful institutional symbolism that enhances
the sense of purpose and coherence in his organization. I also learned
that Jones did not desire to make the trip. “Someone” invited him twice
before he “got the message.”
I cannot judge what Bill Perry took away, but your doctrinal and
operational questions were not lost on him, and they clearly disturbed
him at SAC. I was surprised that he did not challenge you more directly.
In summary, you have clearly opened the doctrinal debate within
the SAC and NORAD circles on “deterrence” and “war fighting”, and

I suspect that it will reverberate back to the JCS in a short time. The
military reaction is going to be mixed. They like your rhetoric, and they
are easily compelled by your logic. As the budgetary and institutional
implications become clearer to them—­as they immediately were to
Jones—­they will have second thoughts, but thoughts difficult for them
to voice candidly.
82.
Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom)
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 22, 1978
SUBJECT
Follow-­up Actions on Your SAC/NORAD Trip
Your trip raised a large number of points, but follow-­up action is
relevant for only a few of them. It is useful to list the major points and
then indicate the ways to follow up.
Key Points Emerging During Your SAC Briefings
2. SIOP rigidities and the limited work on flexible planning.
3. The problem of political guidance for LNO planning.
4. [1 line not declassified]
5. The growing importance of the SSBN fleet for US vulnerability.
6. The lack of a Minute Man reload capability.
7. The lack of redundancy in our SAC targeting data base. Once
the NMCC, ANMCC, and SAC are destroyed, the airborne command
system, including the NEACP, do not have the staff capability to handle
flexible LNO and other targeting.
8. Our ability to assess damage after the SIOP or LNOs is
problematical.
side the System. Brzezinski wrote next to the date: “Good memo! please review with VU
and others, so that it can be staffed out + followed-­up. ZB.”

Key Points Made at NORAD
1. The DSP system has blindspots at times and barely covers the
threat areas. SSBNs could easily shoot through it undetected until the
new PAVE PAWS coastal radar is active (1979 on the West Coast, but
held up by an environmental impact court proceeding on the East
Coast).
2. DSP ground stations are few and vulnerable.
3. Ground and satellite communications with the BMEWS system
is degrading due to budgetary decisions to give up costly landlines.
4. There is virtually no BMEWS or other capability for characteriz-
ing a Soviet IRBM attack on Western Europe.
5. Monitoring ASAT activities and other space activities exceeds
NORAD’s capability, and the forecast is for the gap to grow in the
future. Do the Europeans know this?
Follow-­up Actions
This is a tentative list of things to do and approaches to take. The
possibilities, of course, are rather staggering because you opened more
issues than Defense could possibly resolve in a decade.
1. How to deal with the rigidity in our SIOP and the lax of flexibility.
This is the issue of most direct concern and responsibility for you as
chairman of the Special Coordinating Committee (Crisis Management).
You have already mentioned the very schemes I would recommend.
First, you mentioned to General Jones some IVORY ITEM exercises
to explore scenarios other than the SIOP. Four or five limited nuclear
conflict scenarios, particularly scenarios taken from Soviet exercises,
can teach the President, you, Brown, and the Joint Chiefs a great deal
about our present predicament. Creating that awareness is the first and
most important step now.
Second, you could establish an SCC for LNOs, one to be an NSC
when you can get the President involved. Once that process is started,
you will generate the kinds of guidance needed for more flexibility in
LNO planning. You are also going to uncover the lack of integration of
LNOs with Army and Navy commands and plans, particularly in the
theaters of Europe and Northeast Asia.
This SCC for LNOs could in fact grow into what has been sought
by many people for several years. NSDM–242 called for some small
political-­military war staff for the President;2 it never took hold because

Kissinger’s war doctrine did not require it. The general idea appears
again in the DOD targeting study.
It seeks a “mechanism” that connects the military planners with
the political leadership for appropriate guidance. You and the President
began generating such a small group with the IVORY ITEM. I have
encouraged Defense to accept that informal group as the “mechanism”
they want in this targeting study. Their reactions are mixed, but Leon
Sloss is willing to consider it as second best to a formal SCC for this
purpose.
As you drew out the LNO issue at SAC with General Ellis and
suggested that we might review the LNOs with the President, I was
reminded of a short passage from Clausewitz: “If war is to be fully con-
sonant with political objectives, and policy suited to the means available
for war, then unless statesman and soldier are combined in one person,
the only sound expedient is to make the commander-­in-­chief a member
of the cabinet so that the cabinet may share in the major aspects of his
activities.” An SCC on LNOs, etc., puts the National Security Council
in a position to share in the major activities of military planning with
strategic and other forces.
2. The C3I Problem.
The best approach here is to discuss it first with Charles Duncan.
He is beginning to take interest in the National Communications Sys-
tem and the WWMCCS as the DOD’s major figure in that arena. Two
topics for such a discussion are:
—The problem revealed in the SAC study of our vulnerability
to a C3I attack and the kinds of things that make sense as program
responses. (There is a DOD program issue paper on this C3I.)
—The institutional incentive structure for C3I budgeting: nobody
wants to pay but everyone admits the need for someone to pay for
WMMCCS.
3. The SACEUR and NATO Planning Problem for TNF.
I am not abreast of the way PRM–383 is moving on this matter,
but TNF policy is where the most immediate opportunity for follow-­up
lies. Uninformed of the PRM–38 rationale, I would guess that Gray
Area Systems arms control perspectives are driving our weapons pro-
gram options. European “psychological” or political needs (to avoid
the “de-­coupling” impression) probably rival the arms control concerns
Memorandum/NSC–38, “Long-Range Theater Nuclear Capabilities and Arms Control,”

for driving weapons choices. Left out entirely is the perspective of plan-
ning for a theater nuclear campaign within and as part of the US strate-
gic campaign planning.
4. The “I” Concerns in C3I at NORAD.
Rosenberg can probably be more helpful on this point, but the sat-
ellite reconnaissance budget is obviously a relevant place to follow up
NORAD’s worry about gaps in coverage of missile launches.
SALT and ASAT negotiations are also affected by the projected
degradation of our capability to monitor space activities.
Telecommunications policy is an area for action to prevent deg-
radation of NORAD ground communications, but after a chat with
Bill Perry, I have reached the view that the AT&T monopoly—­which
allowed the DOD to set high standards for connectivity, hardness, and
system interoperability—­will erode and the National Communications
System (including NORAD) will have to adapt. It is not clear to me
what precise actions to take at present on this matter.
This is an initial hasty list. Several of the points need better staffing
before you decide on precise follow-­up actions.
83.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(Jones) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
JCSM–284–78
Washington, August 23, 1978
SUBJECT
Defense Programs and the Military Balance (U)
1. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the pending decisions
on the FY 1980 Defense Budget will exert a pivotal influence on the
national security options available through the 1980’s and beyond. Col-
lectively, therefore, we wish to expand on observations made individ-
ually to you during the recent Program Review process and to draw
under cover of a September 8 handwritten note that reads, “Dave, This is the memo Dr.
Brown mentioned to you. He has passed a copy of it directly to the President.” (Ibid.)
Brown gave the memorandum to Carter at Camp David on September 8. (See Document
87.)

upon the memorandum the Chairman forwarded to you on 12 August
2. (S) We believe that US (and Allied) and Soviet (and Allied)
military postures are generally in balance today. However, we also
believe that a contemporary snapshot of the current balance is mis-
leading unless placed in the wider perspective of long-­term trends.
Leaving aside arguments about specific growth rates, percentages of
GNP, or intentions and recognizing the Soviets’ “China Problem” as
well as their many shortcomings and reverses in political and economic
spheres, there is no escaping the fact that the Soviets have been able to
pull abreast of us militarily through a systematic and protracted invest-
ment in both numbers and quality of weaponry. In relative terms, there
can be little doubt that the strategic balance has shifted, that the margin
of US military capability relative to that of the USSR is narrower today
than it has ever been, and that these adverse trends are continuing.
3. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff see the present consequences and
implications of these trends as follows:
Strategic Nuclear Forces: In the space of a few years, the United
States has moved from a position of clear-­cut superiority to our cur-
rent position of essential equivalence. However, while the present bal-
ance might appear superficially static, the trends are divergent. The
Soviets are modernizing virtually every component of their strategic
nuclear force structure behind the momentum of new systems which
are in the field and in production. In contrast, a decade or more of
slips, reductions, and cancellations has retarded US modernization
appreciably and our ability to accelerate production enough in the
short term to keep pace in the event of an unrestrained competition is
questionable.
Goals and Expectations in the Global Power Arena”) that the Soviets
may expect to achieve a margin of superiority in the strategic field in
the early 1980’s.3 Statistically, the margin may not be great, but any
significant overall edge would have a profound influence, not only
on the perceptions and apparent options open to decisionmakers in
­Washington and Moscow, but also on the policies and alignments of
other nations.
Our situation can be likened to skating on thin ice with the ice get-
ting thinner. Any sudden and dramatic Soviet achievement could cause
a precipitous change in world perceptions, just as Sputnik electrified
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File,
3 See Document 62.

the world in October 1957 with the impression that the Soviets were
far ahead of the United States in space technology. In the late 1950’s
and early 1960’s, it took a “catch-­up” program costing many billions of
dollars and years of concentrated effort to correct that impression; in
the more perilous area of strategic weaponry in the 1980’s, the conse-
quences could be much more serious.
We believe it is also important to bear in mind that Soviet doctrine
does not mirror the widely held view in the United States that nuclear
war is unthinkable. Soviet doctrine treats nuclear conflict as undesir-
able, but also as both possible and winnable. We do not believe this
doctrine can be dismissed as declaratory posturing, for they suit the
action to the word. Across the whole range of strategic capability—­force
structure, command and control, hardening, dispersal, civil defense,
etc.—­we see evidence of a nation which takes seriously the possibility
of nuclear conflict.
Tactical Nuclear Forces: The formal clear-­cut US lead in tactical
nuclear capability has been overtaken by the Soviets. The implications
of this vanished edge are particularly serious in a NATO context.
Soviet expectations of a better-­than-­even chance of gaining a quick
conventional victory in Europe. Many of our European allies share this
view and consider a credible threat of escalation as an indispensable
element of the NATO deterrent. Our NATO Allies have long viewed
tactical nuclear weapons as both an essential leg of the “NATO Triad”
(general purpose, theater nuclear, and strategic nuclear forces) and a
key element in assuring the credibility of the escalation option within
NATO’s MC 14/3 flexible response strategy. However, given the state
of essential equivalence in US–USSR strategic nuclear forces and clear
Warsaw Pact numerical superiority in conventional forces, the absence
of an Allied edge in tactical nuclear capability is an added source of
deep concern especially to defense planners in NATO capitals.
General Purpose Forces: The United States and its allies have never
attempted to match the Soviet predilection for mass and numbers in
conventional warfare. Rather, we have tended to rely upon the force
multiplier effect of technologically superior forces to offset more
numerous but relatively unsophisticated forces of potential opponents.
In recent years, however, Soviet quantitative advantages have per-
sisted or widened while many of the key US qualitative advantages
have been systematically overtaken. This qualitative erosion is a conse-
quence of an extensive Soviet R&D effort and a reequipment program
that has outpaced our own by a wide margin.
Soviet progress has been evident across the board. They are mod-
ernizing their ground forces with improved armor (new main bat-
tle tank), firepower (artillery with superior range and rate of fire),

battlefield mobility (new armored personnel carrier) and air defense
weapons, all of which match or exceed the sophistication of similar US
weapons. The Soviet Navy has grown from essentially a coastal protec-
tion fleet to a highly effective blue water surface and subsurface force,
supported by a growing force of modern, land- and sea-­based naval
aircraft and an increasing amphibious capability. Similarly, the charac-
ter of Soviet air forces has changed from primarily an air defense force
with limited offensive capability into a long range, high performance,
high payload, offensively oriented air arm.
These Soviet advances are particularly worrisome in a NATO con-
text, in that the steadily growing Soviet edge in conventional and chem-
ical warfare capability has for years been concentrated against Western
European defenses. NATO deployments are thin and uneven, our allies
are short of munitions, interoperability problems persist, sea lines of
communication are critical, and, even with increased POMCUS, US
augmentation is slowed by the limitations in our strategic airlift and
sealift capability.
The picture is not altogether negative. The Long Term Defense Pro-
gram is a step in the right direction and we believe it is critical to main-
tain this encouraging momentum through continued Alliance-­wide
modernization of conventional forces.4 However, we also believe that
these measures must be recognized as but a beginning in redressing a
regional imbalance which has been shifting for more than a decade and
that the likely global nature of a NATO conflict must be borne in mind
when assessing our progress.
Power Projection: This is one key military area in which the United
States retains a substantial lead. We believe it essential to maintain this
lead in view of the many political, economic, and military interests
abroad which, if threatened, would have to be defended or reinforced
with CONUS-­based forces.
Much of our lead is based on global interests and an alliance sys-
tem which motivated our developing both the technology and exper-
tise required for power projection. We have long maintained a balanced
mix of mobile ground forces, naval and airlift forces, and flexible
amphibious and tactical air capability for rapid reaction to any level of
threat worldwide.
At present, our superior ability to bring such forces to bear in a
distant crisis area provides significant deterrent leverage, and we see
compelling evidence that the implications of this imbalance have not
NATO heads of state to preserve NATO as an effective deterrent to the Warsaw Pact. A
key outcome of the meeting was the agreement that NATO members annually increase
their defense budgets by at least 3 percent in real terms.

been lost on the Soviets. They are embarked on a determined campaign
both to increase their own projection capability and to deter or neu-
tralize ours. Their increased emphasis on a quasi-­military role for the
Soviet merchant and civil air fleets, the growth of long-­range offensive
surface and submarine forces, growing amphibious capability, prog-
ress in wide-­body aircraft technology, and pressures to obtain access to
ports and airfields in Third World countries are some of the key signs
that the Soviets appreciate the utility of power projection and intend to
narrow our lead.
Additionally, the change in character of Soviet conventional forces,
combined with Western dependence on imported oil, has expanded the
area of potentially critical US/Soviet confrontation into a region—­the
Persian Gulf—­which possesses little in-­place deterrent.
Therefore, we believe it is essential to continue to modernize all
aspects of US offensive and defensive power projection capability.
Breakout Potential: US industries are clearly more efficient, produc-
tive, diverse and technologically sophisticated than their Soviet coun-
terparts. On the other hand, the Soviet near term capacity to produce
military hardware exceeds ours by a substantial margin. With a deter-
mined effort, there is no doubt that the United States could eventu-
ally overtake and surpass the Soviet Union if forced into an accelerated
arms buildup. However, given their “running start” and the time it
would take us to reorient, retool, and expand our military production
base, the overtake point is open to some question. The decisive issue
could be whether the nature of the race were a 100-­yard dash or a mar-
athon. We believe this asymmetry in production base wields significant
influence in the calculus of the strategic balance.
4. (S) Placing the above sobering military judgments into the
broader context of the total power balance, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
conclude:
• The Soviet system has neither the political appeal nor the eco-
nomic vitality of the United States; the USSR derives the majority of its
influence in the world from the actual or potential use and deployment
of its military power.
• The Soviets have experienced political setbacks and reverses in
their efforts to exert influence abroad where the application of military
pressure (direct or proxy) was either inappropriate or foreclosed.
• Although the Soviets traditionally have been very cautious in the
direct use of their own military forces outside their immediate sphere of
control, their present position of strategic nuclear equality, with acceler-
ating momentum toward a margin of overall military superiority, could
create further incentives for greater risks. We believe that the greater the
Soviet perception of freedom of action in the military realm, the greater
the danger that they might attempt to exert the leverage of military

power (threatened or used) in extending their economic, diplomatic, or
ideological influence, miscalculate our will or ability to resist pressures,
and precipitate a conflict which neither side wants or intends.
• In sum, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the central security
challenge of the 1980’s—­and the fundamental issue which the FY 1980
Budget must confront directly—­will be to deny the Soviets any such
real or perceived incentive to pursue options based on a preponderance
of military strength.
5. (S) In our view, the first step should be an explicit and visible
commitment that, until and unless Soviet military expansion becomes
restrained, the United States will maintain at least the present balance
through sustained and substantial growth in our own defense pro-
grams. We should also do everything possible to persuade our allies to
follow suit. In the context of the 5-­year budget levels as specified in the
Consolidated Guidance, the Joint Chiefs of Staff regard the decremented
level as a “reduce and withdraw” budget, the basic level as a “perpetu-
ate the current trends” budget, and the enhanced level as a “retain the
balance” budget.5 Recognizing that, in a constrained resource environ-
ment, the judgment on the size and allocation of limited defense dollars
becomes fundamentally a risk assessment, we believe the enhanced
level of funding is well justified by both the objective and perceptual
considerations discussed above.
6. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff further believe that increased US
defense spending should be only one element in a more confident and
assertive national strategy. Without being arrogant or provocative in
the use of our national power, we believe that the United States has
the material and moral resources to arrest and reverse the dangerous
trends discussed earlier, to force the strategic competition with the
Soviet Union away from the military sphere and toward areas where
the risks of violence are less and the incentives for negotiated force
reductions are greater, and to support our national policy of eventual
reduction of tensions. We will continue to study new alternatives for
contributing to the military component of such a strategy.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
David C. Jones
5 For Brown’s summary of the Consolidated Guidance, see Document 54.

84.
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–431
Washington, August 24, 1978
TO:
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO:
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
United States Global Military Presence (U)
Pursuant to the August 15 meeting of the National Security Coun-
cil,2 the President has directed preparation of a Presidential Review
Memorandum examining the U.S. military presence abroad from the
standpoint of maintaining and enhancing our political and military
position vis-­a-­vis the Soviets and of providing reassurance and con-
fidence to key countries of concern to us. The PRM should develop
options for U.S. military presences in various areas.
The PRM should be prepared by an interagency working group
chaired by the NSC staff for consideration by the SCC. It should be sub-
mitted for SCC consideration and recommendations to the President by
October 2, 1978.
Dissemination of this directive and participation in the PRM
should be restricted as much as possible.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
ing Copies of PRM/NSC 1 through 47. Secret; Sensitive.
2 See Document 76.

85.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 30, 1978
SUBJECT
Report on My SAC/NORAD Trip
On August 20–21 I took advantage of your absence to familiarize
myself with NEACP, to be briefed on the C3I2 problem at SAC HQ, to
fly a low-­level attack mission in a B–52, to inspect a Minuteman silo,
to review warning and assessment procedures at NORAD, to inspect
tactical fighter training at Nevada, and to visit a site on which I will
report orally.
Some key impressions (and you might wish to provide some guid-
ance by marginal notes):
1. The military enormously appreciate the direct interest you have
shown in C3I issues. This was mentioned everywhere. In this connec-
tion, I believe that we ought to run an IVORY ITEM on an LNO. We
have not done this and that issue could become more critical in the
years ahead.
2. I was struck by the extent of U.S. C3 vulnerability. More work
on this is needed, and I will be pressing Harold Brown and my own
staff to develop this matter further. I believe that our C3I vulnerability
is serious. [4 lines not declassified] This issue could become a more seri-
ous problem for crisis stability than the question of [less than 1 line not
declassified].
3. I believe that our strategic forces are well organized and designed
for a single large retaliatory attack, but less so for any lesser variant, or
for a war lasting weeks. We should not base all of our planning on the
assumption that a nuclear war must either escalate or terminate quickly.
4. Our strategic doctrines are based on the concepts of the sixties,
when we had strategic superiority and at least conventional parity.
We need a fundamental doctrinal review. I am setting up an office in
the NSC on Strategic Planning (under Fritz Ermarth, who is currently
­serving as the Director of the Strategic Systems Program at Rand) to
work on this issue as well as on a comprehensive and integrated strat-
egy for SALT 3 and the grey areas.
for information. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the memorandum.
2 Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence. [Footnote is in the
original.]

5. Not enough attention has been paid in SALT to the fact that the
approximately 24 hours or less. The implications of this need to be
examined more fully, especially in view of the lack of a Minuteman silo
reload capability. I will have our staff take a look at this.
6. We have very limited warning capability in the event of a
Soviet nuclear attack on Europe and/or China. The Europeans and/or
­Chinese have even less. This issue could become a political problem in
U.S.-European relations.
7. Our infrared satellite warning system (DSP) has occasional blind
spots as well as growing requirements which it cannot meet without
added capabilities, especially additional satellites. My staff will be
developing the needed review.
8. We need more political input into the development of LNOs.
Until now they have been developed purely by the military. I will be
taking corrective actions.
9. Dave Jones accompanied me. He is immensely worried about
the CTB and says the Chiefs will oppose it. He raised the CTB issue
with me several times in the course of the trip.
86.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, September 11, 1978
SUBJECT
Weapons Systems, Military Capabilities, and Perceptions
You will recall the meeting of the NSC on August 15, on the subject
of U.S.-Soviet competition with special reference to the military bal-
ance.2 The issue of the relationship of U.S. weapons systems programs
to public and governmental perceptions of the U.S.-Soviet balance has
been raised at that meeting and since.
I have been giving further thought to this matter, and have reached
a number of preliminary conclusions. These are listed below and are
upper right corner of the memorandum.
2 See Document 76.

followed by a list of specific systems. I believe we need to proceed with
a substantial selection of these in order to respond both to military
needs and to political perceptions.
1. Though each of the major (and some of the minor) program-
matic cancellations and deferrals effected by this Administration was
made for sound programmatic reasons, cumulatively they have com-
bined with the relative paucity of new starts to convey the impression,
both to our allies and to some of our own public, of unreciprocated uni-
lateral restraint—­our detractors would say, unilateral disarmament. We
do not know how the Soviets view these matters, but we should also be
concerned about their perception.
2. We need to begin some systems that can be identified as initiatives
of this Administration. Differing degrees of program commitment—­
full-­scale development, production, deployment—­are appropriate for
consideration, depending on the particular case. But nothing less than
full-­scale deployment will count in the actual military balance, and at
least some of these systems will have to be deployed if we are to change
perceptions.
3. Military utility, relative effectiveness, and cost should be the
principal criteria for going ahead with such new systems. But antici-
pated political effects, particularly effects on our allies or on the Soviets,
can weigh heavily in such decisions. These effects include such consid-
erations as the creation of parity in a geographical area or at a particular
level of escalation; the promotion of arms control agreements; or the
conveying of a sense of U.S. technological superiority.
4. In general, strategic systems will have the greatest effect on per-
ceptions, though there are exceptions—ERW, for example.
Here are some examples of systems whose implementation would
affect perceptions as well as military capabilities. Because they are not
equivalent in nature, I do not present them as alternatives. However,
I believe we will have to move forward with a substantial number of
them to have a significant effect.
I emphasize that funds for the next steps have been programmed
for very few of these systems. Thus any encouragement engendered
by the thought that these systems exemplify the lead we could have
over the Soviets in technology should be severely tempered. What this
memorandum contains are ideas, potential development programs,
and possible prospective deployments. These by no means offset the
Soviet forces in being, or the Soviet systems in serial production.
Moreover, the systems described below are not a substitute for an
increase in the size of the defense program. They are the part of what
would constitute an increased program, specific reasons for increased
expenditures. In no way could they substitute for the rest of our forces

and defense costs; they are examples of the additions that need to be
made in order to offset the military and perceptual advantages that the
Soviets have been accumulating. They are opportunities: advantageous
if taken (or, rather, bought); useless if forgone.
1. M–X. Next decision is full-­scale development, separately or in
a joint program with Trident C–5 missile. Without it, we will not have
even by the late 1980’s a quick-­response hard-­target capability compa-
rable to that the Soviets will possess early in the 1980’s. A related ques-
tion is survivability, both short-­term and enduring.3
2. Alternate launch point land-­based system. Some mobile system
of this kind (there are two or three alternatives) can assure a survivable
land-­based ICBM, not dependent on warning, provided a solution can
be found to the outstanding technical and cost problems. Other alterna-
tives for increasing survivability will have comparable costs, but differ-
ent balances of military value and political difficulties.4
3. B–X. A new bomber, of range and payload comparable with
that of Backfire, but more effective, because of recent very significant
technological advances, of which you are aware. This bomber would
be greatly superior to the Backfire (and the B–1) in ability to penetrate
air defenses because of a combination of low detectability features,
improved countermeasures and improved defensive systems. It would
be particularly effective in combination with a cruise missile attack
because the “fixes” to the Soviet air defense required for the cruise mis-
siles would be at cross-­purposes with those required for the bomber
(and vice versa). As you are aware, we could start full-­scale develop-
ment of such a bomber as early as 1979 and achieve IOC by 1984. Jux-
taposition with B–1 could pose some political problems, but also has
some potential for political justification—­as you know, we had it in
mind when the B–1 was cancelled.5
5. GLCM. One way to offset Soviet long-­range theater nuclear forces.
At the protocol deployment limit of 600 km, GLCMs (and SLCMs) can-
not reach the Soviet Union from the FRG, though Soviet 600-­km GLCMs
from East Europe (or SLCMs) can reach all of FRG. But at the 2500-­km
test range limit, GLCMs can reach much of European U.S.S.R. from the
FRG and the U.K. (as can SLCMs of that range from the oceans adjacent
to Europe). These systems are in full-­scale development—­the next issue
is deployment. To deploy in the early 1980’s will require acceleration of
the process of making basing arrangements, planning targeting, etc.6
3 Carter wrote “ok?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
4 Carter wrote “?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
5 Carter wrote “no” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
6 Carter wrote “ok?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.

6. Pershing II (XR-­extended range). Range to 1500 km. Not limited
by SALT, but NATO option III offered to the Soviets in MBFR reduces
numbers of Pershings by 36 and limits the U.S. to 72 launchers for SSMs
of range greater than 500 km. Would be a new development; much
larger and less mobile than GLCM.7
7. Tactical cruise missiles of radius in the 1000-­km category, with
terminal guidance (10-­foot accuracy or better), carrying conventional
warheads, and reusable—­to reduce costs greatly. Needs a bit more
thought about targets (I am pushing the concept hard) but could soon
be ready for full-­scale development.8
8. Cannon-­launched Guided Projectiles (Cooperhead). Introduc-
tion of laser guidance to artillery shells will allow us to employ the
thousands of artillery tubes already deployed as precision guided
weapons capable of making a direct hit on a moving tank at ranges in
excess of 10 kilometers. We will begin production of laser-­guided shells
9. Assault Breaker. This program is a new initiative intended
to break up an assault of massed armor without using nuclear war-
heads. It applies the MIRV concept to tactical forces: a tactical missile
is launched at a column of tanks; as it approaches the column, its war-
head separates into 20 or 30 bomblets, each of which has a heat seeker
which guides that bomblet to an individual tank. Development has just
started, but we have the program on an accelerated pace to achieve a
10. Advanced Medium Range Air-­to-Air Missile (AMRAAM). This
will be our first “fire and forget” missile. It will allow USAF and naval
air to achieve air superiority even if outnumbered. This missile will
outrange missiles on Soviet aircraft and allow our F–15s and F–16s to
engage two or three aircraft at a time since the radar guidance system
in AMRAAM becomes autonomous shortly after launch (current air-­to-­
air systems are either short-­range or require the aircraft’s radar to track
the target during the entire flight of the missile). We have just begun an
accelerated development of this missile and expect to begin production
11. SURTASS. The Surface Towed Array Surveillance System is
a new submarine detection and tracking sensor that is the result of a
major breakthrough in acoustic array technology. This 8000-­ft-­long line
array will be towed behind surface ships accompanying carrier task
7 Carter wrote “?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
8 Carter wrote “MIRV’s?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
9 Carter wrote “ok?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
10 Carter wrote “ok?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
11 Carter wrote “ok?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.

forces, or can be used in conjunction with the present SOSUS bottom-­
mounted arrays to extend the coverage and accuracy of the SOSUS sys-
tem. Whereas previous ship sonars or arrays were limited to detection
ranges of the order of 10 to 100 miles, SURTASS will have a range of
200 to 1000 miles, depending on propagation factors. SURTASS can
be used also to provide a submarine surveillance or ASW capability
in remote regions where we do not have bottom-­mounted arrays, e.g.,
the Indian Ocean. The system will become operational in 1981 on the
TAGOS ships.12
As the programming and budget process proceeds, I shall be con-
sidering systems and ideas that we will want to implement. Technology
offers us one possible way to offset some of the advantages the Soviets
hold in so many aspects of the military balance; but unless we move
from the idea stage to tangible increases in capability, the ideas will not
mean very much.
A number of these initiatives can take major steps toward incor-
poration into our military capabilities in the FY 80 program. Others
will do so later. I and others in DoD will be considering with Cy and
Zbig now to make maximum use of these actions internationally, and
with the Vice President in terms of domestic perceptions. At some key
internal decision points you will wish to make your own inputs on the
interaction of perceptions and programs. You may wish to make the
key announcements yourself.13
Harold Brown
12 Carter wrote “ok?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
13 Brzezinski returned the memorandum to Brown under cover of an October 14
memorandum in which he wrote: “I return for your records your memorandum to the
President of September 11, with his marginal notes.” (Carter Library, National Security
also sent a copy of Brown’s memorandum to Carter, with Carter’s handwritten notes, to
Ermarth and Utgoff under cover of an October 14 memorandum. (Ibid.)

87.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, September 15, 1978
SUBJECT
FY 1980 Defense Program
Since you appointed me Secretary of Defense, my own greatest
concern has been assuring the adequacy of our defense against the
growing threat from the Soviet Union. Though the U.S. has many other
grave foreign policy problems, I believe that this one must take prece-
dence in my thinking, because on the adequacy of that defense depends
the protection of our country’s physical existence and its vital interests
in the world, and the deterrence of a nuclear war whose occurrence
would end the world as we know it.
—On August 13 I sent you a memorandum outlining the defense
To maintain a coherent process in the FY 1980 budget preparation, it
is necessary for you now to select a program level for the FY 80–84
period, with associated fiscal level. This will provide a basis for me to
have prepared, for submission to you, the proposed budget request for
FY 1980.
—On September 8 at Camp David I gave you a paper by the Joint
Chiefs of Staff on this subject.3 That paper is, in my view, an accurate
statement (though incomplete, as any statement inevitably is) of the
current military balance and the trends. I subscribe to what it says in
that regard. The present military trend is highly unfavorable to us. I
believe we cannot permit that trend to continue, if we are to meet our
responsibility to the nation’s security. It is in our power to stop the
balance from becoming clearly adverse. To do so requires a greater
defense effort.
I believe that this is one of the most important single decisions as
to which I shall make a recommendation to you, and that your decision
will directly affect the safety of the people of this country.
memorandum. In a September 22 memorandum, Brzezinski informed Brown that Carter
had seen the memorandum (Ibid.)
2 See Document 75.
3 See Document 83.

I.
The Soviet military buildup is the greatest direct threat to the
United States. It continues to compound at 4% every year, year in and
year out. That has gone on for almost twenty years; over that same
period our own defense effort has not increased in real terms, and has
halved as a percentage of GNP or of the federal budget.
Military capability, of course, is forces, equipment, and trained per-
sonnel, not money. But money largely determines those other factors.
Funding is a crude—­but reasonably good-­overall measure of military
capability. It is an even better measure of trends.
Depending on our predilections and our detailed judgments we
may differ as to which side—­the U.S.S.R. and its allies or the United
States and its—­is ahead militarily today. But the balance is close, and
six or eight years ago it was not—­we were clearly ahead. If the trend is
not reversed, the balance will not be close six or eight years from now—­
the Soviets will be clearly ahead.
The trend lines are crossing or already have crossed. For the first
time since World War II, the balance of military power is in process of
shifting. It is true that the Soviets have some problems that we do not,
such as the PRC—­just as we have problems that are unique to us. Those
problems of theirs are not enough to offset the advantage they are gain-
ing. Unless we move, in a steady, real-­growth way, as you pledged to
the NATO allies and directed in PD–18, the gap will widen more and
more. And the results, in my view, will not be long in coming.
II.
I am as aware as anyone—­indeed, I have often reminded others—­
that spending for military purposes is not the sole determinant of
national security. If it were, we already would be in a situation much
more dangerous than the troubling one we now face.
I also am aware that there are many claims on the federal budget, a
budget which must be controlled in order to help fight inflation. But no
claim compares in urgency to the claim which makes all else possible—­
the physical security of our country and the deterrence of war.
Persistent inflation has had the effect of robbing our defense, just
as it has robbed our people. For in the past three years the estimates
of anticipated inflation allowed for in the Defense budget have not
equaled the actual inflation after the results are counted each year. The
same thing will happen again next year if inflation estimates are not
realistic—­an apparent increase in real defense program disappearing in
added costs of trying to maintain even the current level.

The following table shows how inflation has been underestimated
in the preparation of the Defense budget:
Year
OMB Inflation Estimate
at Time of Budget Submission
Actual Inflation
CY 77
CY 78
CY 79
CY 80
In planning the Defense budget, the adequacy of the dollar fig-
ure finally adopted is sensitive to the assumption about inflation. For
instance, if the inflation estimate is understated by 1½ percentage
points, half of a planned 3% real growth simply disappears. I am con-
vinced that the OMB inflation figures for FY 1979 and again for FY 1980
are seriously underestimated.
Underestimation of inflation during the past few years has been
an important contributor to a persistent slighting of our defense needs.
The following table, and Figure 1 (next under), tell the story:
U.S. Defense Budget (TOA)
(Figures in billions, constant 1977 $)
FY 73
FY 74
FY 75
FY 76
FY 77
FY 78
FY 79 (request)
4 Based on actual data, first six months. [Footnote is in the original.]
5 OMB estimate in FY 79 budget submission. [Footnote is in the original.]
6 C. Schultze’s estimate/R. Strauss’ estimate. [Footnote is in the original.]
7 OMB estimate in FY 79 budget submission. [Footnote is in the original.]
note is in the original.]
in the original.]

FIGURE 1
The trend is even more disturbing when compared with that of
Soviet defense spending, as is shown in Figure 2. As you can see, at a
time when the Soviets have been increasing their military expenditures
at a steady rate of 4% per year (and their military hardware and R&D
expenditures even more), our defense expenditures after a period of
decline have risen slightly in the two Ford budgets, and then leveled
off in FY 78 and FY 79, if realistic inflation figures for those years are

FIGURE 2
used. In my view, that movement, which may even result in a decline in
FY 79, must not continue.10
10 Some savings in the defense budget from increased “efficiency” are theoretically
possible. I have accomplished some, and I am making every effort to realize others. Most
take time to achieve, and most of the really glaring inefficiencies (e.g., unneeded bases,
anti-­competitive contracting rules, excessively high civil service pay) exist because they
have political support in the Congress which has been reflected in law. Some of those
inefficiencies have the support of other offices in your Administration—­though they have
not had yours. I do not believe that I—­or any other Secretary of Defense—­can achieve
efficiency gains which can offset in any substantial degree inadequacies of budget level.
[Footnote is in the original.]

III.
I have wanted to discuss this situation with you personally before
making a recommendation to you on the Defense budget level for FY
1980. I plan to make such a recommendation in the next few days.
As Secretary of Defense, I of course feel a particular responsibility
for the adequacy of our military capability. But you should know me
well enough to know that I am not by nature an alarmist, and that in
matters of this kind I consider my position carefully. I believe I owe it to
you to make you aware of my very deep concern.
Harold Brown
88.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, September 18, 1978
SUBJECT
ICBM Vulnerability
Since late last year the Defense Science Board has been studying
the ICBM vulnerability problem. The Chairman, Dr. Eugene Fubini, has
just submitted the Board’s report. It is well done and highly relevant to
some key decisions we must soon make.
Enclosed (Tab A) for your information is an executive summary
of that report. If, after reading this, you want additional background, I
can send you a more detailed (18-­page) summary. I should note that the
group’s conclusions on NCA survivability are, in my view, flawed by
their lack of knowledge of our plans relative to that issue.
While the Defense Science Board was conducting this study, sim-
ilar and related issues were being examined by three other panels: An
OSTP panel formed by Frank Press; a panel of the Air Force Scientific
Advisory Board; and a university-­oriented panel of the Department of
Defense knows as JASON.2 Bill Perry, Under Secretary for Research and
Engineering, met with representatives from these four panels ten days
2 For the OSTP report, see Document 43. JASON (“July August September October
November”) refers to an independent advisory panel of scientists that consulted for the
Department of Defense.

ago to determine whether the scientific community that had studied
this problem was converging on a common opinion.
There was, I believe, strong agreement on the nature of the threat,
our need to respond vigorously, and the desirability of starting a new
missile program in the near future. Participants also agreed on most of
the technical issues regarding how to rebase ICBMs for survivability,
but disagreed on the best basing mode—­partly because there is incom-
plete information on some of the proposals, and partly because of dif-
fering subjective judgments. A summary of the results of that meeting
is enclosed at Tab B. You might also wish to discuss this with Frank
Press, who has been following all of these studies and, of course, spon-
sored one of them.
This material is useful background for the Mid-Term Review of the
Defense Program, planned for Wednesday, September 20.
Harold Brown

Tab A

Executive Summary of a Report Prepared by the Defense
Science Board3
Washington, August 11, 1978
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This paper summarizes the major findings and recommendations
of the DSB Strategic Nuclear Balance panel.
Current Policy and Planning
A review of official U.S. policy and guidance documents indicates
that current definitions of strategic policy objectives are inconsistent,
vague and incomplete.
Technical-Operational
[3 paragraphs (20 lines) not declassified]
• ICBM survival will be increasingly doubtful starting in the early
to mid-1980’s because of the major increase in RVs as the Soviets MIRV
their ICBM force and because of the increased accuracy being intro-
duced in the SS–18 and SS–19.
• In view of the Soviet SLBM threat, bomber base escape is ques-
tionable, especially from coastal bases. Considerable improvement in
3 Top Secret. The summary cover sheet, which bears the title “The Strategic Nuclear
Balance,” is attached but not printed.

survivability would be gained as a result of being able to move the
bombers rapidly to the [less than 1 line not declassified] defined in the
strategic bomber study.
• [1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]
In sum, the essential and immediate need to support a broader
“deterrence” requires increased attention to the war-­fighting capability
of both our strategic forces and the C3I systems which support them.
The DSB recommends that first priority must be given to fixing and
improving existing systems; in particular, improving the survivability
of our C3I systems, and correcting without further delay the increasing
vulnerability of the major elements of our strategic forces.
Acquisition Policy
Establish priorities in the areas of acquisition that emphasize
improvement in survivability and endurance of existing weapons
or devices, even if this requires postponement of new starts of major
national importance. In particular:
C3I: Fix the C3I system so that it works in peacetime and under
attack.
ICBM: Rebase ICBMs in a survivable configuration such as a Mul-
tiple Aim Point System.
Bombers: Improve the survivability of the bomber force by provid-
ing interior dispersal bases for redeployment of alert B–52s (and any
future strategic aircraft).
SSBNs: Maintain the capability of SLBMs at sea by extending the
life of POSEIDON SSBNs to approximately 30 years, and back-­fitting
C4 missiles on most of them.
Resource Implications:
• We are now at a historic turning point.
• On the one side, we are committed to improving general purpose
forces at 3 percent per year.
• On the other side, we must fix the deficiencies in U.S. strategic
forces or be prepared to give strategic superiority to the Soviet Union.
• The presently projected Defense budget is probably not large
enough to do both.

Tab B

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense4
Washington, undated
Seminar on ICBM Vulnerability & Responses
1. Purpose
(S) [2 lines not declassified] The impact of this threat and poten-
tial US responses have been studied this year under the sponsorship
of a number of organizations: Air Force Scientific Advisory Board
(AFSAB), Defense Science Board (DSB), JASON and OSTP. This semi-
nar provided a forum for interchange and discussion among represen-
tatives of these groups in an attempt to: 1) examine the convergence of
the technical community on the basic facts and issues, 2) better focus
and understand the issues, and 3) separate the issues from the under-
lying technical facts. The discussion was organized in four topic areas:
most effective basing approach in response, and 4) the most effective
missile for that basing. There was also a discussion recognizing the
growing importance of Command, Control and Communications to
the SLBM and airbreathing legs of the TRIAD in the face of the threat
to the ICBM.
2. The Threat
(S) [9 lines not declassified] Two groups (JASON and DSB) did not
examine the threat as a part of their review, but took it as a given. The
remaining groups (AFSAB, OSTP) had reviewed the threat analysis.
Representatives from the various groups had examined the threat in
greater depth within the past two years, and found no basis for dis-
agreement. A more confident assessment of Soviet accuracy (by the
Soviets as well as the US), as demonstrated in ongoing development
tests, will probably require about six more months of testing. All groups
felt it would be useful to conduct an independent threat assessment at
that time, but that there was no need to defer programmatic decisions
pending results of more detailed assessment.
3. Response to the Threat
(C) All four panels felt it was important to respond decisively
and vigorously to the threat. Some felt the need to respond by 1983 in
reaction to domestic perceptions if not military need. Others felt that
a gap in an operationally deployed response could be tolerated from
4 Secret.

1983–1986 so long as there was evidence of a vigorous program which
would be effective in the long term. The gap from 83–86 might be tol-
erated by beefing up our other TRIAD legs temporarily during this
period (e.g., increased bomber alert), recognizing that we could rely on
the effectiveness of these TRIAD legs until 1986, but that our confidence
beyond then might begin to degrade.
4. Basing Approach
(S) If a Multiple Aimpoint (MAP) approach is selected, all panels
agree that vertical shelters are the best technical implementation. All
panels agree on the following desirable features of MAP: 1) it provides
a technically sound approach to survivability; 2) it offers endurance;
3) it is straight forward to construct; and 4) we can confidently predict
its nuclear hardness. All groups recognize the breakout problem asso-
ciated with a Soviet MAP deployment, but there is disagreement on
the degree to which a Soviet MAP deployment exacerbates the present
breakout problem. All panels feel that mutual verification of MAP sys-
tems will be a difficult problem, but recognize that it can be resolved
with hard work. With respect to MAP, there is disagreement on the
expected difficulty in negotiations, the time when negotiations would
be completed, and the impact on delaying SALT II.
(S) There is disagreement on the relative effectiveness of alterna-
tive approaches to MAP. The OSTP panel feels that a strip alert airmo-
bile system with dispersed inland basing (e.g., wide bodied jet, initially
with MINUTEMAN III missiles) is the most attractive alternative, and
it would be reasonable to begin deployment of such a system by 1983.
A more effective air-­mobile system (e.g., hardened aircraft with a new
missile) would be competitive with a long term MAP deployment in
1986, in the opinion of the OSTP panel. This approach would avoid
the potential environmental and SALT problems which this panel asso-
ciates with MAP. Other panels objected to the strip alert air-­mobile
approach because of its dependence upon tactical warning, sharing
many of the survivability problems of the present air-­breathing force.
They also felt that a 1983 Initial Operating Capability (IOC) was unre-
alistic and noted that, with a 1977 start, we were projecting a 1982 IOC
for ALCM, with B–52 modifications as the pacing item. There was also
disagreement on beginning with an unhardened aircraft as opposed to
developing a system with long term effectiveness from the start.
(S) All panels agreed on the merits of two potentially far term
(beyond 1990) solutions. One potential solution is a Ballistic Missile
Defense system to provide preferential defense for those MAP shelters
containing a missile. Such a system would be low altitude and probably
non-­nuclear. A limited point defense system could be consistent with
the ABM treaty or, some felt, an expanded system (1000 interceptors)
could probably be negotiated in SALT III (if non-­nuclear). The second

potential approach is a shallow water (Great Lakes, continental shelf)
submersible system deployed in large numbers. These systems would
be small, with very small crews, and would create ASW problems
drastically different than those associated with the TRIDENT in deep
waters. All groups recommended accelerated R&D for both concepts.
5. Missile
(C) All groups agreed on the need and importance of develop-
ing and deploying a new missile, survivably based. However, there
was disagreement on the relative priority of initiating a new missile
development as opposed to proceeding first with a survivable basing
approach. Some panels believed that the TRIDENT II SLBM (D–5) was
needed for TRIDENT and therefore recommended starting now with
the development of a common missile. Others felt that a D–5 was not
needed in the medium term, and recommended proceeding now to
obtain the flexibility offered by a large MX.
89.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 19, 1978
SUBJECT
Memo from McGeorge Bundy concerning “The Next Strategic Nuclear Weapons
System”
McGeorge Bundy sent me a provocative memo concerning the
above subject. I recommend that you read it (Tab A).
Bundy’s main points are that:
—It is gradually becoming clear that there is no good replacement
for the Minuteman force which would be land-­based and thus operated
by the Air Force; and
mation. Carter wrote in the upper right corner of the memorandum: “Zbig—Is he talking
about subs in the Great Lakes? J.” In a September 7 memorandum to Brzezinski, Utgoff
asserted that “Bundy’s submarine proposals are in my opinion technically sound.” Gates
wrote on Utgoff’s memorandum: “Bundy’s memo is really excellent. RG.” (Ibid)

—Only the President can overcome bureaucratic forces that are
working against adopting a solution that would not be land-­based.
While Bundy may be right, I think we are going to have to publicly
establish a very strong case for whatever course of action we decide on.
That case should involve not only an examination of the small submers-
ible concept that Bundy mentions, but also a re-­examination of some
Air Force concepts such as air mobile ICBMs which were discarded
back when the deficiencies of the trench and MAP schemes were less
well understood.
Further, given the rapidly building concerns about the Minuteman
vulnerability problem, the impact such concerns are having on SALT,
and the corresponding interest in getting started on a solution, we may
have to buy the time required to complete our search for an acceptable
solution. This may involve starting a common missile, or accelerating
the cruise missile carrier, or some other program.
The Minuteman vulnerability is probably the biggest defense issue
you will face this year; it will be the main focus of your upcoming mid-­
term review of the Defense budget.

Tab A

Memorandum From McGeorge Bundy to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)2
August 21, 1978
SUBJECT
The Next Strategic Nuclear Weapons System
In the last month or two, partly as a member of the President’s
General Advisory Committee and partly as a foundation executive
attending the annual summer seminar run by experts from the arms
control centers that the Ford Foundation helps to pay for, I have had
some exposure to the bothersome question of Minuteman vulnerabil-
ity, and what to do about it. I have reached the conclusion that if I had
your job again I would want to be sure that the President is fully caught
up on some of the troubles that seem to be brewing. It looks to me as
if both our basic deterrent posture and SALT are headed for a lot of
trouble unless there can be a better solution than is currently favored
by any uniformed service. To put it another way, I believe that we are
headed for a dilemma which can be resolved only by the President as
Commander-­in-Chief and that an early resolution, difficult as it may
be, is much more likely to be successful than a delayed effort to patch
things up.
The problem of Minuteman vulnerability is unpleasantly real.
That is not the preferred conclusion of many of my friends in the arms
control community, but the evidence from the Defense Department
seems to me persuasive. The combination of throw-­weight, MIRVs, and
increasing accuracy on the Soviet side is producing a real vulnerability.
The Nitze scenarios are highly implausible,3 but the increasing expo-
sure of the Minuteman system is simply not what was aimed at when it
was built. It is not about to become worthless, but in less than five years
it will no longer be the secure second-­strike system it was designed to
be. Nothing has happened since 1960 to change the belief that such a
secure second-­strike capability is a highly desirable element in each of
our strategic systems taken alone, on the obvious ground that surviv-
able weapons are much better than those which are open to effective
preemption.
Minuteman belongs to the Air Force, and its habitat is the conti-
nental United States. It follows that by natural bureaucratic inertia the
effort to replace it has focused on land-­based missile systems of one
sort or another. The bad news is that none of these systems is attrac-
tive on basic technical and economic grounds, leaving aside the politics
of large-­scale ground-­based deployments. The currently favored MAP
system has the additional disadvantage of severely complicating SALT.
Ironically, it is a system that no one would have designed if it were
not for the counting rules of SALT. MAP is a bad plan, and a Soviet
MAP would be a nightmare even for moderates, because of the prob-
lem of verification. The more this system is studied, the worse its con-
sequences seem to be, and the nuttier the requirements associated with
the shell game which is its theoretical raison d’etre. MAP is the only
weapons system I have heard of that makes the old MLF look smart.
Harold Brown and Frank Press are certainly two of the ten best
men in the country, on the problems that lie at the intersection between
weapons systems and science. Both of them know how hard this par-
ticular issue is, and both have had important studies underway for a
long time. Until this summer, no one had any attractive ideas about
alternatives to the mobile land-­based missile. Now the Jason Summer
Study Group, with such stars as Gell-Mann, Garwin, and Drell among
its members, has found at least one interesting alternative—­a relatively
simple in-­shore system of conventionally powered submersibles. The
in-­shore element is critical, (1) to the kind of command and control
that is an attractive feature of Minuteman, (2) to the cost-­effectiveness
3 See Document 1.

of the system, and (3) to its distinctiveness, as a system sufficiently
different from Poseidon and Trident to require very different Soviet
countermeasures.
Those to whom I have talked, and I admit that they are only a
small sample, believe that this in-­shore submersible system is much the
most attractive in sight technologically, economically and militarily, if
we think simply in terms of what a new secure second-­strike strategic
system should be like. Unfortunately, it is bureaucratically unattractive
both because it offers no role for the Air Force and because it relies on
exactly the kinds of vessels and capabilities that the Navy resists. As
recent events have shown us again, the Admirals like large ocean-­going
ships, preferably with nuclear power, and they think in terms of insur-
ing the survivability of each of these monstrous units, rather than in
terms of the deterrent effect of a large set of small vessels that survives
by numbers, not by individual “invulnerability.”
If anyone can bend the uniformed bureaucracy to technical and
strategic reality it is the President, and if any President has the intel-
lectual and moral equipment for the task it is this President. There is a
world of difference between what a President can command and what
the ablest Secretary of Defense can manage.
Obviously, the technical and economic premises on which this
memorandum is based need to be tested. Judgments of this importance
cannot be rested on conversations in Colorado or on the hunches of
even the most gifted of civilian scientists. But it is equally obvious that
the service bureaucracies are not organized with a view to providing
the best possible solutions to problems of this sort; they are organized
for the survival of their own preferred symbols of status. The secure and
closely controlled second-­strike weapon is nobody’s favorite, except
when it happens to be a manned bomber or an ocean-­going nuclear
powered submarine. Minuteman itself is serving well for twenty years,
but it was not designed by military men, and their bumbling efforts to
replace it show that left to themselves they will not get the job done.

90.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Mid-Term Review of Defense Programs
You are scheduled to meet Friday, September 29th, with me, Har-
old Brown, Jim McIntyre and a few others for a mid-­term review of
those particular programs in the FY 80 Defense budget that seem likely
to have the greatest implications for our overall national security policy.
In arranging this meeting, we planned for Harold to take the lead
in framing the issues for discussion. The agenda Harold has proposed
(Tab A) is too broad to allow discussion in-­depth of any of the issues if
we try to discuss them all. Harold will therefore focus on the strategic
issues and in particular Minuteman (MM) vulnerability which is by far
the most important issue you will face this year.
You should begin the meeting by calling on Harold Brown to out-
line the strategic forces issues as he sees them. He will then call on
Under Secretary of Defense Bill Perry to present more detailed remarks
and a “straw man” strategic force structure through the 1980’s, along
with development and procurement plans. This presentation and the
ensuing discussion will probably consume most of the time of the meet-
ing. Harold will then want to raise some issues on General Purpose
Forces which Assistant Secretary of Defense Murray will present in
more detail. Finally, if there is time, Harold may call on Dr. Perry to
address the question of research and development strategy.
At the end of the general meeting, Harold would like to take 15
minutes to discuss the separate highly classified paper for which not
all participants are cleared. When you so indicate, Harold will arrange
for those not cleared to leave, or you may want to adjourn to the Oval
Office with a much smaller group for that part of the discussion.
As background for the meeting Harold has sent you three short
papers (Tabs B–D). In addition, Frank Press has prepared an analysis
of the MM vulnerability issue and what we should do about it which is
included at Tab E with a forwarding memo and an Executive Summary.
The remainder of this memo summarizes and comments on Harold’s
ment of Defense—Subject File, Box 39, Department of Defense—General—I [1]. Secret.
Sent for information. Printed from an uninitialed copy of the memorandum. Tabs A–E
are attached but not printed.

papers and provides some questions you can use to channel the discus-
sion in some interesting and useful directions.
Strategic Forces Issues
Harold Brown’s first paper (Tab B) describes a strategic forces
modernization plan that addresses three main factors:
1) obsolescence in the bomber and ICBM legs of the Triad;
2) vulnerabilities in the ICBM force and the bomber force created
by Soviet ICBM improvements, their construction of an SLBM force
that could pose a significant prelaunch threat to our bomber force, and
improvements in Soviet air defense; and
3) the need to increase our force capabilities to maintain essential
equivalence with the Soviets.
For the long term, Harold presents a “representative strategic force
modernization program” aimed at increasing our capabilities through
improvements in the forces that most need modernizing. The suggested
program raises our steady-­state total strategic spending to $9B per year
—Development starting in FY 79 of a new “mostly common”
missile that closely approximates the M–X missile but provides major
components that can be used to upgrade the Navy’s new C4 missile to
closely approximate the D5 (Trident II) missile at less than one-­fourth
the R&D cost of the D5.
—Development in FY 79 of the MAP basing scheme, and either
an air mobile or ground mobile basing scheme, or both, with the best
system to begin full-­scale development by FY 80.
—Development of a cruise missile carrier (CMC) aircraft begin-
ning in 1981 not as a force enhancement program, but as an eventual
replacement for our first CMC, the B–52G.
—Production of 3,000 first-­generation cruise missiles beginning in
1980 (with an IOC of 1982) plus development of a second-­generation
cruise missile with reduced detectability.
—Upgrading the B–52H fleet (including new avionics and ECM) to
maintain it as a penetrating bomber force until the end of the century.
—40 new austere inland bases to allow wider dispersal of the
bomber and cruise missile carriers.
Harold also notes that the vulnerability of our strategic C3 systems
is as profound a concern as the vulnerability of the forces themselves;
The paper also comments that a new penetrating bomber is “indicated
by the late 80s” and that we will want to explore smaller submarines
than Trident as a possible follow-­on.
Comments
Harold’s analysis is based on the judgment that we want to retain
a full Triad and will not go to a posture (e.g., Dyad) that depends

primarily on SLBMs and bomber/CMs. However, Harold points out
that even if his long-­term plan is adopted, we will nonetheless face a
period from the late 70s to the mid-80s during which our land-­based
ICBM force will be very vulnerable. Thus, until 1985 when our ICBM
force will theoretically get well with some form of mobile basing, we
will be very dependent on the other two legs of the Triad.
Whether or not to permit this vulnerable period is an extremely
important judgment. Domestically, it will be used against SALT; inter-
nationally, it may undermine our Allies’ confidence and be exploited
by the Soviets. Harold is also concerned by the argument that if we can
live with it for three or more years, why not indefinitely?—­which will
undercut support for the measures he proposes to rectify the situation
in the long term.
Thus, the greatest weakness in Harold’s program is the absence
of an interim program to deal with the vulnerability gap in the early
80s. You should press him on this point and ask that specific options be
developed for consideration in the final budget meetings at the end of
the year.
It is also clear that Harold still believes that the MAP basing scheme
is the best long-­term solution to the MM vulnerability problem in spite
of the fact that others outside DOD (including Frank Press’ panel and
the Jason group) have serious reservations about the practicality of
MAP, to say nothing of the problems it may create for SALT. You should
therefore urge Harold to take a serious look at other schemes on a pri-
ority basis.
In light of the above, you might ask Harold the following specific
questions:
—How can we bridge the gap from 1980 until we have modernized
the Minuteman force? Would the adoption [1 line not declassified] Would
the required changes in our C3I/warning systems be useful even after
we had completed the modernization of the force? Could these changes
be made in 1–2 years?
—Given the limits on our resources, wouldn’t it be better to sub-
stitute a short study of the MAP scheme and its more promising alter-
natives for the year-­long parallel development program proposed, and
develop only the scheme that the study shows to be best?
—Does it make sense to begin full-­scale development of the rel-
atively large “mostly common” missile when the smaller common
missile might be more compatible with the basing scheme we end up
choosing?
—Why aren’t we considering a more vigorous CMC development
program as a means for maintaining essential equivalence?

—Is it necessary to wait until mid-79 to take additional actions to
improve our C3I systems? Aren’t there actions beyond those you are
currently taking, that we already know we’ll want to take?
The most important thing Harold wants from this meeting is a pol-
icy statement from you that we are going to solve the MM vulnerability
problem. Such a decision would be of great help in our efforts to widen
support for SALT. Harold would like to announce this decision next
week, and I would like to follow up on it in a policy speech I am sched-
uled to deliver the following week in Chicago.
Harold would also like you to indicate whether or not you support
specific elements of his long-­term plan. I believe that any such deci-
sions would be premature and should be made in the budget review
meetings that will be held between now and January.
General Purpose Forces (GPF)
Harold’s GPF paper (Tab C) contains no surprises. It continues the
NATO-­emphasis improvements in reinforcement (POMCUS) and in
strengthening the Army through a vigorous modernization and expan-
sion program.
The most important issue is likely to be the scope of the Army
modernization program, particularly in light of the current DOD study
of Army force structure that you directed in the Spring budget review.
This study is examining an alternative defense doctrine based on a
belt of fixed infantry-­manned emplacements, equipped with anti-­armor
capability and backed up by mobile armored reserves. In the meantime,
however, DOD proposes to modernize and expand the Army along the
lines of the current “active defense” doctrine which raises the question:
should the Army’s plans be held back to await the results of the study?
Although the study may reveal some interesting new concepts, I do
not recommend holding back on modernization now. For a number of
reasons, we are likely to have the existing doctrine and force structure
for some time to come, and failing to modernize as needed would harm
near-­term capabilities. On the other hand, this is an important issue
and an opportunity to re-­examine the premises behind our doctrine.
DOD should not treat it lightly, as many there would like. To reinforce
its importance, I suggest that you ask Harold how the study is coming
and what effect it might have on future Army programs.
Shipbuilding is also an important issue, particularly since the
budget veto. The veto message said that the Navy has been moving
toward larger, more costly ships, but fewer of them. However, the
upcoming budget reduces the shipbuilding rate a little further and
may make us vulnerable to criticism that although we may be giving
more relative emphasis to smaller ships, we are still moving toward
lower numbers.

You might ask Harold the following questions:
—What explanations should we present to the Congress and the
public for the continuing declines in both the size of the Navy and in
our shipbuilding rates?
—Are the smaller ship types that we are building the types we
should be building? If we haven’t yet identified the appropriate types
of ships to solve the Navy’s force level problem, what efforts do we
have underway to do so?
Defense R&D
Harold’s last paper argues that steadily increasing Soviet R&D
efforts in combination with US R&D efforts that have suffered a long-­
term decline due to inflation have led to a situation where the Soviets
are seriously challenging our technology lead in many areas.
The paper also presents DOD’s overall strategy for dealing with
this situation which is basically—­increased funding applied more
selectively when projects start to get expensive.
I support this general approach, but would like to see it reflected
in a specific collection of new R&D starts that we can use to demon-
strate that we are making a concerted effort to draw on our technolog-
ical strengths to solve our most pressing defense problems. You might
express this same interest to Harold and ask him for a rundown of the
new technological initiatives that he intends to include in the FY 80
budget.2
p.m. he met with Brown, Duncan, Jones, Brzezinski, Aaron, Perry, McIntyre, and Press in
the Oval Office to continue the discussion of the same issue. (Carter Library, Presidential
Materials, President’s Daily Diary). No minutes of either meeting were found.

91.
Presidential Directive/NSC-411
Washington, September 29, 1978
TO:
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO:
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Administrator, General Services Administration
SUBJECT
U.S. Civil Defense Policy (U)
I have reviewed the recommendations of the Policy Review Com-
mittee meeting on PRM–32. Based on them, I direct that the U.S. Civil
Defense program seek to:
—Enhance deterrence and stability in conjunction with our strate-
gic offensive and other strategic defensive forces. Civil defense, as an
element of the strategic balance, should assist in maintaining percep-
tions of that balance favorable to the U.S.
—Reduce the possibility that the U.S. could be coerced in time of
crisis.
—Provide some increase in the number of surviving population
and for greater continuity of government, should deterrence and esca-
lation control fail, in order to provide an improved basis for dealing
with the crisis and carrying out eventual national recovery.
This policy does not suggest any change in continuing U.S. reli-
ance on strategic offensive nuclear forces as the preponderant factor in
Based on the conclusions reached by the PRC on PRM–32 (see Document 73), Brzez-
inski submitted two versions of PD–41 to Carter under a September 19 covering memo-
randum. One version referred to a consensus among State, Defense, CJS, and OMB that
“makes no special claims for civil defense but explicitly ties it to crisis stability and the
strategic balance,” a connection that had been made “clear to the Soviets in SALT.” Brzez-
inski advised Carter to sign the consensus version. ACDA submitted the other version
as a dissent. Referring to the consensus PD favored by Brzezinski, Carter wrote in the
upper right corner of Brzezinski’s memorandum: “Zbig—It says nothing. J.” The Presi-
dent also noted in the bottom right corner: “Incorporate specifics of ACDA proposal at
least.” At the bottom left, Brzezinski wrote to Odom: “WO revise, adding #’s marked by
me. We will resubmit. ZB.” The PD printed here reflects those amendments. (Ibid.) In an
October 12 memorandum to Mondale, Vance, and Brown, as well as Jones, Turner, and
GSA Administrator Jay Solomon, Dodson noted that the ACDA Director had been “inad-
vertently omitted from the address list of PD/NSC–41,” and asked that recipients change
their records “as necessary.”

maintaining deterrence. U.S. civil defense programs will take advan-
tage of the mobility of the population stemming from wide ownership
of private automobiles, the extensive highway systems, and the large
number of non-­urban potential housing facilities to achieve crisis relo-
cation of the urban population. Civil defense programs should also
help deal with natural disasters and other national emergencies.
Jimmy Carter
92.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Deputy Secretary of
Defense (Duncan)1
Washington, September 30, 1978
SUBJECT
C3I
Some of the major conclusions I drew from my August trip to SAC
and NORAD concern the adequacy of our C3I for the changing U.S.-So-
viet strategic balance.2 I want to express my thoughts to you on this
matter because of your role as Chairman of the WWMCCS Council. The
following three points reflect my concerns:
—[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (9 lines) not declassified]
—Concern was expressed at NORAD about the erosion of
Defense’s ability to manage the National Communications System as
it impinges on private telecommunications developments and poli-
cies. This appears to result from both budgetary trends and pending
legislation.
I would like to have your views on how we should deal with these
problems. I realize they are enormous in scope and budgetary impli-
cations, but I believe we must address them if we are to be prepared
to maintain crisis stability in the years ahead. I am particularly con-
cerned that we do not spend large sums rectifying the first problem—­
connectivity for SIOP execution—­by means that fail to address the
Top Secret.

second problem—C3I survivability for conducting a campaign that
might last weeks and perhaps longer.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
93.
Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense1
Washington, October 1978
PD/NSC–18
SECURE RESERVE FORCE
TARGET ACQUISITION STUDY
FINAL REPORT
[Omitted here is a cover sheet, a table of contents, a list of tables,
and a glossary of acronyms and abbreviations.]
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND
­RECOMMENDATIONS (U)
I. Introduction
(TS) National Security Decision Memorandum Number 242, with
its call for the discriminate and controlled use of nuclear weapons, first
advanced the concept of a secure reserve force—­a survivable, strate-
gic force held in reserve for “protection and coercion during and after
nuclear conflict.”2 In addition, PD/NSC–18 directed that “U.S. target
plans should provide for the maintenance of a secure reserve force to
be withheld for possible use subsequent to a major nuclear exchange.”3
(TS) The “strategic reserve” forces presently consist of: (1) the
recovered and reconstituted forces. This study deals only with the
Secure Reserve Force (SRF).
(TS) Specific planning guidance for the employment of reserved
forces, including the Secure Reserve Force, is not contained in NUWEP
(with the exception of the injunction that such forces must not be
3 See Document 31.

essential to meeting SIOP objectives), or any other national-­level policy
document.
(TS) In the absence of specific guidance on how to translate the
idea of Secure Reserve Forces into actual nuclear attack plans, pre-
planned packages have been developed for the current SRF. These
preplanned packages include a combination of the unique (Eastern
European economic) and the strategic after-­thought (e.g., low priority
USSR economic SIOP “seconds”) with no definition as to when, where
and under what conditions the forces would actually be used, except
that it would be after a major nuclear exchange. The SRF weapons are
available for use in ad hoc employment options—­they are not committed
to any specific preplanned target package or employment strategy.
(S) Lack of attention at the policy level to Secure Reserve Force
employment concepts is in part rooted in the persistence of the view
that if deterrence fails a nuclear war will not only be massive but brief.
In such a scenario there would be a role for a reserve force; but only for
a force that is modest in size, and intended for use only in protection of
the U.S. against coercion by a recovering Soviet Union, or from intimi-
dation by a third party.
(S) What has not been satisfactorily addressed is the role that a
Secure Reserve Force would or should play if a nuclear war were pro-
longed, and involved a series of exchanges.
(C) The task assigned the SRF Study Group was to assess the capa-
bilities of the SRF in its present composition, particularly the capabili-
ties for target acquisition, under two different employment strategies;
preplanned targeting and ad hoc targeting for the SRF as it is currently
composed (B–52s, POSEIDON/POLARIS and MINUTEMAN III). The
study assessed the four basic requirements central to the use and con-
trol of the SRF against a range of time, C3I, and reconnaissance variables
and constraints: (1) survival of the SRF; (2) survival of the decision-­
maker; (3) information requirements for the employment of the Secure
Reserve Force and the availability of that information (survivability of
intelligence and communications assets); and (4) the ability of the NCA
to command and control and retarget/reprogram U.S. military forces
and to communicate with allies, enemies, and neutrals.
(U) Two scenarios were developed for use in the study. In both sce-
narios, it was assumed that there was a major nuclear exchange between
the Soviet Union and the United States. The first scenario assumes that
the Soviets initiate an attack on the United States and its allies with U.S.
forces in a day-­to-­day alert posture. The second scenario assumes that
the Soviet Union initiates an attack against the United States and its
allies with U.S. forces in a generated posture.

II. Findings
(TS) On the Survivability of the SRF
In the absence of specific guidance as to what number and kinds of
weapons we want to survive, for how long and for what purpose, it is
not obvious what an analysis of SRF survivability should concentrate
on. What can be said, however, is that:
—The TRIAD approach, with its programmatic hedges, has been
applied to the composition of the SRF. [2 lines not declassified]
—At least a portion of the SRF TRIAD is expected to survive and
remain available [less than 1 line not declassified] after an initial nuclear
exchange.
—The endurance of the SRF is the product of two factors: its ability
to survive the initial enemy attack (“initial SRF survivability”) and its
ability to surmount problems in post-­attack system support and main-
tenance (“long-­term SRF endurance”).
—Estimates of initial SRF survivability were based upon individ-
ual system survivability and SNDV alert status. These estimates indi-
cate that a militarily-­useful portion of the SRF can survive a massive
Soviet attack, under both the “surprise attack” and “attack with warn-
ing” scenarios. The initial force drawdown was found to be primarily
the result of (1) the fact that, whatever standard is applied, Minuteman
survivability is decreasing rapidly, (2) the loss of non-­alert bombers,
and (3) the loss of a non-­alert SSBN in the surprise attack scenario.
—Long-­term SRF endurance is estimated to be sufficient to pro-
vide militarily-­useful SRF capabilities [less than 1 line not declassified]
following the initial attack. [4 lines not declassified]
—In addition, the temporary non-­availability of some weapons
is expected, due to SSBN replenishment cycles and bomber recovery
operations.
These survivability/endurability estimates were based upon the
damage expected to result from a single massive Soviet attack. Addi-
tional Soviet or third country attacks could reduce SRF survival/
endurance. The assumption of a single-­wave attack makes the force
endurance problem more manageable but does not understate the
problem.
(TS) On NCA Survivability
—Current policy looks to emergency plans developed by the Fed-
eral Preparedness Agency [2 lines not declassified] There are 14 statutory
successors to the President and 32 statutory successors to the Secretary
of Defense.
—The adequacy of some of the current evacuation plans appear
questionable. Furthermore, we cannot definitely conclude that they

will work properly, since these plans are not realistically exercised [2
lines not declassified]
—We also find that only the President, Vice President, and Sec-
retary of Defense are briefed on nuclear weapons control and release
procedures. Other successors are not familiar with SIOP or SRF proce-
dures or options; however, military advisors will be available to assist
an NCA successor.
(TS) On Information Availability
—The information “needs” of a national decision maker could
range across the following competence or ability levels for decision-­
making and force management:
—Level I—“Blind.” Has minimum knowledge of status of U.S.
forces, inferred from launch orders given and known weapons systems
characteristics. Capable of launching preplanned SRF options.
—Level II—“Informed.” Has access to a reasonable amount of
information about U.S. status but does not have comparable informa-
tion on enemies or neutrals. This allows the NCA to reprogram forces
against preplanned options to make up for force drawdowns.
—Level III—“Intelligent.” Has access to status of enemy, neutral
and U.S. forces, and an assessment of the results of the SIOP laydown.
Can do effective force reprogramming and retargeting against the pre-
planned options (including all withholds)—­that is, a limited ad hoc
employment capability, for response to enemy attempts at coercion or
“peripheral pillage.”
—Level IV—“Ideal.” Knows the status of enemy, friendly and
neutral forces; the extent of damage to the enemy (both economic
and military); the rate and status of U.S. and enemy recovery efforts;
international political situation; extent of damage to the U.S.; and has
sufficient information and control of assets that he can sustain near-­
real-­time battle management, including reprogramming, retargeting,
and reconstitution.
—NSDM 242 requires that the SRF be available for use for pro-
tection and coercion during and after a major nuclear exchange. This
implies a need for both SRF flexibility and responsiveness to rapidly
changing real-­world situations, and also an “Intelligent” decision-­
maker. Hence, the study used Level III information requirements and
command abilities as the standard against which needs and abilities
were assessed.
—Information Availability—U.S. Status
—Assuming that they survive, the ABNCPs will be able to moni-
tor and update the status of most of the surviving military communi-
cations/intelligence/reconnaissance assets, as well as monitoring the

status of the SRF and of other surviving forces with “high” likelihood,
except [less than 1 line not declassified]
—The primary U.S. status information deficiency is the limited
information expected to be available on nuclear operations (launches,
NUDETS), [3 lines not declassified]
—Information Availability—Enemy Status
—The ability to locate enemy residual strategic forces, elements
of the command structure, strategic and intelligence/reconnaissance
assets, or tactical forces will be severely limited by loss of intelligence
assets due to enemy action or (in some cases) collateral damage.
—The most significant enemy information deficiency will be the
inability to determine the mission and alert status of residual enemy
forces.
—Determination of the extent of economic damage in enemy terri-
tories will be difficult without imagery data. SIGINT also is expected to
be inadequate; hence, a “low” assessment of the availability of enemy
status information, [less than 1 line not declassified]
(TS) On the ability of the NCA to Command and Control, Communi-
cate, and Retarget U.S. Military Forces
—The principal RF communications sites, satellite terminals and
common-­user facilities are expected to be destroyed in a major nuclear
exchange.
—[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
—[4 lines not declassified] and the forces and information sources
that survive.
III. Conclusions
(TS) The primary conclusions drawn from the assessments made
by this study are:
(1) We cannot offer a confident judgment on the survivability of
the NCA. We did not have full access to evacuation/reconstitution
plans and successful evacuation is highly situation-­dependent (rang-
ing from a surprise attack during a Presidential inaugural or State
of the Union address, to attack after a prolonged crisis). [2 lines not
declassified]
[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]
(2) At least a portion of each leg of the SRF TRIAD is expected to
survive and remain available [less than 1 line not declassified] The rapidly
decreasing survivability of the Minuteman [2 lines not declassified] The
hard target capability and control responsiveness of the Minuteman
argues, however, for retaining even a small MM element in the SRF.

At the same time, it is not clear that sufficient SRF forces will be avail-
able to support a wide range of possible preplanned and ad hoc options.
[2 lines not declassified] That is, existing national guidance on SRF
employment is not specific enough to permit detailed assessment of
the adequacy of the number of weapons assigned to the SRF.
Even considering only the current preplanned SRF packages, it is
important that the decision maker note that execution of any one pack-
age would have an effect on the weapons available for remaining pack-
ages. [2 lines not declassified]
(3) Assuming the survivability of and endurability of airborne
command centers, we now have the capacity (i.e., adequate communi-
cations) in the post-SIOP period to execute the SRF forces. This capacity
is neither scenario-­dependent, nor [less than 1 line not declassified] time-­
dependent, [less than 1 line not declassified]
—[3 lines not declassified]
—[1 line not declassified]
—[1 line not declassified]
—[less than 1 line not declassified]
The principal reasons for this “low” capability are:
—Lack of enemy status and activities information:
—Due to loss of fixed ground facilities and non-­alert recon-
naissance aircraft or aircraft support.
—[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]
—Limited capabilities of surviving centers:
—To process, integrate, and assess information.
—To support decision-­making.
—Primarily due to loss of fixed facilities, data bases and
personnel.
—Aircraft endurance and potential EMP problems exacerbate
the situation.
—[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]
—Due to loss of fixed ground facilities and enemy jamming.
—[1 line not declassified]
—[1 line not declassified]
—Limited pre-­war planning and preparation:
—Incomplete prepositioning of data bases, equipment and
supplies.
—Limited procedures, tasking, and training.
[1 paragraph (14 lines) not declassified]

IV. Possible Improvements
(TS) We did not explore all possible remedies to the present defi-
ciencies. What follows are suggestions which are not fully staffed as to
priorities, costs, or even technical and practical possibilities. It should
be noted, however, that these suggested improvements range from
virtually cost-­free procedural changes to major (and possibly costly)
improvements in or additions to SRF capability. That is, if we wish to
improve our ability to employ the SRF in a protracted nuclear war,
we are not faced with the choice of benign indifference or massive
expenditures—­there is a rather extensive “middle ground.”
A. On Force Improvements
Problem: [1 line not declassified]
Suggested Improvements:
[9 lines not declassified]
B. On Communications Improvements
Primary Shortfall: Limited Communications to [less than 1 line not
declassified]
Problem: [less than 1 line not declassified]
Suggested Improvements:
[16 lines not declassified]
Problem: [less than 1 line not declassified]
Suggested Improvements:
[6 lines not declassified]
C. On Sensor and Information Source Improvements
Primary Shortfall: [less than 1 line not declassified]
Problem: [2 lines not declassified]
Suggested Improvements:
[10 lines not declassified]
Problem: Vulnerability of [less than 1 line not declassified] Ground
Support and Control Interfaces to direct attack.
Suggested Improvements
[16 lines not declassified]
Problem: [1 line not declassified]
Suggested Improvements:
[5 lines not declassified]
Problem: [2 lines not declassified]
Suggested Improvements:
[2 lines not declassified]
D. On Center Improvements
Primary Shortfall: [less than 1 line not declassified]

Problem: [1 line not declassified]
Suggested Improvements:
[15 lines not declassified]
E. Other Improvements
Problem: [less than 1 line not declassified]
Suggested Improvements:
[7 lines not declassified]
V. Recommendations for Follow-On Study
A. Alternative strategic reserve force employment strategies and
SRF force compositions should be explored at the earliest possible date.
Particular attention should be given to the following:
1. Employment strategies
a. Identify specific targeting objectives and packages (i.e., high
priority targets such as national leadership installations, national mili-
tary headquarters, and attack assessment installations) that can be pre-
planned, assuming the perceptions and problems of a “blind” NCA, but
which are deliberately withheld from the initial attack, to be attacked
by a “second strike” force.
b. Identify broad targeting objectives which can form a framework
for ad hoc attacks, assuming an “informed” NCA with access to various
levels of information.
2. Force composition
a. Examine the survivability and endurance of the SRF triad,
including the issue of hedging against uncertainty (e.g., an SRF com-
posed of bombers and SSBNs, SSBNs alone, MX/MAP alone, MX and
SSBNs, etc.).
b. Identify the pros and cons of a force structure much larger than
the current SRF (i.e., [less than 1 line not declassified] of the present SIOP
figures).
B. The possible improvements suggested by the SRF study should
be subjected to a cost-­effectiveness analysis. Particular attention should
be given to the following:
1. Development of an investment strategy which addresses the
issue of allocating funds for modifications to the C3I infrastructure
[2 lines not declassified]

94.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, October 6, 1978
SUBJECT
War Mobilization Exercise; NIFTY NUGGET
I want to call your attention to a crisis management contingency
exercise which begins full play next week and which should prove
instructive about our capabilities to mobilize for general war.
NIFTY NUGGET is the largest mobilization exercise held since
World War II. It includes all military services and 27 civilian agencies,
boards, and commissions. The Joint Chiefs of Staff and most of the prin-
cipals of the agencies are participating in key decisions at some time
during the four-­month scenario which is largely compressed in the
period October 10–30.
The level of activity varies from simple staff reviews of mobiliza-
tion plans to extensive measures in the case of the services and some
departments. The Army is calling a small number of personnel to active
duty from every reserve unit planned for deployment in the first thirty
days. The Air Force and Navy are contacting all reserves by mail or
telephone to ascertain their location and availability. The Selective Ser-
vice System has been preparing for the exercise since June because 110
days are required for it. As an example of civil agency play, HEW will
be tasked to receive American civilians and dependents in a simulated
evacuation from Europe.
A number of decisions by you are assumed in the early period of
play. The scenario has you directing industrial preparedness measures,
activating the Selective Service System, and asking Congress to approve
military induction before the outbreak of hostilities. Later, a number
of NSC/SCC decisions are required for allocating military resources
among theaters of operations.
The purpose of the exercise is to determine the adequacy of existing
plans, systems, and procedures. Interrelationships among OSD, JCS,
unified and specified commands, the military services, and civil agen-
cies will be evaluated. NIFTY NUGGET will be conducted with real
world data collected prior to the exercise and played against require-
ments in current war plans to determine limitations and shortfalls in
upper right corner of the memorandum. An unknown hand wrote beneath Carter’s ini-
tials: “return to Stebbins.”

manpower and logistics for supporting operations. NIFTY NUGGET
was partly inspired by the 2,000 deficiencies discovered two years ago
in an Army exercise, MOBEX–76, and the 187 major issues still not set-
tled in repairing the deficiencies.
Although the exercise play is classified, the general nature and
extent of NIFTY NUGGET has been announced to the press.
95.
Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom)
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 11, 1978
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Net Assessment 1978
The assessment update of PRM–10 is now complete and available
for whatever use you choose to make of it. Fritz Ermarth has reviewed it
and has several ideas which he is working out. In the interim, however,
I believe it would be most useful if you read the Overview (attached
at Tab A) which was prepared largely by Sam Huntington with some
assistance by Putnam and me. It will give you a good sense for what is
in the much larger supporting papers. It is a rather concise statement
of “how we have been doing vis-­a-­vis the Soviets” over the past two
years. It provides a significant amount of graphic information to facil-
itate interpretation. Finally, in the section on implications, it specifies
what needs to be done on the East-West front. I personally think that
the Overview and selected papers from assessment would make excel-
lent pre-­summit reading for the President.
Fritz has some objections to the present form of the Overview. The
charts do not enamour him. He believes that it treats the “objective”
and “subjective” factors in the East-West relationship on an equal basis,
giving insufficient emphasis to the objective factors. Sam believes that
some of the upbeat aspects of the diplomatic balance must be kept in
the forefront in order to get the President to take the objective factors
more seriously. Fritz proposes to resolve this difference of opinion by
PD–18 [4]. Top Secret. Outside the System. At the bottom of the page, an unknown hand
wrote: “DA has seen.

preparing an “overview” of the Overview, much shorter, which lends
the emphasis he prefers.
When you have read the Overview, it would be most helpful if
Fritz and I could speak with you about how to proceed.

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council2
Washington, undated
COMPREHENSIVE NET ASSESSMENT 1978
Overview
I. Introduction
The principal purposes of Comprehensive Net Assessment 1978
(CNA 78) are to assess:
1. The changes that have occurred since January 1977 in:
(a) the military, political, economic, diplomatic, and technological
capabilities of the U.S. and the USSR;
(b) the projections of future trends in those capabilities; and
(c) our perceptions of those capabilities and trends;
2. The causes of these changes;
3. The implications of these changes for U.S. strategy vis-­a-­vis the
Soviet Union.
The starting point for CNA 78 is the PRM–10 Comprehensive Net
Assessment completed in June 1977, with most of its data referring to
CNA 78 is not the result of an elaborate interagency process, but is
instead a product of the NSC staff, drawing upon the information and
expertise available from other agencies of government. This procedure
was adopted, first, because PRM–10 already provided a solid founda-
tion for subsequent analysis, and, second, because of the need for both
frankness and confidentiality in an assessment by this Administration
of changes that have occurred since it came into office. CNA 78 is, thus,
in considerable measure an exercise in self-­assessment. Basic reports
were drafted on the following eight topics.
2 Top Secret.

1. The strategic balance
2. The NATO-Warsaw Pact military balance
3. Power projection
4. The diplomatic balance
5. The political-­ideological balance
6. The economic and technological balance
7. Europe
8. East Asia
This overview report summarizes the conclusions of these basic
reports and attempts to spell out some of the implications of those con-
clusions for U.S. strategy.
II. Capabilities and Trends
No radical changes in the overall global balance of power have
occurred during the past 18 months, and the broad conclusions of the
PRM–10 net assessment remain valid today:
1. A rough asymmetrical equivalence in military capabilities exists
between the U.S. and the USSR.
2. The U.S. holds significant advantages in economic, technology,
diplomatic access and support, and political appeal;
3. The Soviet-American relationship is a mixed one, involving ele-
ments of both cooperation and competition.
In none of the central elements of the global balance of power did
either superpower lose to the other an advantage in capabilities between
however, trends in the balance either changed direction or were inten-
the strategic balance which existed in January 1977 has now intensified
so as possibly to call into question the future of essential equivalence.
With this notable exception, all the other trend changes were in a pro-
U.S. direction. As a result, the trends in almost all non-­military components
of national power (except technology and covert action) now favor the U.S.
The trends in the military components of national power, on the other hand, all
favor the Soviet Union, except for a mixed trend in the NATO-Warsaw Pact
military balance.
The last eighteen months have thus seen a heightening of the
incongruence in capabilities noted in PRM–10. With the notable excep-
tion of technology, the U.S. is pulling further ahead in the principal
non-­military areas where it already had the advantage. In the mili-
tary areas, the capabilities are more even, and the trends more gener-
ally favor the Soviet Union. This pattern of incongruent trends gives
renewed urgency to three key questions:

1. How can the U.S. more effectively capitalize on its non-­military
advantages in dealing with the Soviet Union?
2. How can the U.S. slow down and reverse the trends in mili-
tary capabilities favoring the Soviet Union (as it has, in some measure,
already done with respect to the European military balance)?
3. How are the Soviets most likely to attempt to use their growing
military strength for political and diplomatic purposes and how can the
U.S. best deter or counter such use?
Six of the specific trend changes between January 1977 and July
1978 appear to be particularly noteworthy.
A. Intensified deterioration in strategic balance trends. The trend in
strategic forces has favored the Soviet Union since the mid-1960s. Since
January 1977, however, this trend has become significantly more pro-
nounced. The 1976 projections in the key indicators of the strategic bal-
ance generally showed adverse trends for the U.S. into the early 1980s
and then, on most key indicators, a reversal in favor of the U.S. by 1985
(Chart 1). Current projections generally show a steady decline on almost
all key indicators into the 1990s (Chart 2). These projections assume a
SALT treaty along the lines agreed to as of May 1978, current U.S. pro-
grams for the ALCM and Trident II, and no new Soviet programs. In
terms of equivalent countermilitary potential (the central indicator for
counter force capability), the basic trend, if M–X is not built, will be
unfavorable until 1987, when it will level off at a very substantial Soviet
advantage. If M–X is built, the adverse trend will level off in the mid-
In either event, unless other corrective actions are taken, the Minute-
man force will be highly vulnerable to Soviet attack during the early
1980s. With respect to equivalent megatonnage (the central indicator
for countervalue capability), if M–X is not built, the adverse trend will
continue into the 1990s; if M–X is built, the decline will level off in the
In terms of dynamic indicators, current projections show that after
a nuclear exchange in the 1980s (Soviet counterforce first-­strike; U.S.
counterforce second-­strike), the U.S. would be very inferior in equiva-
lent megatonnage, in a somewhat disadvantageous position regarding
throw-­weight, and slightly behind in warheads.
The vulnerability of U.S. C3 compared to that of the Soviets remains
and PRM–32 analysis has shown that full implementation of current
Soviet and U.S. civil defense programs would leave 10–20 percent of
the Soviet population and 35–65 percent of the U.S. population dead in
an all-­out nuclear exchange.4

B. Improvement in European military balance trends. The PRM–10
assessment noted a sustained trend in the European military balance
favoring the Warsaw Pact. It indicated that while the Warsaw Pact
forces were generally superior quantitatively and were making signif-
icant qualitative improvements, nonetheless neither side could be sure
that it could achieve its objectives in a war. In the past 18 months, the
efforts by the U.S. to strengthen its early combat capability in Europe
plus other collective measures to strengthen the NATO forces have
slowed and perhaps halted the pro-Pact trend, though in absolute terms
the West still remains at a disadvantage. Full implementation of the
Long-Term Defense Program will reverse the pro-Pact trend and create
a military balance in Europe more favorable to the Allies. At present,
however, NATO disadvantages in chemical warfare, C3, and radio-­
electronic combat remain, with little effort being made to correct them.
C. More active anti-Soviet, pro-West role of the PRC. In 1976–77 it was
appropriate to speak of a triangular relationship among the PRC, the
USSR, and the U.S. During the past year, however, the PRC has turned
outward and assumed a more active role in countering Soviet influence
in Africa, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, and Eastern Europe. It has
also decided to promote its economic and military strength through
the import from the West of technology, equipment, and weapons. In
pursuit of these goals, it has moderated its position on normalization.
As a result of these developments, the relations between the USSR
and the PRC have deteriorated, and the relations of the PRC with the
U.S., as well as with the European countries and Japan, have improved.
Given the additional strains which have developed in U.S.–USSR rela-
tions in the past year, the triangle is now clearly no longer equilateral.
D. Reversal of unfavorable trends in diplomatic relations and political
appeal. Between 1960 and 1977, changes in U.S. relations with other
countries were more likely to be in an unfavorable than a favorable
direction. This was particularly notable during the Nixon and Ford
Administrations; between 1970 and 1977, for instance, the U.S. suffered
51 diplomatic “losses” and scored 36 diplomatic “gains.” During these
same years, the opposite was true for the Soviet Union. Between 1970
two to one. While the past 18 months are too brief to arrive at any con-
clusive judgment about the longer term, they have, nonetheless, seen
a significant shift in past trends. Changes in U.S. diplomatic relations
were positive with 30 countries, negative with 21. Changes in Soviet
diplomatic relations, on the other hand, were positive with only 11
countries and negative with 25. Improvements in U.S. diplomatic rela-
tions were particularly notable with Third World countries (especially
India, and in Africa and Latin America) and in Eastern Europe. The
deterioration in Soviet diplomatic relations was most marked in Africa,

the Middle East, and Latin America. As a result, the overall U.S. lead in
the diplomatic balance has improved (Table 4).
PRM–10 pointed out that while the U.S. was the most powerful
country in the world and the USSR was second, of the next five stron-
gest countries, four were allies of the U.S. and one (the PRC) was the
enemy of the Soviet Union. The significance of U.S. allies in the global
balance is underlined in Table 5. Although in three of these four power
resources, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., in all four the U.S. together
with its allies and friends (not including the PRC) is ahead of the USSR
and its associates, often by a substantial margin.
The PRM–10 assessment suggested that the initiative in terms of
political and ideological appeal might be shifting to the U.S. Newly
analyzed evidence on trends in world opinion supports this hypothe-
sis. From the early 1960s to the mid-1970s, the favorable gap between
Soviet and U.S. standing narrowed dramatically, with U.S. popularity
being eroded by Vietnam, racial strife, and Watergate, while the unpop-
ularity of the Soviet Union was eroded by detente. Since 1976, how-
ever, scattered evidence suggests that these trends have been reversed.
American popularity is clearly on the rise, though it still remains well
below the highs of the early 1960s. Soviet standing in world opinion,
in contrast, has plummeted to depths unequalled since the late 1950s.
These preliminary findings will be tested and hopefully confirmed by
more comprehensive ICA polling in November 1978.
E. Intensified contrasting trends in economic and technology. The trend
in overall economic resources and productivity is now more clearly
favorable to the U.S. than it was 18 months ago. The trend in technol-
ogy remains strongly favorable to the Soviet Union, although the U.S.
still retains a substantial overall advantage. During the past year, the
U.S. has attempted to increase its potential gains from U.S.-Soviet eco-
nomic interaction.
It now appears that during 1976–79, for the first four-­year period
since World War II, the real U.S. economic growth rate (4.6%) will
age growth rate of the other OECD states (3.5%). Soviet industry grew
at its lowest rate since World War II in 1976 and its second lowest rate
in 1977. The problems of coordinating U.S. economic policies with our
allies have, however, become more apparent than they were two years
ago, and overall international economic prospects seem gloomier than
they did then. Nonetheless, at present, the energy picture for the U.S. is
less threatening than it was previously, due to slower world economic
recovery, increased conservation, and the short-­term effects of North
Sea and North Slope supplies. During 1977, on the other hand, Soviet
oil production grew by its lowest rate in 30 years, and this past year
the Soviets launched various measures to attempt quickly to increase

production in their West Siberian fields. These measures also increase
the likelihood of a longer-­term fall-­off in production, and an absolute
decline in overall Soviet oil production seems very likely in the early
1980s.
During the 1960s and early 1970s, total U.S. R&D expenditures
declined steadily while Soviet expenditures steadily increased. During
the past two years R&D expenditures have stabilized at about 3.0% of
GNP for the Soviet Union and 2.3% for the U.S. In terms of military
R&D, real Soviet spending during the past decade has increased at an
annual rate of 6.6%, while real U.S. spending has declined at a rate of
and Soviet RDT&E expenditures were about 75% greater than U.S.
expenditures. In terms of technological output, it is clear that the U.S. is
still superior to the Soviet Union in many areas, particularly as a result
of its superior ability to translate basic scientific knowledge into sophis-
ticated and usable end-­products. The question thus remains whether
the superior resources which the Soviets are devoting to research and
development, both generally and in the military area, will, at some
point, enable them to equal the U.S. in qualitative output.
PRM–10 indicated that the Soviets benefitted substantially from
their economic interaction with the U.S. and the West. PD–18 directed
that the U.S. should capitalize on its economic and technological
­advantages to counter the spread of adverse Soviet influence and to
induce the Soviets to be more cooperative in achieving solutions to
global problems. During the past year, further studies have underlined
Soviet dependence on the U.S. for energy-­related equipment (includ-
ing submersible pumps, high-­quality drill bits, blow-­out preventers,
gas-­lift equipment; advanced computers; large-­scale credits; and, less
certainly, grain (particularly feed-­grain). During the past six months,
the U.S. has begun to attempt to exploit these advantages by reforming
administrative procedures on technology transfers and by placing oil
equipment and technology on the Commodity Control List.
F. Specific Soviet gains and increased polarization in the Persian Gulf,
Middle East, and Africa. The PRM–10 net assessment concluded that
the Middle East-Persian Gulf area was the most important region of
the Third World for both the U.S. and the Soviet Union. PD–18 linked
this region with Western Europe and East Asia as an area of critical
interest to the United States. In addition, the net assessment argued
that “From their viewpoint the Soviets would be hard-­pressed to find
a better spot than Iran for a crisis-­confrontation with the U.S.” During
the past 18 months, the Soviets have gained two new and important
bridgeheads in this area, Ethiopia and Afghanistan, while losing a less
important one in Somalia. These new gains bracket the major sources of
oil for the U.S. and its allies.

More generally, Cuban military personnel in Africa approximately
doubled during this period. Overall Soviet arms flows to Third World
countries in 1977 were one-­third more than in 1976. Soviet support for
the Ethiopians and the transport to Ethiopia of both equipment and
Cuban troops demonstrated the effectiveness of Soviet power projec-
tion capabilities in a benign environment and the ability of the Soviets
to secure the necessary overflight rights in the Middle East. The Soviets
and Cubans also increased their involvement in the black nationalist
struggles in southern Africa. Soviet-Cuban actions in the Horn, the inva-
sion of Shaba, and the coup in Afghanistan, all generated responses on
the part of both affected local countries and of concerned outside pow-
ers. They contributed to a decline in Soviet diplomatic relations with
many African countries (particularly Francophone ones), stimulated
criticism of Soviet intervention at the OAU, and encouraged opposition
to Cuba by key states in the Non-Aligned Movement.
III. General Cause of These Changes
In Afghanistan and in Africa, the Soviets and Cubans promptly
took advantage of opportunities to expand their presence and influ-
ence. Virtually all the other major changes in the global balances in
1977 and 1978 did not, however, derive from Soviet initiatives. Overall
Soviet policy, particularly with respect to its military programs, was
characterized by substantial continuity. In general, both positive and
negative changes in the global balance during the last 18 months have
been due less to what the Soviets have done than to what we and others
have done.
The intensification of the adverse trends in the strategic balance
was, in part, a result of changed perceptions stemming from new intel-
ligence on the accuracy of Soviet missiles. In much larger degree, how-
ever, it was the result of U.S. decisions to cancel the B–1 bomber, to
delay full-­scale development of the M–X, and to push development
of the cruise missiles. The improvement in the trends in the NATO-­
Warsaw Pact military balance in Europe was the result of the U.S.
pushing, at the London Summit in 1977 and subsequently, for a three
percent increase in real defense spending among the NATO countries,
taking some immediate short-­term measures to increase early combat
capability, and securing approval of the Long-Term Defense Program
at the ­Washington Summit in 1978. The improvements in U.S. diplo-
matic relations, particularly with Third World countries and Eastern
Europe, were the result of the changed priorities, new initiatives, and
“new broom” effect of the Carter Administration (paid for, in part,
by some deterioration in U.S. relations with more conservative mili-
tary regimes). The deterioration in Soviet diplomatic relations, on
the other hand, reflected in large part the reaction of African states to
Soviet-­Cuban intervention in the Horn. The upswing in U.S. popularity

among foreign publics, as well as the drastic decline in Soviet popu-
larity, were principally the result of the Administration’s new explicit
emphasis on human rights. Similarly, the improvement in the trend in
the ­economic interaction balance reflected the Administration’s new
willingness, stemming from PD–18, to attempt to capitalize on U.S. eco-
nomic advantages. The significant change in the role of the PRC was
primarily the result of the decisions of Hua-Teng leadership to which
the U.S. and other Western powers responded favorably.
Overall, the U.S. thus played a central role in effecting changes
in the global balance during the last 18 months. The predominance
of U.S. initiatives in its competition with the Soviets parallels the pre-
dominance of U.S. initiatives in the conduct of ongoing arms control
negotiations (SALT II) and in proposing new arms control negotiations
(CAT, ASAT). Contrary to some views, the tides of history clearly do
not condemn the U.S. to simply a defensive and responsive role. This
pattern of the past 18 months, however, may reflect in large part the fact
that the Carter Administration was new to office while the Brezhnev
regime was well along in its second decade. Five or six years from now,
the roles could be reversed, with a new Soviet leadership attempting
to seize the initiative and a second Carter Administration remaining
committed to its earlier policies.
IV. Implications for U.S. Strategy
PD/NSC–18 set forth three broad purposes of national strategy:
1. to maintain an overall military balance vis-­a-­vis the Soviet Union
at least as favorable as that which currently existed, the achievement of
this goal, in the light of the continuing Soviet build-­up, requiring three
percent annual increases in real defense spending;
2. to take advantage of U.S. non-­military advantages to encourage
Soviet cooperation in securing balanced and verifiable arms control
agreements, resolving regional conflicts, expanding contacts between
societies, and promoting cooperative solutions to global problems; and
3. to use U.S. non-­military advantages and, if necessary, U.S. mili-
tary forces to prevent the expansion of Soviet influence adverse to the
U.S. in critical areas of the world.
The favorable changes which have occurred in the trends in the
global balance in the last 18 months testify to the general validity of
this strategy. Certain elements in that strategy have, however, received
greater emphasis than others. The developments of the last 18 months
also highlight problems and opportunities in some specific areas which
could suggest the desirability of certain changes in emphasis within the
overall framework of the PD–18 strategy.
A. Military Strategy. In the military area, the PRM–10 assessment
indicated that while there was an overall asymmetrical equivalence in

military capabilities, the trends were adverse to the U.S. in three critical
areas: the strategic balance, the NATO-Warsaw Pact balance, and power
projection. Developments in the past year in these balances reflect the
different emphases which the Administration has given them in imple-
menting PD–18 strategy.
During the past year, the Administration has given top priority
to the needs of NATO and, as a result, it is now possible to project a
mixed trend in the European military balance. Continued improvement
in this balance depends upon the full and expeditious implementation
of the Long-Term Defense Program by the Allies. This, in turn, depends
upon the willingness of governments and parliaments to increase real
defense spending at roughly 3 percent per year into the mid-1980s. In
this connection, it must be noted that while the Administration pro-
posed a roughly three percent increase in military expenditures for
FY 1979, it also proposed roughly a two percent increase in new obli-
gational authority. If the three percent spending commitment is to be
maintained in the coming years, increases in obligational authority will
also have to approach that level. Failure of the U.S. to maintain this level
would probably produce a comparable falling off in European efforts
and could seriously undermine the Long-Term Defense Program.
Despite the emphasis in PD–18 on the need to enhance U.S. stra-
tegic mobility and to develop a quick reaction force, the unfavorable
trend in power projection continues. To halt that trend will require,
among other things, rapid and coordinated implementation of the
PD–18 directive in this area.
PD–18 committed the U.S. to the maintenance of essential equiv-
alence in strategic forces with the Soviet Union. During the past year,
however, the unfavorable trend in the strategic balance has intensified.
The slowdown and/or reversal of this trend depends upon:
1. prompt actions to reduce the vulnerability of the U.S. C3 and
Minuteman missiles during the early 1980s;
2. early affirmative decisions to develop the M–X, M–X (MCM),
Trident II, or comparable weapons systems; and
3. revision of U.S. nuclear war doctrines to emphasize the impor-
tance of C3, limited nuclear options, and sustained nuclear engagements.
In the absence of these actions, U.S. strategic forces are likely
to become, in appearance and in fact, inferior to those of the Soviet
Union, and essential equivalence in nuclear forces will no longer be
maintained.
B. The Role of the PRC. The new role of the PRC has benefits for
the U.S. but also could close off certain U.S. options. So long as the
U.S. maintained a roughly comparable posture with respect to both the
PRC and the USSR, it was in a position in which it could (and did)

use actual or prospective improvements in relations with one commu-
nist power to induce greater cooperation from the other. As the PRC
becomes more aligned with the West, however, the U.S. ability to do
this declines, and the Soviet Union, instead of attempting to forestall
Sino-American cooperation, reacts negatively to it (as it has done in its
global propaganda during the past six months). There is, thus, a trade-­
off for the U.S. between the gains to be secured by using the PRC to
counter Soviet expansion, and those to be secured by using it to induce
Soviet cooperation. At present, the balance is shifting from the latter to
the former. How far and at what rate it is in the interest of the U.S. for
that shift to continue is a central issue for U.S. strategy in relation to the
major communist powers.
C. Diplomatic Support and Political Appeal. The improvements in the
diplomatic balance and in the attitudes of foreign publics towards the
U.S. stem largely from the new policies, new promises, and new style
of the Carter Administration. Unlike Soviet gains which, as in Ethiopia
and Afghanistan, tend to be concrete and difficult to reverse, these U.S.
gains with respect to the attitudes of foreign governments and pub-
lics are less deep-­rooted and could be much more ephemeral. In some
respects, indeed, they result simply from the fact that the Administra-
tion is new. Thus, the increased attention which the Administration
paid to some countries was a significant factor in the improved rela-
tions with those countries. Unless the attention is escalated, however,
which is likely to be impossible, the impact of that increased attention
will fade over time. Similarly, the Administration’s emphasis on human
rights has had an apparently major positive impact on foreign pub-
lic opinion. Again, that impact seems likely to diminish over time as
human rights becomes a familiar element in U.S. foreign policy. Conse-
quently, in order to maintain the favorable trends of the past 18 months,
it would seem desirable to explore ways in which improved U.S. rela-
tions with key countries could be secured by more institutionalized ties
based on common interests.
D. Economics and Technology. The trends in these areas have three
major implications for U.S. policy.
First, the U.S. can move much more decisively than it has to take
advantage of the Soviet Union’s current and prospective economic
weaknesses. In particular, U.S. technology is of central importance to
the Soviets in postponing the decline in their oil production and U.S.
technology and credits could play a major role in developing Soviet
natural gas and oil reserves. This situation is now ripe for exploitation
by the U.S. One possibility would be for the U.S. to express its willing-
ness to cooperate with the Soviets in developing their energy (partic-
ularly natural gas) resources on a massive scale, through such means
as the $6 billion Yakutsk natural gas project, provided the Soviets

correspondingly increased their economic dependence on the West in
other ways and provided they adopted more accommodating policies
in the Middle East and Africa.
Second, increased cooperation on East-West economic relations
among the principal OECD countries would enhance each country’s
benefits from trade with the Soviet Union. East-West economic rela-
tions would be an appropriate item for the U.S. to place on the agenda
of the next economic summit.
Third, the Soviet advantage in R&D expenditures suggests the
desirability of intensified U.S. efforts to increase its R&D investment so
as to reduce the likelihood of losing to the Soviets its crucially import-
ant leadership role in this area.
E. Soviet Gains in Ethiopia and Afghanistan. The coup in Afghanistan
and the Soviet-Cuban presence in Ethiopia open up the possibility of
new Soviet threats not only to Iran, but also to the smaller Persian Gulf
states, Saudi Arabia, and North Yemen. As the riots in Iran this past
summer indicate, all these states are likely subjects for political instabil-
ity, which could offer the Soviets various opportunities to expand their
influence. A comprehensive U.S. strategy to reduce the likelihood of
this happening could include:
1. continued efforts to maintain as much access as possible to cur-
rent regimes in Ethiopia and Afghanistan (as well as Iraq and South
Yemen);
2. clarification of U.S. interest in the stability of the area and of the
seriousness with which we would view any Soviet efforts to expand
their influence in pro-Western countries;
3. arms transfers, technological assistance, and political support
designed to strengthen current pro-Western regimes in the area;
4. rapid implementation of the PD–18 provisions concerning a
quick reaction force;
5. reconstitution of CIA covert action capabilities in the area.

Attachment 1

Table Prepared in the National Security Council5
Washington, undated
Table 1
U.S.–USSR Global Balance
January 1977
CAPABILITIES
U.S. Advantages
Rough Equivalence
USSR Advantage
PRO U.S.
Economic Resources and Productivity
Political Institutions/Leadership
East Asia
TRENDS
MIXED
Political-Ideological Action
Intelligence
East Europe
PRO USSR
Technology
Overall Military
Covert Action
Diplomatic Balance
Capabilities
NATO-Warsaw Pact
Power Projection
Strategic Balance
Military Balance
West Europe
Economic Interaction
Third World
5 Top Secret.

Attachment 2

Table Prepared in the National Security Council6
Washington, undated
Table 2
U.S.-USSR Global Balance
July 1978
CAPABILITIES
U.S. Advantages
Rough Equivalence
USSR Advantage
TRENDS
PRO U.S.
Economic Resources and Productivity
East Asia
East Europe *
Political-Ideological Action *
Diplomatic Balance *
West Europe *
Third World *
MIXED
NATO-Warsaw Pact
Military Balance *
Economic Interaction
PRO USSR
Technology
Power Projection
Overall Military
Capabilities
Covert Action
Strategic Balance
Note: Intelligence capabilities and political institutions/leadership were not assessed in July 1978.
* Asterisk indicates change in trend direction.
Underscoring indicates trend intensification.
6 Top Secret.

Attachment 3

Table Prepared in the National Security Council7
Washington, undated
Table 3
Changes in Trends in Global Balance
January 1977–July 1978
A.
From pro-USSR to pro-U.S.
Diplomatic balance
West Europe
Third World
B.
From pro-USSR to mixed
NATO-Warsaw Pact military balance
Economic interaction
C.
From mixed to pro-U.S.
Political-­ideological action
East Europe
D.
Intensified pro-U.S.
Economic resources and productivity
East Asia
E.
Intensified pro-USSR
Strategic balance
F.
Unchanged pro-USSR
Overall military capabilities
Power projection
Technology
Covert action
7 Top Secret.

Attachment 4

Table Prepared in the National Security Council8
Washington, undated
Table 4
Diplomatic Relations of US and USSR
With Other Countries
US
USSR
NEGATIVE (Hostile or antagonistic)
MIXED (Cool, neutral or sympathetic)
POSITIVE (Friendly or allied)

Attachment 5

Table Prepared in the National Security Council9
Washington, undated
Table 5
Shares of Global Power Resources
U.S.
U.S. Allies
& Friends
Total
USSR
USSR Allies
& Friends
Total
Population
Gross
Economic
Product
Military
Manpower
Military
Expenditures
8 Top Secret.
9 Top Secret.

Attachment 6

Chart Prepared in the National Security Council10
Washington, undated
CHART 1
LONG TERM US/USSR STRATEGIC
FORCES RATIO–1976 DATA
STATIC INVENTORY (TRADITIONAL MEASURES)
10 Secret.

Attachment 7

Chart Prepared in the National Security Council11
Washington, undated
CHART 2
LONG TERM US/USSR STRATEGIC FORCES RATIO
STATIC INVENTORY (TRADITIONAL MEASURES)
11 Secret.

Attachment 8

Chart Prepared in the National Security Council12
Washington, undated
CHART 3
ADVANTAGE RATIO FOR POSSIBLE
FORCE CONFIGURATIONS
ECMP–C.G.DATA
EXCLUDES BACKFIRE
12 Secret.

Attachment 9

Chart Prepared in the National Security Council13
Washington, undated
CHART 4
ADVANTAGE RATIO FOR POSSIBLE
FORCE CONFIGURATIONS
EMT–C.G.DATA
EXCLUDES BACKFIRE
13 Secret.

96.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, October 18, 1978
SUBJECT
ICBM C3I
The mid-­term review discussion2 made clear that we need a thor-
ough high-­level look at the issue of Minuteman/C3I. We need to under-
stand fully what our present capability is and what measures are most
needed if enhanced capability is deemed desirable. A study should be
prepared for the SCC which examines:
—Soviet capabilities
—­present and feasible upgraded US warning, and C3I assets
—­present and possible alternative US policies, including the polit-
ical, doctrinal and allied implications
Because of its sensitive nature, this study should be limited to
the minimum number of people required to successfully do it. Please
designate a representative who should contact Fritz W. Ermarth of the
National Security Council Staff as soon as possible for a discussion of
terms of reference and study procedures.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 See Document 90.

97.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, October 23, 1978
SUBJECT
The Triad and Its Alternatives
At our meeting on September 29th, you asked why—­since Min-
uteman is becoming vulnerable, and since MAP involves thorny ques-
tions of its own—­we should not simply abandon the ICBM leg of the
triad, and strengthen the remaining two legs as necessary.2 You were
also interested in other possible basing systems. This memorandum is
to give you my thoughts on those issues.
In simplest terms, we could indeed abandon the ICBM leg and
move to a dyad of SLBMs and bombers. Or we might retain a triad—­or
something like a triad—­by replacing silo- or MAP-­based ICBMs with
one of the newer concepts (air-­mobile ICBMs, land-­mobile ICBMs, air-­
launched ICBMs, or perhaps even SLBMs carried in coastal submers-
ibles). With any of those alternatives, we could probably maintain an
overall balance with the Soviet Union in terms of static indicators and
in terms of dynamic exchange calculations. In addition, though it’s too
early to estimate costs for the novel basing schemes, we can say that
at least the SLBM/Bomber dyad need not be more expensive than an
SLBM/Bomber/MX–MAP triad of generally equivalent capability as
measured by most (though probably not all) criteria. But on the other
hand, with the dyad alternative, and to a lesser extent with the tri-
ads involving the alternatives to MAP, we would give up features of
both perceptual and military value that we have enjoyed in the past,
and—­if one puts aside some of the political and possible verification
questions about MAP—­would continue to enjoy with the MX in a MAP
deployment.
The effect of the US giving up, under successful Soviet pressure, a
military capability of considerable value which the Soviet Union retains
would, in my view, have disastrous consequences both internationally
and domestically.
the memorandum. Brown’s handwritten covering memorandum to Carter, October 23,
reads: “This is the first of a series of memos on issues that have arisen in past discussions
on the Defense program. They are deliberately structured as information rather than
decision papers, because I will want to make specific recommendations separately at a
later time. Though they may seem lengthy, they are worth reading in full.”

Though precisely what we would give up in terms of military value
depends on the particular alternative, there are two types of losses: the
first is the loss of specific characteristics (which determine what kinds
of things we will or will not be able to do); the second is a loss in simple
diversity (which determines our confidence in being able to do it, come
what may, in the face of new and unexpected Soviet developments, or
of unforeseen occurrences in a combat environment).
A less drastic alternative would be to retain Minuteman in silos
until its reliability is unacceptably degraded by age, perhaps then
replacing it with a new missile, and to plan to launch it before Soviet
R/Vs destroy it. This presumes reliable attack assessment, and a deci-
sion sequence that works. The Soviets might not be sure that sequence
would not work; I, for one, would be far from sure that it would. My
major concern can be put this way: such a course would be a major step
on the road to giving computers the power of decision on going to war.
LOSS OF CHARACTERISTICS
As for specific characteristics, some we value are:
• Independence from tactical warning. This means being able to ride
out a Soviet strike. It’s desirable because we avoid the need for a “hair
trigger” response to possibly ambiguous warning with all the com-
plexities that could entail, avoid as well the risk of the hair trigger not
working because the postulated decision process doesn’t function, and
also because a Soviet attack on our warning systems cannot jeopardize
forces that do not depend on warning in the first place.
MAP deployments of ICBMs—­if their size is in the proper ratio
to the size of the Soviet attack—­would have this valuable characteris-
tic. SLBMs have it already. Bombers do not—­they can be wiped out if
caught on the ground, or near their bases. (For simplicity, I’ll save the
discussion of novel basing systems for later in this memo.)
• Endurance. This means being able to maintain some capability
after an initial exchange—­perhaps for days, or weeks, or even a few
months. It is desirable not only to prevent further coercion, but as a
counter to Soviet sheltering of political leadership (they’ve got to come
up sooner or later), and against third countries who might suddenly
find themselves in positions of great relative strength.
Again, ICBMs in a MAP deployment would have this characteris-
tic. The SLBMs per se do too, but their problem in this respect lies in the
dubious endurance of the systems to communicate with them. Bomb-
ers, because their bases are vulnerable, have little endurance, unless
they have so many potential recycling bases as to prevent the Soviets
from targeting all the bases.
• Quick Response Hard Target Capability. “Quick” refers not only
to short flight times [1 line not declassified], but also to your ability to

get in touch with the force quickly, and how quickly it can respond.
“Hard target” primarily implies accuracy (though warhead yields are
not irrelevant). There are two classes of hard target: one is the roughly
1100 Soviet silos we would expect under SALT II; [3 lines not declassi-
fied] (There are also [less than 1 line not declassified] hard communications
points; we do not have enough accurate weapons to target these now.)
Thus far, ICBMs have had unique advantages in this respect—­
quick and reliable communications, a quick-­firing capability, short
flight times, and high accuracy. SLBMs are currently weak here—­slow
communication, mediocre accuracy, and limited warhead yield. [5 lines
not declassified] Bombers have no quick response hard target capability.
[2 lines not declassified]
• Good C3. “Good” here refers to communications links that can
transmit adequate amounts of data as rapidly as needed, and are not
vulnerable to enemy attack. Simple execution [1 line not declassified]
requires one level of C3 sophistication; a “warfighting” capability (see
next below) can require considerably more.
ICBMs have great advantages in C3. Though no C3 system can
be invulnerable, [11 lines not declassified] The survivability of these
aircraft—­because of the vulnerability of their bases—­is also limited
in duration, thus limiting the endurance of this part of the C3 system.
[2 lines not declassified]
• Warfighting Capability. Sometimes called “flexibility” or “respon-
siveness”, this refers to the ability to do more than execute a massive
pre-­planned strike—­to be able to use limited amounts of strategic force
against particular numbers and types of targets during a nuclear war on
the basis of what had occurred before. This includes retargeting, assess-
ment of surviving US and Soviet forces, and connection to a surviving
NCA. We have considerably more of that kind of capability today than
we had in past; further developments in this direction are possible, at
a price. Generally desirable characteristics to this end are the ability to
retarget forces and execute missions promptly and with high probabil-
ity of success, to limit collateral damage, and to restrict the size of each
mission to the minimum deemed necessary.
I should note that I doubt that this kind of a strategic war is among
the likely possibilities, or that it could be fought without rapid esca-
lation to an unlimited spasm. But there are many indications that the
Soviets are structuring the forces to fight such a war. Their plans and
exercises point the same way. If they think they have such a capabil-
ity, and both we and the Soviets know that the US does not, adverse
military consequences are possible, and adverse political consequences
probable.
ICBMs are the best of our forces for such missions. We can retarget
them quickly and launch as few as one if necessary. We are now at the

point of adapting some of our Minutemen for retargeting [1 line not
declassified] They have a high penetration probability, and their accu-
racy limits collateral damage. SLBMs are much less well adapted to
warfighting: communications tend to be slower, and launch of a single
missile tends to expose the position of the SSBN. Penetrating bombers
are not well-­adapted to such missions: flight time is long, and—­since
such raids are likely to be small—­penetration is problematical, partic-
ularly if attacks on Soviet defenses were to be restricted in an effort to
limit collateral damage. On the other hand, aside from their long flight
time, ALCMs carried on bombers offer good penetration probability,
accurate delivery, and the likelihood of low collateral damage.
In summary, by giving up silo- or MAP-­based ICBMs, we would
lose the part of the Triad that provides our best warfighting capability
and has our most reliable C3. [1 line not declassified] the best prospects
for endurance of both the system and our ability to communicate with
it, and a system that does not rely on either strategic or tactical warning.
Some of these capabilities can be preserved with some of the alternative
mobile ICBMs.
LOSS OF DIVERSITY
The other kind of loss entailed in moving to a dyad has to do with
diversity, which relates to our confidence in our strategic forces in spite
of an uncertain future. Diversity benefits us in three ways:
• It protects us against things the Soviets might do—“solve” the
ASW problem, deploy a very effective air defense, face us with an ABM
breakout, etc.
• It protects us against failures on our own part—­physical failures
of equipment (such as in our SLBMs in the early ’70s), unsuspected vul-
nerabilities (such as the EMP problem we discovered in the late ’60s),
shortcomings in our war planning (such as the fratricide problem we
recognized in the mid-’60s), etc.
• It tends to complicate enemy planning—­for example, Soviet
attacks timed to catch our bombers will warn our ICBMs, and vice
versa.
Eliminating the ICBM leg would eliminate one of our hedges
against marked Soviet progress in ASW (which could jeopardize the
SLBM leg), but not the other—­our bomber force. It could also elimi-
nate one of our hedges against Soviet development of a successful tactic
against our bomber bases—­possibly a barrage attack—­or a much stron-
ger Soviet air defense (either of which could jeopardize the bomber
leg), but not the other—­our SLBM force. Thus, failures of a single leg
of a dyad of SLBMs and bombers would be extremely serious but need
not be catastrophic. Failure of both—­unlike failure of two parts of the
triad—­would be a total disaster.

COSTS
Before turning to the possibilities of novel basing systems, I would
like to elaborate on my statement above that dyad and triad costs need
not differ appreciably. By way of illustrating that, below are outlined
three forces, all roughly comparable in capability (aside from the inher-
ent differences in characteristics noted above) to each other and to the
Soviet forces expected under SALT II. One is a triad, with 400 MXs in a
MAP deployment; the other two are dyads, one heavy in the airbreath-
ing half (100 cruise missile carriers with 60 ALCMs each), the other
[table not declassified]
These differences in costs are well within the accuracy of estimation.
One would normally assume that the failure of a single leg would
affect a dyad more than a triad. However, it’s not that simple if costs
are held constant—­if the three legs of a triad are smaller than the two
legs of a dyad. For example, if the most expensive and least effective leg
of a triad were eliminated, and its funding applied instead to the more
efficient two legs that remain, conceivably each could be made strong
enough to match any two legs of the old triad.
How that works out depends on the relative costs and effective-
ness of the three legs that happen to be involved. In the example above,
if the ICBMs fail, either dyad (both of which omit the ICBM leg) is of
course superior to the triad; if the bombers fail, the triad is better than
the first dyad but worse than the second; if the SLBMs fail, the triad is
worse than the first dyad but better than the second.
Thus, dyads and triads of roughly equivalent capability—­insofar
as it is possible to make them equal—­need not differ appreciably in
cost, and may not differ appreciably in hedging against failure of any
single leg—­it depends on which leg fails.
NOVEL SYSTEMS3
As for novel basing alternatives to the MAP system, I should cau-
tion first that none has been thoroughly studied (at least not recently),
and experience teaches us that many concepts that initially seem to
be ingenious ways of solving existing problems later turn out, after a
closer look, to be flawed with new problems of their own. Furthermore,
it is most important to understand that none of these novel propos-
als is really a substitute for the ICBM force; though they surely could
add to our strategic nuclear force, none could preserve all the valuable
characteristics of the ICBM force—­excellent warfighting capability and
3 Carter wrote: “MAP is very ‘novel’” in the right margin next to this heading.

reliable C3, and endurance, and complete independence from tactical
warning.
• Air-Launched Ballistic Missile (ALBM): With this system, large
aircraft would carry ballistic missiles of intercontinental range. (In a
feasibility test of such a system, we dropped and fired a modified Min-
uteman from a cargo aircraft some years ago, but no guidance system
was operative, nor was capable of doing so).
This concept, however, is much more closely related to the ALCM-­
carrying bomber than to an ICBM. It suffers from the bomber’s depen-
dence on tactical warning and lack of endurance. As an alternative to
the ALCM, it promises only better penetration (though we do not expect
penetration to be a severe problem for the ALCM) and quicker reaction.
On the other hand, its accuracy and the number of warheads carried
per aircraft would be much inferior to the ALCM’s. And, of course,
instead of hedging against a Soviet ABM breakout (as the ALCM does),
it would hedge against a breakthrough in Soviet air defenses.
• Air-Mobile ICBM: With this system, ICBMs would be trans-
ported from airbases to dispersed launching sites, where they would
be unloaded, erected, and fired. Through use of short take-­off and
landing aircraft, the potential number of launching sites is very large.
The dispersion process could begin on strategic warning, though some
continuing movement of ICBMs between sites would be necessary to
defeat Soviet reconnaissance and targeting.
This system, though similar in many respects to ICBMs as we nor-
mally think of them, would not be completely independent of warning,
and it could be difficult to provide communications as secure and reli-
able as the ICBM’s. The proper aircraft does not now exist.
• Land-Mobile ICBM: With this system, ICBMs would be carried
in land vehicles, either in more-­or-­less continuous motion to prevent
pre-­targeting, or in a “dash on warning” mode (in which vehicles nor-
mally kept at central bases would disperse on tactical warning, possi-
bly to shelters randomly chosen from among a large number prepared
in advance). There was much interest in the ’60s in mobile versions of
the Minuteman, but the concept was abandoned in light of the prob-
lems of C3, security, and—­most of all—­the prospect of public reaction to
the idea of so many nuclear warheads continuously circulating on the
roads or rails of the country. However, the land required and the speed
of the vehicles is subject to tradeoffs with the hardness of the vehicle, or
of its MAP-­like shelter.
In comparison with ICBMs in silos or MAP, this system would suf-
fer in terms of reliance on tactical warning, or in terms of C3 for versions
relying purely on mobility rather than random shelters.
• Coastal Submersibles: This concept postulates very small (350-­
ton), inexpensive submarines, each armed with a pair of encapsulated
MX missiles, and manned by a crew of 12. They would operate on the
coastal shelf, with communications via a redundant grid of fiber-­optics
cables on the ocean floor. The submarine would be connected to plug-­in
terminals in the grid through an umbilical.
If feasible, this system would probably be further off in the future
than any of the other novel basing schemes. Its potential advantage
would be lower cost; the likely disadvantage, even if feasible, is vul-
nerability. Aside from its vulnerability to Soviet trawlers—­tearing up

the cables, attacking the submarines, or even making boost-­phase inter-
cepts of the missiles—I am particularly concerned about vulnerability
to the so-­called Van Dorn Effect, a subject of considerable interest when
the Navy first considered such coastal submarines.
The Van Dorn Effect postulates that as the wave front from the det-
onation of a large-­yield weapon in deep water to seaward approaches
the rise to the continental shelf, its energy becomes crowded into a
much smaller volume, and the result is violent motion throughout the
mass, with waves at the surface hundreds of feet high. Theory predicts
that a single weapon could generate a destructive wave front over a
hundred miles in width. Though there is clearly no way of running any
kind of full-­scale test, vastly scaled down tests using sizeable amounts
of chemical explosives in a lake gave results that agreed well with the
theory. Should the coastal submersible be vulnerable to this effect, the
entire force—­and much of our coastline as well—­could be wiped out
with perhaps a dozen, large-­yield Soviet weapons.
SUMMARY
We could abandon the ICBM leg and move to a dyad. By strength-
ening the airbreathing and SLBM components, we could build back our
number of warheads, megatonnage, etc. But we would also be sacrific-
ing some important characteristics that we would enjoy with the ICBM
force, and we would be less well hedged against unsuspected develop-
ments on the part of the Soviets and unsuspected failures on our own
part. And for a US force size comparable with that the Soviets are sure
to have during the mid-80s, moving from a triad to a dyad would not
save a significant fraction of our strategic force costs.
We could also consider—­and we are doing so—­novel basing alter-
natives other than MAP. None of these has been studied thoroughly
enough for me to recommend a deployment decision as among them.
The addition of such alternatives to a dyad will result in a force that
may approach the full goals of a triad, though none would fully match
the characteristics of a triad that included MX in MAP basing. The
alternatives could avoid some of the verification and political con-
cerns connected with MAP, but could have other political problems
of their own.4
Harold Brown
4 In November 1 memorandum to Brown entitled “The Triad and Its Alternatives”
Brzezinski wrote: “Attached is a copy of your memorandum of October 23 on the above
subject. Please note the President’s comments.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,

98.
Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom)
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 25, 1978
SUBJECT
Crisis Management: Priorities, Emerging Issues and Initiatives
You asked for a short review of the above three categories in my
area, Crisis Management.
Basic priorities which have been met in the first two years.
1. Crisis management procedures at the strategic level. This is the
area in which we have made the most progress. (An unanticipated and
distressing consequence may be that we have oversold the capabilities
for LUA.)
2. On the civil front, the FEMA re-­organization is a major stride.
The follow-­through, however, is crucial and presently not ensured.2
4. We have generated a much changed impression and under-
standing of Soviet approaches to strategic force management.
5. We have created an interagency counter-­terrorism incident man-
agement system which has met demands effectively thus far, and we
have created new special counter-­terror units in the Army.
Emerging Issues.
1. [6 lines not declassified]
2. [2 lines not declassified]
3. Mobilization inadequacies, thrown up by exercise play NIFTY
NUGGET, will be an issue impacting on the organization of FEMA.4
Presently there is little understanding or desire in OMB to make FEMA
fill the mobilization planning gap, but we will miss an extraordinary
opportunity if we do not force the matter as FEMA develops.
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 59, Administration’s Policy: NSC: 1978. Top Secret;
Sensitive.
3 See Document 91.
4 See Document 94.

4. Nuclear weapons security and terrorism could become a big
issue. The scene in Europe is not comforting, perhaps not in the U.S.
either.
5. The technology transfer and trade issue as it relates to oil, and
the USSR is an on-­going issue.
New Initiatives
1. Continuity of Government. We must launch a major review of
“continuity of government.” The PRC on civil defense agreed that this
should be done, and the civil defense directive, PD–41, requires the
capability which at present is non-­existent.5 This is not the easy issue it
may appear to be. It relates to the C3I studies, LUA, stockpiles, mobi-
lization, military manpower policy, and FEMA re-­organization. Trying
to work out the terms of reference for analysis boggles the mind. (TS)
2. Military doctrine. I have spelled out the categories for pursuing
this one. They are: (a) the conceptual revolution; (b) implementation in
C3I by small steps; (c) flexibility in planning for military operations; (d)
force structure changes by small steps. You may be inclined to empha-
size the conceptual revolution first. I am inclined to leave it until last,
moving in the program and operations areas first. Such a sweeping
doctrinal change is impossible to explain to most audiences and unac-
ceptable to most who understand. (TS)
3. Mobilization. This one could be made an issue if you like or sim-
ply ignored for later. NIFTY NUGGET is generating a wealth of data
which could be used to make it an initiative. Much can be done in this
area at very little cost in defense budget outlays. Legislation and orga-
nizational changes would not be costly. (S)
4. A real shocker. The quickest way to drive the defense budget down
and to increase our military power is to reinstitute the draft, reducing
private’s pay by 10 percent in the process. The savings would probably
dwarf the “increment” Harold Brown seeks. (S)

99.
Memorandum From Victor Utgoff of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, October 25, 1978
SUBJECT
Observations on the Continued Need for a Triad of Strategic Forces
During the recent Mid-Term Review of Defense Programs, the
President questioned Harold’s assumption that we must maintain our
Triad of strategic forces. This memo reviews the arguments for main-
taining a full Triad.
The first thing to note in addressing the overall issue is that, given
the continued viability we project for the bomber and ICBM forces, and
the modernization efforts already underway, the question is not the
general one of whether we want a Triad. It is instead the more specific
one of whether the modernization of the ICBM force to maintain a Triad (1)
adds wholly unique and necessary capabilities to the Dyad of bombers
and SLBMs we are already modernizing, or (2) hedges in some unique
way against the possibility of a catastrophic loss of one leg of our strate-
gic forces posture, or (3) provides capabilities present in the underlying
Dyad, but at less cost.
Unique and Necessary Contributions of the ICBM Force
It is commonly argued that the unique combination of good C3,
high readiness and short flight times make the ICBM force uniquely
capable of rapid destruction of hard targets. There are several problems
with this claim, however.
First, the requirement for rapid destruction of targets may not be
very great. The ICBM modernization study now being completed by
OSD argues that there are [less than 1 line not declassified] targets (includ-
ing [less than 1 line not declassified] hard targets) other than missile silos
and launch control centers that change value so rapidly that striking
them with missiles might do significantly more damage than striking
them later with bombers or cruise missiles.
tion. At the top of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “VU this is a good + and provoc-
ative memo. Set up a discussion of it among our people—­and at some point we ought to
draw in the DOD. In the meantime develop the [illegible] memos mentioned on pp 6–7.
ZB.”

However, the need to kill these targets is realistic only in scenarios
in which the crisis deepens from modest levels (where actions to reduce
the values of potential targets don’t seem necessary to the Soviets) to
the missile shooting level in a matter of less than a day or two, and such
scenarios don’t seem likely.
With respect to the missile silos and launch control centers, while
we might like to be able to destroy such targets before they launch their
missiles, it doesn’t seem likely that we would be able to. Soviet mis-
sile readiness levels, warning systems, doctrine, and exercises indicate
that they are capable of and apparently plan on launching their missiles
under attack. We might want to attack such targets anyway—­to destroy
missiles that failed to launch, or to prevent reload of the silos . . . How-
ever, if this is our purpose, a half a day or so delay in hitting these tar-
gets probably wouldn’t make much difference.
To the extent that there is a real requirement to be able to destroy
the [less than 1 line not declassified] time-­sensitive targets, SLBMs can
be made capable of the task. Bill Perry noted in the Defense Review
meeting that while it would be a tough technical problem, SLBMs can
be made to achieve ICBM accuracies by the late 80’s. Further, contrary
to popular opinion, submarine C3 is good enough to rapidly generate
large nuclear strikes. Against worst case jamming, TACAMO aircraft
operating off our coasts can complete transmission of an emergency
action message (EAM) within 45 seconds with virtually perfect con-
fidence that it will be received by any submarine at normal operating
depth that is within 800 nautical miles. This implies that two TACAMO
aircraft can guarantee coverage of about 4 million square miles of
ocean—­enough operating area for at least five SSBNs carrying a total
of more than 600 warheads. These aircraft can also guarantee delivery
of an EAM over an additional 10 million square nautical miles within
15 minutes—­which would allow launch of more than 1500 additional
warheads.
One might argue that other elements of the SSBN C3 networks may
fail to get the message to the TACAMO aircraft, but in this regard, the
SLBM C3 network seems no worse off than the C3 network supporting
the ICBM force. Given the vulnerability of ground based communica-
tions stations and transmission lines, the ICBM force seems likely to be
controllable only from our airborne command posts, and getting the
word to TACAMO isn’t much tougher in principle than talking to our
other airborne command posts.
The Increment of Hedging Provided by a Modernized ICBM Force
One of the strongest arguments made in favor of modernizing
the ICBM force is that it substantially improves the degree to which
our overall strategic posture is hedged against catastrophic failures in

any one force component. This argument is based on two ideas—­first,
that failure of any one force component in a strategic force divided into
three essentially equal components leaves you with 2⁄3 of your original
force, whereas with a strategic force divided into 2 essentially equal
components you would only have ½ your original force left. Second,
since there is no reasonable way to establish the relative probabilities
of unforeseen catastrophic failures in each strategic force component,
we should adopt a conservative approach and construct our strategic
force so as to make the loss of our most capable force component at
least marginally acceptable. While these ideas are not unreasonable, a
deeper look yields some interesting insights.
To begin our analysis, we might first examine the significance of
force remain effective, given a catastrophic failure? At Tab A I have con-
structed illustrative 1990 strategic force postures for a full Triad, and a
slightly augmented Dyad in which our ICBM forces are not modern-
ized. For these national forces, you have [less than 1 line not declassified]
remaining after the strongest leg of the Triad fails, versus [less than 1 line
not declassified] after the stronger leg of the Dyad fails. The significance
of such a difference is clearly a judgment call. While moving to sharply
lower strategic force levels than say [less than 1 line not declassified] will
make a 15–20% difference more significant, I don’t see this difference
much of a motivation for modernizing the ICBM force in the foresee-
able future.
We should also ask how likely the total failure of one leg really is?
The only failure that our strategic forces have had that approaches the
level one might call catastrophic occurred in the late 1960’s. [4 lines not
declassified] While this was a very serious problem and took a number
of years to fix, even if we had discovered it in the course of a nuclear
exchange, there is good reason to believe that we could have strung out
our missile launches and realized at least 1⁄3 of the original expected
effectiveness in each missile leg (I grant you the failure was in 2 legs,
but I’ll get to that point below).
However, if we assume that hedging against a 2⁄3 loss of effective-
ness in any one leg of our posture is sufficient, a Dyad of forces should
be acceptable. The reasoning behind this is that there seems to be a
reasonable consensus that a Triad of forces provides sufficient hedging
against a complete catastrophic failure of any one leg. However, a Dyad
hedges as well against 2⁄3 type losses as a Triad does against complete
Another question we might ask is—­exactly how does moderniz-
ing the ICBM force to maintain a second missile force allow any greater
degree of hedging than is possible by increasing the sizes of each leg of
the underlying Dyad? Given the [10 lines not declassified]

Basing mode failures can be divided into two categories, failures
by natural causes, and failures due to an unforeseen ASW vulnerability
that gets exploited by our opponents. As far as natural causes are con-
cerned, our oldest SSBNs have been operating for nearly 20 years and
the complete gamut of required submarine evolutions through launch
of the missile has been run through hundreds of times. Given this test-
ing, and the fact that the Trident SSBN is already on the way and will
have been in operation for many years by the time the current SSBNs
will be retired in large numbers, the risk of a catastrophic failure of our
SSBN force by natural causes seems extremely small.
The relatively significant possibility is that of a catastrophic ASW
breakthrough—­and even this doesn’t seem very large. Thus, the ICBM
force’s significant marginal contribution to hedging against catastrophic
failures—­is in its ability to hedge against the loss due to a catastrophic
ASW breakthrough, of whatever capabilities are provided uniquely by
missiles.
Note, however, that the bomber forces can do anything except
destroy their targets in less than [less than 1 line not declassified]—­which
takes us back to the issue raised on page 2—­given the likelihood that
any homeland-­to-­homeland nuclear exchange would take place only
after a deep crisis lasting a period of days or weeks—­how important
is it to hedge against the loss of our ability to deliver nuclear weapons
on target within less than [less than 1 line not declassified] of the decision
to do so? Wouldn’t the value of the Soviets’ time-­sensitive targets have
been reduced to a minimum long before an exchange of nuclear weap-
ons begins?
Can Modernizing the ICBM Force Give US Capabilities Provided by the
Two Legs of the Triad but at Less Cost?
In my opinion, the arguments we have been through so far seem
to make less than a compelling case for modernizing the ICBM force to
retain a full Triad. Thus, if we want to make a reasonably strong objec-
tive case for modernizing the force, we need a positive answer to this
last question.
The most up-­to-­date source we have for judging the relative costs
of modernizing our strategic forces is the PD–18 follow-­on study on
modernizing the ICBM force.2 That study estimates the costs of deploy-
ing and operating additional strategic forces through the year 2000 at
per arriving air launched cruise missiles, and $15–17 million per arriv-
ing Trident warhead. While these figures indicate that arriving ICBM
RVs would be somewhat cheaper than arriving ALCM and Trident
2 See Document 93.

weapons, they assume that we deploy the MAP system that DOD cur-
rently favors and that the Soviets do not fractionate their missile pay-
loads to the maximum allowed by SALT in order to maximize their
ability to attack the MAP system.
The costs of the alternative ICBM modernization schemes such
as air mobile ICBMs, and the offshore submersible idea would prob-
ably be significantly higher than the MAP system, which could make
ALCMs the least expensive option though we should realize its costs
are quite uncertain, too. An ICBM system deployed on trucks that
would disperse and hide whenever the Soviets order their forces to
high readiness might cost significantly less than the MAP system, but
DOD has not yet examined this system in any detail.
Summary and Conclusions
Aside from the institutional considerations, in order to believe that
modernization of the ICBM force to maintain a Triad is necessary on
other than perceptual grounds, it would seem necessary to subscribe to
some combination of the following statements:
—There is a significant probability that given a failure in one leg
of our strategic force, this failure will reduce the effectiveness of the
affected force by more than 67% and that the advantage (maximum
15–20%) in total force effectiveness of a Triad relative to a Dyad under
such circumstances will make a significant difference.
—There is a significant probability that we might find ourselves
in a situation where the Soviets had achieved an ASW breakthrough
negating the effectiveness of the SSBN force and a crisis had reached
the shooting level so fast that the Soviets did not have enough time to
reduce their time-­sensitive targets down near their minimum values.
—There is sufficient value and a high enough chance of neutraliz-
ing Soviet ICBMs before they can be launched to justify hedging against
an ASW breakthrough that made the SSBN force unable to perform this
task.
—Modernizing the ICBM force allows us to buy at less cost capa-
bilities that could be provided by further modernizing the other stra-
tegic forces.
While the first three statements have some validity, I believe that
unless DOD can identify an ICBM modernization scheme that we can
confidently expect to be more cost-­effective in providing arriving weap-
ons than CMC/ALCM or unless the political and institutional costs are
too great, we should start moving toward a Dyad of SLBMs and stra-
tegic aircraft.
The above arguments also suggest the following:
—The importance of ICBM modernization schemes that could
provide arriving warheads at the lowest possible cost (such as the

truck-­mobile scheme mentioned by Harold Brown) should receive
more emphasis.
—A careful study should be made to determine whether DOD’s
concerns about the security problems associated with moving strategic
systems onto private land are reasonable—­particularly if such move-
ments occur only in deep crisis situations.
—As part of the assessment of the feasibility of ICBM systems that
are normally visible and countable but disperse in times of crisis, the
intelligence community should be asked to assess the level of confi-
dence we can have that we would detect Soviet moves to the levels of
military readiness at which they would be willing to execute a coun-
terforce attack. This assessment should identify the numbers and types
of strategic forces and other important Soviet assets that might have to
remain vulnerable to a US retaliatory strike in order to achieve strategic
surprise.
—DOD should be asked to bring its now overdue targeting study
to a rapid close so that we can more fully appreciate how the issues it
raises bear on the question of whether to modernize the ICBM force.
—DOD should be asked for descriptions of the various classes of
time-­sensitive targets, the numbers of targets in each class, the time
required to reduce them to their minimum values, and a comparison of
their relative day-­to-­day and minimum values.
—The intelligence community should be asked to assess the likeli-
hood that we could prevent the launch of significant numbers of Soviet
ICBMs.
—Improvements in C3 systems that support the SLBM force (more
TACAMO and improvements in the systems that can talk to it, such
as E4B aircraft) should be supported in the upcoming FY 80 budget
review.
—On a very close-­hold basis, a set of talking points making the
case for a Dyad should be worked out to see if such a move can be
explained in convincing terms to the public.
Even if our continuing investigations show that moving to a Dyad
is the right thing to do, such a move would have to be made relatively
slowly, given the upcoming SALT ratification debates and the enor-
mous amount of change implied by the strategic forces decisions that
have already been made during this Administration.
Fritz Ermarth has discussed this memo with me and has no signif-
icant difficulties with what it says.3
3 Ermarth initialed above his name and wrote at the bottom of the page: “I’ll try for
some contribution of my own shortly. F.E.”

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council4
Washington, undated
NOMINAL US STRATEGIC FORCE POSTURE FOR 1990
Assumptions
carrying heavy bombers “counting as 1.”
2. Deployment of a new “FB–111H” type penetrating bomber.
3. SNDV limits filled out by retaining Minuteman II, refurbished to
solve 2nd stage propellant aging problem.
Notional Triad
SNDVs/RVs
RV Subtotals by “Leg”
[number not ­
declassified]
Tridents [less than 1
line not declassified]
[number not
declassified]
[number not
declassified]
Poseidons [less than
1 line not declassified]
[number not
declassified]
[number not declassified]
[number not
declassified] M–X
(11 RVs)
[number not
declassified]
[number not
declassified]
Minuteman II
[number not
declassified]
[number not declassified]
[number not
declassified] CMC
(50 ALCMs)
[number not
declassified]
[number not
declassified] “FB
111 H” ([number
not declassified]
weapons)
[number not
declassified]
[number not declassified]
[number not
declassified]
Remainder after strongest leg fails: [number not declassified]
Notional Dyad
SNDVs / RVs
RV Subtotals by “Leg”
[number not
declassified]
Tridents
[number not
declassified]
[number not
declassified]
Poseidons
[number not
declassified]
[number not declassified]
[number not
declassified]
Minuteman II
[number not
declassified]
[number not declassified]
[number not
declassified] CMC
[number not
declassified]
[number not
declassified]
“FB 111 H”
[number not
declassified]
[number not declassified]
[number not
declassified]
Remainder after strongest leg fails: [number not declassified]
Note that differences in remainders are less if—­cruise missile carriers count as
2; M–X carriers fewer warheads; Trident missiles average more warheads; penetrators
carry fewer weapons. [Footnote is in the original.]

100.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, October 25, 1978
SUBJECT
The Triad and Its Alternatives
Harold Brown has sent you an information memo responding to
your questions in the recent Mid-Term Defense Review meeting about
the need to maintain a full Triad of strategic forces.2
Harold argues that while various combinations of SLBMs, bomb-
ers and novel ICBM deployment schemes or M–X/MAP can give us
roughly equal cost Dyads or Triads that will equally well maintain an
overall balance with the Soviets in terms of the usual static measures
and dynamic exchange calculations, by going to a posture without
M–X/MAP, we will give up features of the ICBM force that have sub-
stantial perceptual and military value.
Harold specifically suggests that allowing the Soviets to pressure
us into giving up the military advantages of an ICBM force while they
retain them would have a “disastrous effect” on both international and
domestic perceptions. The military capabilities we would sacrifice to at
least some degree are: independence from tactical warning; endurance
after an initial exchange; quick response hard-­target kill capability;
good C3; and warfighting capability—­which is the ability to use limited
amounts of strategic forces against particular numbers and types of tar-
gets selected on the basis of how a nuclear war unfolds.
Harold also comments on the value of diversity in strategic forces,
particularly as a hedge against the unexpected, and presents a short
discussion of problems he sees with four alternative missile deploy-
ment schemes (air-­mobile, ground-­mobile, air-­launched, and offshore
submersible).
Overall, the memo makes a forceful case for modernizing our stra-
tegic force posture with M–X/MAP. In so doing it raises a number of
interesting and difficult issues that should be more fully illuminated.
Specifically:
Harold is imposing requirements on our strategic force posture, [2
lines not declassified]—­which they don’t now meet and which have never
for information. The date is handwritten. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the
memorandum.
2 See Document 97.

really been imposed on them before. While imposing these require-
ments may very well be justified, we should first examine the doctrinal
issues that give rise to such needs and which have been addressed in
the very nearly complete PD–18 follow-­on targeting study. We should
also examine the potential for improvements in the capabilities of other
forces to meet these same requirements. For example, SLBM C3 can be
probably improved enough to allow large-­scale SLBM strikes against
time-­sensitive targets under worst case conditions.
The stated requirement for capabilities to destroy targets rapidly
seems to drive much of the argument in favor of an ICBM force. Harold
should be asked for descriptions of the various classes of time-­sensitive
targets including numbers of each type, their relative day-­to-­day and
minimum values, and the time the Soviets would need to reduce them
to their minimum values. Further, since the large majority of the time-­
urgent hard targets are Soviet silos, launch control centers, and their
associated C3 systems, it would be useful to ask Harold and Stan Turner
to assess the likelihood that even if we did have an extensive time-­
urgent hard target kill capability we could prevent launch of a signifi-
cant fraction of the Soviets’ ICBMs.
I wonder if we aren’t being a little over-­selective in choosing where
to mimic the Soviets and where not to. In particular, why must we
match their land-­based ICBM capabilities, but not the [less than 1 line
not declassified] strategy that their exercises suggest they might adopt
in times of crisis? Soviet exercises and doctrine give us reason to believe
that strategic warfare is very unlikely to grow out of situations in which
you will not have had hours or even days to implement a crisis-­only
[less than 1 line not declassified] strategy and contemplate your response
if and when tactical warning of an attack comes in. We should also con-
sider the possibility that in order to deprive us of strategic warning,
the Soviets would have to leave themselves significantly more vul-
nerable to a retaliatory response. It seems clear that we need a better
understanding of Soviet thinking and capabilities for [less than 1 line not
declassified]
The memo’s summary of difficulties and deficiencies of the alter-
natives to M–X/MAP seems a little hasty. We can afford to look at these
possibilities more carefully, particularly if we keep our options open by
proceeding with a common missile that could be used in Trident or in
any of the ICBM deployment schemes, including MAP.
The arguments given in favor of M–X/MAP assume the Soviets
will not respond by fractionating their missile payloads significantly
above current projections. Even within the limits of the current SALT
proposals, they can fractionate enough to sharply raise MAP’s costs and
the land area it would require. How should we view this possibility?

Harold’s memo does not explicitly mention an argument for the
Triad frequently made, i.e., that ICBMs protect the bombers by making
it very difficult for the Soviets to attack both. Does modernization of
ICBMs provide any such benefit to bomber survivability or does reten-
tion of some Minuteman in silos provide this benefit?
The issue of hedging against both evolving and unforeseen Soviet
threats raises an interesting question. Is the margin of advantage of a
Triad over a Dyad in hedging against unforeseen threats that meaning-
ful if the ICBM modernization schemes required to maintain a Triad
must be maintained against evolutionary expansions of threats we can
already see?
The argument that abandoning the ICBM field to the Soviets could
have a disastrous effect on perceptions needs more development. Are
we being run unilaterally out of an otherwise attractive force posture,
or are we simply the first to recognize and respond to a problem of tech-
nological obsolescence that the Soviets will eventually have to face?
Finally, there are several larger issues that this discussion of Triads
versus Dyads does not come to grips with. Specifically, as we enter the
relatively dangerous early 80’s, we should have a clear view of what
we need in terms of specific strategic capabilities, that may be realized
in a variety of different forms, and how the Soviets may try to respond
to our modernization efforts. We should ask which force mix poses the
greatest problem over the course of a protracted competition to the
Soviet force planner concentrating on damage-­limiting objectives:
—Augmented sea and air mobile forces with no ICBMs?
—Augmented sea and air mobile forces with some silo-­based
ICBMs?
—Augmented sea and air mobile forces with improved and
rebased ICBMs?
A better understanding of these larger issues may strongly influ-
ence our answers to the current key question—­are the strategic capa-
bilities we add or retain by modernizing and rebasing ICBMs really
unique and necessary?

101.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, October 28, 1978
SUBJECT
ICBM Vulnerability, MAPS, and Verification
As we discussed at our midterm review, the growing numbers and
increasing accuracy of Soviet missiles will give them the capability to
destroy [less than 1 line not declassified] of our Minuteman silos by 1982–
the ICBM leg of our Triad and the risks of giving up our ICBM force—­
especially under this pressure from the Soviet Union.
I also noted at the midterm review that while we should improve
our attack assessment system, we should not allow our ICBMs—­at
least not all of them—­to be so vulnerable that it would be necessary to
launch our force out from under an attack in order to save it. Our ICBM
force has had the ability to ride out any conceivable attack on it. This is
far preferable to a situation where, because the ICBM force cannot sur-
vive, we embark on a course whose outcome is that a computer decides
whether we launch a nuclear attack.
The alternative to the sobering options of retreating to a dyad, or
being forced into a launch-­under-­attack policy, is to provide surviv-
able basing for our ICBMs. We still are studying the various alterna-
tives, but already it is clear that there are no simple, quick or cheap
solutions.
Leaving aside political and perceptual problems, as well as the
very important problem of uncertainties in counting the number of
Soviet launchers (or missiles) if they go to MAPS or some other mobile
concept—­the best solution, both from a technical and from a cost point
of view, appears to be MAPS. This is not to say MAPS is an inherently
attractive solution; the problems just referred to cannot be left aside.
But all of the other basing systems we are considering either cost more
or compromise away some important characteristic of the present
ICBM force (e.g., no dependence on strategic warning), or both. In most
cases they also, like MAPS, involve counting uncertainties if the Soviets
paper prepared in the NSC entitled “Comments on Harold Brown’s 28 October Memo on
ICBM Vulnerability, MAPS, and Verification” is ibid.
Document 90.
3 See Document 97.

build similar systems. You should not expect our studies of these alter-
native basing systems to reveal a better solution than MAPS. Rather, we
are looking at whether there are acceptable systems which do not raise
the same issues of SALT verification and intelligence requirements that
MAPS does.
It is important to emphasize that the SALT verification problems
posed by MAPS are only a special case of a general intelligence prob-
lem that would also exist if SALT limitations did not exist. That prob-
lem is the requirement that our intelligence be able to monitor the size
of the Soviet RV force which a MAPS must face with sufficient certainty
to give us confidence that we have enough shelters to absorb the threat
and leave an adequate number of U.S. missiles surviving. Uncertain-
ties in the size of the Soviet force can stem from a Soviet MAPS, Soviet
cheating on SALT, or Soviet measures to conceal the size of their force
in the absence of SALT limitations.
Recognizing that there will always be some uncertainty in our esti-
mates of the size of the Soviet force, a MAPS system would be designed
with a tolerance for considerable uncertainty as to the Soviet ICBM
inventory. For example, in one MAPS design concept we would plan
on 200 M–X missiles with 50% survivability. If the threat from Soviet
missiles were doubled, survivability would be reduced to 15%, i.e., only
30 M–X missiles—­but still a force equivalent to 100 Minuteman IIIs. We
also could hedge against threat increases by adding additional shelters;
for example, if as in the previous example the threat doubled, a 10%
cost increment for added shelters would keep survivability from drop-
In my view, a crucial point in discussion of MAPS verification
in the SALT context is this basic fact about the concept: The system
would, for strictly military reasons, be designed to tolerate a substan-
tial concealed increase in the size of the Soviet force. The size of that
tolerable concealed increase would have to be large enough that we
would be confident our intelligence could detect a force larger than
that with very high confidence—­whatever concealment measures the
Soviets might employ, including copying the MAPS concept. Meeting
this strictly military requirement would in itself meet the basic test of
arms control verification: That test is not absolute certainty, but high
confidence that cheating (here, concealment of illegal missiles in a
MAPS) would be detected before it could affect our security or under-
mine the strategic balance. For SALT it is very desirable—­and may be
politically essential—­to have more confidence in counting the Soviet
force than we require to meet this military requirement. However, it is
important to recognize that we are talking about adding to a level of
4 In the right margin next to this paragraph, Ermarth wrote: “No numbers.”

confidence that is, by definition, already adequate for preserving our
military security.
With this perspective, it is reasonable to examine critically the
SALT issues raised by MAPS:
1. Is MAPS legal under a SALT II agreement? (SALT says that we
may not use deliberate concealment to impede verification by national
technical means, including satellite reconnaissance.)
2. Can we design MAPS to allow verification and still keep the
Soviets from knowing which shelters to target?
3. Is the Soviet Union likely to deploy a MAPS?
4. If the Soviet Union deploys MAPS, can we verify?
5. If the Soviets deployed MAPS, could they use it to “break out”
from a SALT treaty?
6. If the Soviets deployed MAPS, and in fact complied with SALT
provisions, would SALT critics claim the Soviets were cheating (and
were also able to tell which of our MAPS shelters contained our mis-
siles), thereby undermining public confidence in the system’s sur-
vivability, and perhaps thus push us to respond by filling up all our
shelters?
These, like most questions raised about SALT verification, are dif-
ficult and complex. Our studies of the past few months have provided
some important answers. In this paper I will discuss these issues using
MAPS with vertical shelters (silos) as a frame of reference, but most of
the discussion is also applicable to hybrid trenches (MAPS with hori-
zontal shelters under cover), which I believe is also a viable, but some-
what more expensive, option.
1. Is MAPS legal under SALT II?
Yes. The verification provisions of the draft treaty say that we may
not take deliberate concealment measures that impede verification
by national technical means. Although MAPS obviously conceals the
current location of launchers, we could and would as discussed below
make special design provisions to permit verification of their numbers.
Provided verification is possible through NTM, concealment of current
location is not barred—­otherwise it would be illegal to send SSBNs to
sea, an act which certainly conceals their location.
2. Can we design MAPS to allow verification and still keep the Soviets
from knowing which shelters to target?
Yes. In addition to the inherent verification opportunities afforded
by our open society, we have ways of allowing the Soviets to verify our
compliance with MAPS without endangering the security of the sys-
tem. These have been studied by both SALT and military experts, and

there is good agreement that they can provide an adequate approach to
this problem.5
The first verification method involves insuring that the Soviets
can monitor the number produced. We could do this by designing
MAPS so that all missile-­launcher combinations go through an assem-
bly process which can be observed by satellite reconnaissance before
they enter the shelter area. Thus the Soviets can count the missiles and
launchers going into the shelter area without knowing which particular
shelters (silos) they are going to. (This is similar to the way we verify
SLBMs today, in that we make our count in the assembly area but do
not know where the missiles are after the submarines carrying them
are deployed.) The length of time required to assemble and deploy a
missile and launcher before it is put in a shelter is long relative to the
intelligence cycle time. The Soviets may worry that we would cheat by
deploying a covertly assembled missile and launcher into a MAPS shel-
ter overnight under cover of darkness. While this would be a difficult
and risky undertaking, it is conceivable for MAPS (as for a variety of
other strategic systems).
To help reduce this residual uncertainty about whether illegally
produced launchers had been deployed secretly, we could also make a
practice, or formally offer, to open a few groups of shelters on demand to
prove that there is only one missile and launcher per group. We would
open all shelters in a designated group except the one that was full.
This occasional checkup could be accomplished by satellite; if the Sovi-
ets prefer, some of these inspections could be done by ground observers
since there is no security risk in showing them empty shelters. I believe
that countermeasures can be used to maintain security but still permit
adequate verification. For a covered MAPS (hybrid trench) the missile
would be assembled and put into the trench while under observation.
Then the trench would be sealed except for a small opening for main-
tenance purposes.
No set of measures such as these can be absolutely cheat-­proof—­
but there is a residual uncertainty about verification of any weapons
system. This kind of measure would eliminate any basis for a good-­
faith claim that the situation for MAPS was in any way more uncertain
than for other, more familiar systems.
3. Is the Soviet Union likely to deploy a MAPS?
Probably not. First of all, MAPS as such is an expensive defensive
system which as such gives them no additional striking power. Sec-
ond, if the Soviets decide to improve the survivability of their ICBM
5 In the left margin next to this paragraph, Ermarth wrote: “oh?”

force, they already have developed (but not deployed) in the mobile
SS–16 or derivative, a model for a “truck-­mobile” system which
should be more than adequate. However, we cannot be certain on this
point. If they did decide to deploy MAPS, they certainly would have
fewer problems than we relative to land availability and environmen-
tal restrictions, a factor which would ease several types of non-­silo
basing.6
4. If the Soviet Union deploys MAPS, can we verify?
The Soviet Union is bound by the same SALT provisions as are
we. Therefore, if the Soviets deploy a MAPS they would have to make
adequate provisions as to its verifiability through exposure of the pro-
cess of production, assembly and deployment. Otherwise, they would
be impeding verification by NTM (including satellite reconnaissance)
by concealment.7 If they followed the example I have described for our
MAPS, we could verify it with good confidence. [2 lines not declassified]
The potential problem, of course, is that they might make provisions
for verification that we would judge less than adequate. In that case,
we would then have a major argument in the SALT consultative com-
mission. This is a risk of the kind we face with other SALT verification
questions, including a variety of alternative basing concepts, and have
been dealing with in the SCC.
5. If the Soviets deployed MAPS, could they use it to “break out” from
SALT?
The answer is yes, but only if they are able secretly to produce
and hide more than a thousand ICBMs. A few hundred covert ICBMs
would not change fundamentally the nature of the threat; in fact, our
MAPS would be designed initially to accommodate a 2:1 increase in
Soviet RVs over present levels (achieved either by cheating or by RV
fractionation), and could be expanded with relatively small cost to
accommodate a 3:1 increase. Therefore, in order to pose a serious threat
to our MAPS, their covert production and storage operation must han-
dle more than a thousand ICBMs and their forces in the field must be
able to support twice as many launchers as the apparent, legal force.
I believe we would detect such a massive operation. Just as import-
ant, given the nature of intelligence, they could not be confident we
would not detect it. The Appendix8 describes our problems in counting
their ICBM production. This is an extremely important requirement. It
6 In the left margin next to this paragraph, Ermarth wrote: “DoD said the same thing
about MIRV.”
7 Ermarth drew a vertical line in the right margin next to the first three sentences of
this paragraph and wrote above it: “inadequate.”
8 Attached but not printed is an undated one-­page paper entitled “Monitoring of
Soviet Strategic Forces.”

deserves more intelligence emphasis; our current capability is far from
perfect, but it is also far from zero. This issue is not unique to MAPS. It
is fundamental to our ability to assess strategic balance, with or with-
out MAPS—­in fact, with or without SALT. As explained above, that
confidence is a necessary precondition of the military acceptability of a
MAPS system—­that we could detect a massive Soviet effort needed to
prepare to overwhelm it with secret missiles. If the Soviets can covertly
they can launch them from their storage areas. All these missiles are
designed for “cold-­launch,” and could be launched from a simple pad
or a simple erector launcher, with no need for silos. A MAPS, to be sure,
would provide in-­place C3 and logistic support, but would do so at
locations which are under our intelligence “microscope.” If the Soviets
can solve the problem of covertly producing and shipping that many
ICBMs and expanding the support base in deployment areas for 2–3
times as many launchers as the legal force (which I doubt), I believe
they could solve the further problem of covertly producing and ship-
ping the attending C3 and logistic support. Thus, to the extent this is a
real risk, it is a risk with or without MAPS.
6. If the Soviets deployed MAPS, and in fact complied with SALT provisions,
would SALT critics claim they were cheating, and that our MAPS mis-
sile locations were not secure?
The answer is probably yes—­such claims likely would be made,
no doubt by some of the very people now advocating MAPS. Would
that destroy our confidence in the viability of the system and force us
to respond by filling up our shelters and abrogating SALT? Not unless
the credibility of our strategic strength had been badly eroded by other
issues. Your Administration and two which preceded it have weathered
similar charges about Soviet cheating on SALT I—­and about alleged
Soviet military superiority in various areas—­and have not given in,
nor have they ever lost public support as a consequence. We probably
shall have to deal with similar charges that the Soviets are cheating on
Backfire, cruise missiles, SS–16 production, RV freeze, and other Treaty
limits.
To summarize, I believe that for strictly military reasons our intel-
ligence must be able, even without SALT, to detect a Soviet buildup
big enough to threaten MAPS’ viability. Most of the additional veri-
fication questions raised about MAPS in the context of SALT can be
answered by the special design provisions we would make on MAPS
to provide for adequate verification while maintaining security. In
addition to political problems and impressions, that still leaves two
possible situations that cannot be put aside. One is the possibility that
the Soviets might succeed in covertly producing and storing more than
a thousand missiles, and then suddenly “breaking out” from SALT.

The other is the possibility that some in the United States will claim
that the Soviets are doing so and demand that we abrogate SALT. Both
of these are risks. The risk of covert production exists even if we do
not have a SALT, but is aggravated by the convenience of silos for the
sudden deployment presumed. The risk that SALT critics will claim
that the Soviets are cheating and that we should abrogate is aggra-
vated by MAPS but also exists without MAPS. These factors need to
be judged in the light of the risks of Soviet misbehavior, or charges of
Soviet misbehavior, on Backfire, cruise missiles, new types and other
provisions.
Risks of this sort must be weighed against the perceived benefits
both to SALT and to strategic stability. In the case of MAPS, the risks are
real, and the benefit is the degree of confidence maintained in the sur-
vivability for our ICBM force. When we have fully explored the alter-
natives to MAPS to the same degree of detail, MAPS may well prove
to be the best option in combined political-­military-­cost terms. Many
of the alternatives present comparable verification/intelligence prob-
lems. For that reason I believe we cannot now prudently rule MAPS
out, though I do not think we can now choose it to the exclusion of the
alternatives.
Early in November I expect to have for your consideration a devel-
opment and deployment plan for strategic forces over the next ten or
more years, including options for future decision. In presenting such a
program, I shall include considerations of the Triad and MAPS along
with the fundamental issue of the strategic balance with the Soviet
Union.
Harold Brown

102.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 16, 1978
SUBJECT
Strategic Force Modernization Plan
Harold Brown has sent you a memo (Tab A) laying out a tenta-
tive plan for modernizing our strategic forces posture. Overall, I think
­Harold’s plan looks quite reasonable. It allows for a really serious look
at an air-­mobile basing mode for a new ICBM. It provides for improved
ICBM survivability during the early ’80s (by deploying Minuteman
III on trucks). Finally, it seems to strike a realistic balance between the
extremes of [6 lines not declassified]
The memo is reasonably short and informative; in reading it you
might keep the following points in mind:
—Harold seems to have decided on the mostly common missile (a
squeezed M–X) rather than the common missile (TRIDENT II). How-
ever, proceeding with full-­scale development of the mostly common
missile means making an investment that will be largely wasted if we
do not identify a good land-­based deployment scheme. In light of this,
I intend to ask Harold for a short memo outlining his basis for this
decision.
—Given the relatively high costs of an air-­mobile scheme and the
drawbacks we are already aware of in MAP, it might be prudent to give
the truck-­mobile system that Harold proposes for Minuteman the capa-
bility to subsequently carry a mostly common missile.2
—Harold notes that the $22B cost estimate for the air-­mobile con-
cept may be too high. However, even a better estimate would probably
be overstated, in that the net impact on the defense budget of build-
ing this system should subtract the amounts we would have to spend
to develop a follow-­on cruise missile carrier or an intra-­theater cargo
transport, since the aircraft Harold has in mind can also serve these
other purposes.
—There are a number of underlying issues that seem likely to at
least color our attitudes toward some of the more detailed decisions
imbedded in this plan; for example, can we develop and deploy the
C3I systems needed to support a mobile missile system, and would
the indicators of impending Soviet strategic attack be good enough to
justify a significant investment in a truck-­mobile system carrying the
mostly common missile, and how much time-­urgent, hard-­target kill
2 Carter wrote “I agree” in the left margin next to this paragraph.

capability do we really need? In the coming weeks, I will address these
issues for you, in appropriate detail.

Tab A

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President
Carter3
Washington, November 4, 1978
SUBJECT
Strategic Force Modernization Plan
I. Introduction
At the mid-­term review I described the requirements for upgrad-
ing our strategic forces and presented a tentative program for strategic
force modernization.4 Subsequently I sent you a paper describing why I
believe we need to maintain the vitality of our strategic TRIAD and why
this requires the rebasing of our ICBM’s to enhance their survivability.5
We have continued to study our strategic offensive forces in general
and the alternative solutions to the difficult ICBM problem in particu-
lar. I have arrived tentatively at a course of action which seems to me
to meet our needs. This paper describes the programs I believe appro-
priate for modernization of our ICBM force, SLBM force and bomber/
cruise missile force. The resulting capability would give us reasonable
assurance that our strategic forces would provide essential equivalence
with those of the USSR through the 1980’s. Though forecasting beyond
that is more risky, I think that the recommended program would also
allow our successors to assure essential equivalence into the 1990’s by
exercising the appropriate options as that time draws near. The plan
is consistent with SALT II provisions as we now envisage them and
would put us in a strong position to negotiate major arms reductions in
SALT III. The plan can be adjusted as time unfolds to reflect reductions
negotiated in SALT II.
II. ICBM Modernization
The ICBM modernization plan has three major components:
3 Top Secret; Sensitive. Carter wrote “Zbig. C” in the upper right corner of the
memorandum.
5 See Document 97.

(1) Begin full-­scale development of a new ICBM this fiscal year
(after a review in early December by the Defense Systems Acquisition
Review Committee), with an IOC (Initial Operating Capability) of 1986,
and a goal of deploying up to [less than 1 line not declassified] The missile
would be constrained [less than 1 line not declassified] also be used in the
TRIDENT II missile.6
(2) Conduct a parallel development program for two alternative
basing systems—MAPS and an air transportable system—­with the
objective of making a final choice in one year. If MAPS is selected, and
IOC in 1986 could be achieved, with an FOC (Full Operational Capabil-
ity) of 290 missiles by 1990. The air transportable system we envision
requires a new aircraft having fast takeoff, high nuclear hardness, and
short takeoff and landing characteristics. It would operate in a land-­
and-­launch mode in conjunction with a few thousand pre-­surveyed
landing strips (perhaps sod).7 Each aircraft would carry one of the
ICBM’s described above. An IOC of 1987 and FOC of 200 aircraft by
1990 seems possible. Because this system would have a “dead time”
while the aircraft were being dispersed on strategic or tactical warning,
I believe it would be wise also to deploy about 100 of the new ICBM’s in
existing MINUTEMAN silos, to provide an immediate response capa-
bility of the sort that the Soviets will have (though theirs will be much
larger). The silos already exist, the missiles would be the same, and the
operating costs in a silo mode are very low. This would therefore be a
relatively inexpensive diversification.
At the same time, detailed study efforts on other basing modes
for ICBM’s, including off-­shore and (perhaps hardened) ground mobile
versions, would be carried out to provide a backup or a possible
­follow-­on basing system.
(3) Develop a “stop-­gap” survivable basing mode for MINUTE-
MAN, since the program just described will not be operational until
four or five years after the threat becomes serious. [2 lines not declas-
sified] On strategic warning they each would be redeployed to one of
several thousand pre-­surveyed sidings along the existing highways in
the states where MINUTEMAN is based.8 This system is relatively sim-
ple, quick (IOC of 1983), and—­by the standards of strategic force—­of
moderate cost (about $1.5 billion, including necessary improvements in
our warning system). It would be effective only until the Soviet Union
6 Carter underlined “also be used in the Trident II.”
7 Carter drew an arrow pointing to this and the preceding sentence and wrote in
the adjacent right margin: “seems very costly & vulnerable vs ground carriers a la SS 16.”
8 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this sentence and the two preceding sen-
tences: “seems Better.”

improves its overhead reconnaissance to achieve an intelligence cycle
time short enough to allow targeting of dispersed transporters (which
will probably not happen until at least the late 80’s). It is, of course,
hardly effective against a “bolt-­out-­of-­the-­blue” attack since we could
not move the missile very far in the few minutes warning we would
get from an SLBM attack.9 On balance, though, it would be a strong
move—­both militarily and politically—­if coupled with a solid program
for dealing with the longer term solution to the problem. This move is
particularly valuable if we decide on the air transportable ICBM basing
mode with its later IOC.
III. SLBM Modernization
The SLBM modernization plan has four major components:
(1) Begin production of TRIDENT I missiles in 1979 and deploy
them on 21 of the POSEIDON submarines (336 missiles deployed) by
1985. Replacing POSEIDON missiles with TRIDENT I will give us our
most immediate and effective increase in striking power to offset in
part the military and political effects of the Soviets’ major increase in
ICBM RV’s.
(2) Begin the development of the TRIDENT II missile in 1979 by
taking advantage of the commonality of two propulsion states with
the ICBM described above. [2 lines not declassified] If we decide to pur-
sue MAPS as the ICBM basing mode, then we need not rush to deploy
the TRIDENT II; in this case we envision a 1990 IOC. However, if we
decide to pursue the air transportable basing mode for ICBM’s, and
if ways of communicating with SSBN’s in a post-­nuclear attack envi-
ronment improve sufficiently, then we may want to accelerate the
­TRIDENT II IOC in order to compensate in part for our reduced capa-
bility to attack time-­urgent hard targets. In either case the TRIDENT II
would be deployed on the new TRIDENT subs as they come off the
production line and later backfitted in the earlier subs that had been
fitted with TRIDENT I.
(3) Continue production of the TRIDENT submarine at a rate of 1½
per year. I believe that the major startup problems are behind us now
and that maintaining this program through the 80’s is the proper course
of action.10 The latter conclusion is subject to a size-­connected vulnera-
bility to ASW that I think a theoretical possibility, though not a practical
one, during the next 15 years.
9 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this and the preceding sentence: “Could
move every night.”
10 Carter drew an arrow in the right margin pointing to the phrase “I believe that the
major startup problems are behind us now” and wrote: “optimistic view?”

(4) Begin the design study for a new submarine, conceptually
smaller and cheaper than the TRIDENT.11 If this design proves to be
successful, consider it for production beginning in the late 80’s, phas-
ing out production of the TRIDENT then. If not, continue production
of the TRIDENT. In either case, we will plan to extend the life of the
IV. Bomber/Cruise Missile Modernization
The modernization plan for the air-­breathing leg of the TRIAD has
three components:
(1) Continue development of the first-­generation cruise missile,
per year until 1988.
(2) Begin development of the second generation cruise missile.
Whether (and when) to phase over production from the first generation
to the second generation is covered in a separate appendix.
(3) Begin study of a new strategic bomber. Whether (and when)
to begin development and production of this bomber is covered in a
separate appendix.12
If we decide to pursue the air transportable ICBM basing approach,
the aircraft we would develop would also be compatible with the role
of cruise missile carrier and would eventually replace the B–52’s in this
role (in the 90’s). No additional funding would then be required for
this CMC program during the 80’s. Without this new aircraft we might
use an adaptation of a commercial aircraft for the cruise missile carrier
role—­as we have been discussing to date.13
V. Funding Requirements
FY 79 funding requirements for all of these programs are cov-
ered in the FY 79 enacted budget plus our supplemental request. FY
80 total funding requirements are mostly covered in our FY 80 APDM
budget at the “basic” program level (139.5B$), though the detailed dis-
tribution among programs would have to be revised. At the “decre-
is approximately one-­half billion dollars less than what is needed for
ing requirements in the 80’s are given in Appendix A for two optional
plans depending upon the choice of ICBM rebasing. The costs for
11 Carter underlined the word “cheaper” and wrote “ha!” in the right margin.
12 Appendix D was not found attached. According to the list of attachments, it was
to be provided separately; it was not found. Carter wrote “??” in the right margin next
to this paragraph.
13 Carter underlined the phrase “adaptation of a commercial aircraft.”

the air transportable system are probably overstated. Considerably
cheaper airplanes and dispersal schemes are being considered for this
application, but we are not yet certain that they will provide adequate
base escape. Appendix B contains a portrayal of U.S. versus Soviet
expenditures to strategic forces; Appendix C summarizes the principal
variations on the basic plan.14
Harold Brown
14 Appendices A–1 “Summary Chart of Funding Requirements—MAP ICBM Bas-
ing;”, A–2 “Summary Chart of Funding Requirements—Air Transportable ICBM;” B,
“U.S. versus SU Strategic Forces Expenditures;” and C, “Variations on the Basic Plan;”
are attached but not printed.
103.	 Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense
(Duncan) to the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Enduring Communications, Command and Control and Intelligence (C3I)
Your recent memorandum requested my views as to how we
should deal with the problem of providing a communications, com-
mand, control and intelligence (C3I) capability that will endure a pro-
tracted nuclear conflict.2 I share your concerns and agree that further
improvement to our C3I systems to support general war is needed—­
particularly to support other than a limited set of pre-­planned retalia-
tory responses.
Top Secret. Odom forwarded the memorandum to Brzezinski under cover of a November
17 memorandum in which Odom noted: “I see no need for a specific response to Dun-
can’s memo. You have accomplished your original purposes: Changing the focus in C3I
to endurance (see the last paragraph of Duncan’s reply.); Giving the matter top priority
attention.” (Ibid.)
2 In his memorandum to Duncan, September 30, Brzezinski expressed concerns
about the C3I issue following his visit to SAC/NORAD in August. (Ibid.) See Documents

In this regard several studies of our [6 lines not declassified] which
are both a follow-­on to PD–18; a SAC study of strategic C3I which is
just getting underway; and a recently completed Defense Science Board
(DSB) Study which addressed enduring C3I.3 I am also convening a fol-
low-­on task force of the DSB to extend the DSB’s preliminary analyses;
and plan to have Navy examine the enduring communications to stra-
tegic submarines.
With regard to your question on the continuity of government, we
share your concern that the military C3I system and the survivability
and endurance of the C3I system serving the NCA are part of a cohesive
whole. To this end my staff will continue to work closely with Colonel
Odom and Fritz Ermarth of your staff to ensure that changes we pro-
pose in military C3I systems are consistent with the President’s desires
and the procedures and systems of the Office of the President.
I also share your concerns with respect to the National Commu-
nications System, over half of which consists of the Defense Commu-
nications System. The impact of the Communications Act of 1978 (HR
13015), in its present form, on the DoD’s national security and emer-
gency preparedness responsibilities is of particular concern.4 Our
views which have been provided to OMB, point out DoD’s opposition
to the bill in its present form and detail the shortcomings of the bill.
Policies being developed based on private sector interests, e.g., unreg-
ulated competition, and pending legislation resulting from testimony
on HR 13015 could very well have an adverse impact on many aspects
of DoD operations, including the ability to support enduring general
war C3I.
I am encouraged by your recognition of the importance of C3I to
our war-­fighting and deterrent posture, and am confident that, with
your assistance, we can make progress in this extremely important area.
C.W. Duncan
3 For the Executive Summary of the Defense Science Board Study, see the attach-
ment to Document 88.
4 The Communications Act of 1978, as proposed, was a measure designed to amend
the original Communications Act of 1934 to introduce private-­sector competition into the
telephone system.

104.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 24, 1978
SUBJECT
Final Report on the PD–18 Study Entitled “Modernization of the ICBM Force”
Attached is the final report on the PD–18 follow-­on study entitled
“Modernization of the ICBM Force.” This study was made to provide
background for addressing two of the issues raised in your memoran-
dum of August 24, 19772: hard-­target capability and the future of the
Triad.
I believe that our discussion with the President on September 293
and the memoranda I sent him on October 23 on Triads and Dyads
and on October 28 regarding ICBM vulnerability and MAP verification,
provide my views on these issues to the extent they can be formulated
at this stage.4 I believe it will probably take several months, at least, to
reduce the uncertainty in some important factors such as SALT, MAP
verification, and alternative ICBM basing systems. For the moment, I
believe we will need to proceed along several paths until the preferred
choice becomes clearer.
Harold Brown

Attachment

Report Prepared in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Program Analysis and Evaluation5
Washington, November 1978
[Omitted here are the title page and table of contents.]
2 See Document 31.
101, respectively.
5 Top Secret.

I. Preface
In response to the NSC Directive of August 24, 1977, subject: “Fol-
low-On Studies for PD/NSC–18,” the Secretary of Defense initiated a
DoD study to address the following related issues:
—­modernization of the ICBM force,
—­the future of the Triad concept, and
—U.S. requirements for hard-­target kill capability.
This two-­volume study attempts to illuminate these and related
issues of policy by focusing on broad cost-­effectiveness considerations
and the factual basis underlying arguments about military require-
ments. With only a few exceptions, the study does not examine alter-
native designs for specific systems; nor does it explore the full range of
conceivable strategic systems. Instead, we have focused primarily on
the relative merits of illustrative forces with various deployments of
MAP-­based MX, Trident II, and Cruise Missile Carriers.
Volume II has been printed as a separate document; it contains:
(1) the full text of the study’s technical papers, (2) discussion of the
analytical methodology used in the cost-­effectiveness analysis, and (3)
detailed information and results from that analysis, including back-
ground material on costs and special nuclear materials.6
This study was conducted by the Strategic Forces and Arms Lim-
itation Division in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Pro-
gram Analysis and Evaluation). Although the study team was assisted
by a working group comprised of representatives from the Services,
OJCS, DIA, and a number of OSD offices, this report is a PA&E product
and has not been coordinated within DoD.
II. General Observations
This section describes a number of observations drawn from the
study, but avoids conclusions on matters of policy. Section II.A summa-
rizes observations of a general nature traceable to the technical papers
contained in Volume II. Section II.B describes the observations from the
study’s cost-­effectiveness analysis.
A. From the Technical Papers:
1. The ICBM force has played a dominant role in the targeting
of our strategic forces against the Soviet Union, [1 line not declassified]
our forces will still be well-­hedged in their ability to destroy economic
targets; however, we face a significant decrease in our counterforce
capability until ALCMs are deployed in the mid-1980s. At that time,
the issues will be: timeliness of response, ALCM penetration capability,
and flexibility, e.g., in other than a spasm-­type war.
2. Modernizing the ICBM force through MAP basing has some
strong rationale: to enhance crisis stability and restore the more stable
pre-MIRV situation in which an attacker could not expect to destroy as
many missiles as he expended; to preserve the Triad concept of well-­
hedged forces against non-­silo targets and the unique contributions of
the ICBM force; and, to discourage the Soviets from seeking strategic
superiority. There are also a number of concerns with the MAP con-
cept. Among the most severe are MAP verification (not addressed in
this study) and the sensitivity of the system and its cost to a respon-
sive threat. A SALT agreement limiting Soviet MIRVed ICBM throw
weight and RV fractionation could go a long way toward ensuring that
a MAP system would be affordable. Without a fractionation limit, 10-­
year system costs could rise above $40B. Without a SALT agreement,
there would be no way to confidently bound the problem, i.e., the Sovi-
ets could continuously expand the threat and we would be forced to
expand the MAP system for a given level of survivability.
4. Deploying MX in existing Minuteman silos would be by far the
least expensive way to modernize our ICBM force. Among the potential
advantages of this option are: (1) it would be a clear response in kind to
Soviet acts, and might encourage them to accept more arms control and
[14 lines not declassified]
6. Survivability “requirements” for a MAP system should not be
based on throw weight or EMT, especially when comparing the ade-
quacy of different concepts such as MX in MAP vs. Minuteman in MAP
vs. the common missile in MAP. Retaliatory effectiveness against the
current [2 lines not declassified]
B. From the Cost-Effectiveness Analysis:
1. A minimum modernization force (i.e., a force with Trident
SSBNs, the Trident I missile, and ALCMs on 169 B–52Gs, but without
MX, Trident II or CMCs) would cost roughly $100B in constant 1979
of greater modernization would depend primarily on: (1) decisions
regarding what constitutes essential equivalence, (2) our requirements
for hard-­target capability, (3) the risks we were willing to accept regard-
ing breakthroughs in ASW, air defense and pre-­launch destruction of
bombers, and (4) the strategy we chose for influencing the Soviets on
arms control.
2. All forces considered in this analysis, including the mini-
mum modernization force, would provide more non-­silo retaliatory

capability against the current National Target Base than today’s forces.
The minimum modernization force would also be as well-­hedged
against force-­wide degradations and against catastrophic failure of
any one component as today’s forces. This greater non-­silo retaliatory
capability will be the result of planned improvements in the SLBM and
bomber forces, including increased day-­to-­day alert rates.
3. The incremental cost for “fully” modernized forces that present
a relatively strong essential equivalence picture, provide an extensive
hard-­target capability, and hedge against catastrophic failure in any
discounted (10%) dollars. Foregoing the extensive hard-­target capability
dollars.
4. There are no significant differences between Triads providing
quick-­response vice non-­quick-­response hard-­target capability in terms
of cost, essential equivalence measures, total hard-­target capability,
non-­silo retaliatory effectiveness or hedging. This issue will have to be
decided on the other important factors, primarily timeliness of response
and whether or not we want to “threaten” the Soviet ICBM force or
attempt to drive them to a mobile ICBM or more SLBMs.
5. Under the assumption (not assessed in this study) that [less than
1 line not declassified] Dyads of Trident II and bombers (plus silo-­based
MM III for use in limited exchanges) could be given much the same
capabilities as comparably priced Triads. In particular, balanced Dyads
could hedge as well as Triads against force-­wide degradations of effec-
tiveness, and even against catastrophic failure of one leg. Therefore,
conclusions about the relative advantages of Triads vs. Dyads depend
on judgments about [2 lines not declassified]
7. Given a decision to deploy an extensive QRHTC, a force empha-
sizing the baseline MX in MAP basing would be significantly more cost
effective than a force with both MX and Trident II, whether or not MX
and Trident II were developed jointly in a common missile program.
However, a Triad without Trident II would provide no hedging of the
QRHTC.
[Omitted here is the remainder of the report.]

105.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, November 28, 1978
SUBJECT
Nuclear Targeting Policy Review (U)
I am forwarding to you our recently completed review of nuclear
targeting policy that you requested in August 1977 as one of a number
of follow-­up actions in PD–18. The study outlines several broad pol-
icy alternatives and also makes a number of specific recommendations
with respect to nuclear weapons employment policy. It suggests some
major changes both in the thrust of current policy and in the procedures
for planning SIOP and non-SIOP options. Some issues will require fur-
ther study and several of the broader policy issues should be the basis
for interagency discussion. In the meantime, I plan to initiate action
within DoD on those matters noted below that are within the frame-
work of current policy, and which I believe can be acted on now.
The basic theme of the study is that employment policy will make
its maximum contribution to deterrence—­our basic strategic objec-
tive—­if our employment policies make a Soviet victory, as seen through
Soviet eyes, as improbable as we can make it, independent of Soviet
employment policy and of any particular scenario. These plans should
include targeting options against Soviet military forces, command and
control, and military support that would maximize the threats to the
objective targets, while minimizing collateral damage. We should also
have a capability to threaten escalation. To lend credibility to a US
threat to escalate, we need employment options and supporting capa-
bilities which the Soviets might perceive to be advantageous to us. Such
options require greater flexibility and endurance than we now have in
our nuclear posture.
As you will note, the study makes a number of specific recommen-
dations to these ends. In particular, it proposes specific measures to
improve our capabilities to target and attack Soviet forces, C3 and [less
than 1 line not declassified] It also suggests that we develop both plans
and capabilities that will permit us to withhold attacks on [less than 1
line not declassified] targets as a means of coercion if a nuclear war is
prolonged; and in general, that we focus our plans and our capabil-
ity on the possibility of an extended exchange, rather than (as now)
principally on an essentially instantaneous all-­out spasm exchange.
It also proposes measures to strengthen the strategic reserve forces.
These measures are designed to enhance deterrence by posing to the
Soviets the prospect that they would not only suffer severe damage
in a nuclear war, but be unable to achieve their military objectives or
gain any other advantage. The proposals also would provide a broader
range of options should deterrence fail.
The study places considerable emphasis on enhancing the flexi-
bility of the SIOP through the development of more discrete building
blocks of like targets. By breaking down the present target base into
smaller increments, the President would have a broader range of
options should we ever have to consider SIOP-­type attacks. A number
of practical problems must be resolved, however, before deciding pre-
cisely how to implement the concept. The SIOP probably cannot be put
together by taking an arbitrary linear combination of building blocks;
the interactions need to be considered.
Endurance is another issue of considerable importance, not only
in forces, but also in command, control, communications and intelli-
gence. Very few of the objectives listed above in terms of an extended
exchange, withholds, etc. can be achieved without endurance, both in
forces and in C3I. We need to consider the kind of endurance we need
and the rate at which we should proceed in acquiring a more enduring
strategic posture. Inasmuch as some of these issues relate to acquisition
policy, I have recently initiated studies designed to identify the prob-
lems and lead to specific development and procurement actions. In the
meantime, we should take care to assure that adjustments in targeting
policy are phased to match improvements in endurance.
We have also attempted to deal with the guidelines for targeting
the Soviet nuclear threat—­more effective targeting of Soviet military
and war-­sustaining capacity, and targeting to threaten [less than 1 line
not declassified]
The study also addresses non-SIOP options (LNOs and RNOs) and
suggests strengthening procedures to assure that both political and mil-
itary considerations are brought to bear in the development of these
options, and in any consideration of their use.
In all these cases—­but especially endurance and flexibility—­there
are some initial steps that can be taken with the existing establishment,
but to realize the concepts fully will require acquisition decisions. In
other cases, some concepts appear promising, but require more analysis
before we can decide on concrete actions. One example of an interest-
ing idea where feasibility has not been determined is a “regionalizing”
strategy, to threaten continued central control of the USSR by isolating
its constituents from each other through a retaliatory nuclear strike.
I believe that the study (whose Executive Summary I hope you
have time to read) makes it clear that, while we have made substantial

progress over the past year in defining issues and proposing specific
solutions, much remains to be done to follow up on this report. Among
those matters that we intend to move on promptly within DoD are the
development of the following:
—More discrete building blocks which would provide increased
flexibility in the SIOP.
—An improved intelligence data base, particularly for command
and control targets and other military forces.
—A launch-­under-­attack option for our land-­based ballistic missile
force, which will become vulnerable in the early 1980s and remain so to
a substantial degree for a number of years even though we take prompt
steps to deploy it in a less vulnerable form.
—[less than 1 line not declassified]
—Possible alternative criteria for the targeting of Soviet [less than 1
line not declassified]
—Specific program proposals to enhance endurance of strategic
C3I.
—More detailed guidelines for the Secure Reserve Force.
—Exercises that will test and provide the basis for refinement of
non-SIOP options.
We also plan to develop a program of additional studies. These
will explore such issues as how we might target Soviet general purpose
forces more effectively, [2 lines not declassified]
In addition, there are some issues that are broader in scope and,
therefore, should receive NSC consideration. Among the most import-
ant of these is identifying and electing a broad and coherent set of pol-
icy objectives that will give focus to our nuclear weapons employment
plans and related acquisition policies. This report identifies four such
broad policy options. It is my view that we should adopt, at a mini-
mum, alternative b, described on page ix of the Executive Summary,
and that we should consider moving some distance toward alternative
c, insofar as budgetary constraints allow.
We also should review in the NSC the extent to which we should
adjust our targeting policy with respect to Soviet industry which now
focuses on “impeding recovery.” The study suggests modification in
light of our evaluation of deterrence requirements and our limited
understanding of the recovery process itself, as distinct from simply
targeting industrial capacity.
Another important unresolved issue, also addressed in the sepa-
rate ICBM Modernization Study,2 relates to counterforce capabilities;
the range of capabilities we require and the extent to which we should
develop quick reaction hard target capabilities. The issue of future
ICBM requirements and Hard Target Capability have also been the
2 See Document 102.

subject of recent DoD studies. Neither this report nor any of the other
studies provide a tidy answer to the issue of future ICBM requirements
and Hard Target Capabilities. This is an issue that we will clearly have
to come to grips with in the review of these studies and as our strategic
modernization program takes shape.
Targeting population is still another issue that is appropriate for
high level discussion. We have not in recent years targeted population
per se, nor do we propose to do so now. Should the Soviets proceed fur-
ther with plans to shelter and evacuate population, we must consider
whether targeting some specific part of population should become an
explicit objective and, if so, how much of our resources would we want
to devote to that objective as compared with other targeting objectives.
Meanwhile, the NSC should reaffirm current policy.
Another important policy issue that merits attention is the devel-
opment of revised targeting plans for China. This study recommends
that we alter our targeting plans for the PRC by handling China tar-
geting through non-SIOP options and the Secure Reserve Force. I will
proceed to implement such a policy if you wish to direct it now; such a
decision seems appropriate.
A number of these issues should receive interagency consideration.
To that end, I propose one or more meetings of the PRC and/or SCC,
prior to an NSC meeting with you, to review this study as well as the
related ones concerning ICBM Modernization and the Secure Reserve
Force.
Harold Brown

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense3
Washington, November 1, 1978
[Omitted here are the cover page and table of contents.]
NUCLEAR TARGETING POLICY REVIEW
Summary of
Major Findings and Recommendations
A. Purpose
The purpose of this review was to evaluate nuclear employment
policy—­that is, the policy guidelines and procedures for the targeting
3 Top Secret.

of nuclear weapons—­and to identify alternatives to current policies.
In conducting this evaluation, we focused particularly on the relation-
ship between our stated policy (as set forth in PD–18 and NSDM–242)
and the targeting plans designed to carry out that policy. We have
also reviewed, where appropriate, the relationship between employ-
ment plans and the capabilities of forces and supporting command,
control, communications and intelligence. The evaluation that follows
uses as its framework the principal objectives of nuclear employment
policy, namely: deterrence and essential equivalence; escalation con-
trol and war termination; and the four general war targeting objectives
described below. We also have evaluated the Secure Reserve Force
(SRF) concept, Launch Under Attack (LUA) targeting and targeting
policy for China.
B. Major Findings
1. Deterrence. Our deterrence objectives are to deter nuclear attack
on the United States; to deter attacks on U.S. forces abroad and on our
allies; and to impede coercion by unfriendly nuclear powers of the US,
its allies and other friendly nations. Nuclear weapons play a major role
in meeting these deterrence objectives, but they are not expected to do
this task alone.
While we are not sure what deters the Soviets, there is fairly broad
consensus in the US intelligence community and among a number
of Soviet experts that the Soviets seriously plan to face the problems
of fighting and surviving a nuclear war should it occur, and of win-
ning, in the sense of having military forces capable of dominating the
post-­war world. Their emphasis on planning for nuclear war and on
damage limiting measures, including civil defense and civil emer-
gency preparedness testifies to this overall thrust in Soviet policy. This
does not mean that the Soviet leadership is unaware of (or indiffer-
ent to) the destructive consequences of a nuclear conflict. Indeed, there
are many statements by Soviet leaders which attest to their desire to
avoid nuclear war and to their recognition of its potential destruction.
However, the Soviets appear to have prepared themselves militarily
and psychologically for the possibility that a nuclear war could occur
and within the limits of their resources, they have prepared plans and
developed capabilities which would permit them to do as well as possi-
ble in surviving a nuclear conflict and in defeating the military forces of
their adversaries. It is clear that they are continuing substantial efforts
to improve their own strategic posture. The effect is to pose new obsta-
cles to achievement of our strategic objectives. We do not argue that the
US concentration on deterrence is wrong, or that the Soviet idea that
nuclear wars are winnable is right, but rather that carrying out a policy
of deterrence cannot ignore these Soviet attitudes.

Our deterrent appears adequate in normal circumstances to pre-
vent the Soviets either from attacking us or our allies deliberately or
from pursuing a recklessly aggressive policy carrying with it a high
risk of war. But it is in a severe crisis that our ability to impede coercion
and extend deterrence to other nations would be most severely tested.
Should such a crisis occur, we would want to avoid war (or terminate
a war at the lowest possible level of violence) while simultaneously
preventing the Soviets from coercing us or our Allies. In such a case,
deterrence requires that the Soviets must never be confident that esca-
lation would be to their advantage; also they must never be certain that
the U.S. is unwilling or unable to respond effectively to any attack.
Deterrence will be influenced primarily by Soviet perceptions of
our capabilities and will, rather than our plans. However, to the extent
that our plans are known to the Soviets, these plans say something
about our capabilities and will. Employment policy also has an impact
both on the Soviet perception of the risks and advantages if they esca-
late, and on our confidence which in turn affects the Soviet perception
of the likelihood that we may escalate.
Since the Soviets appear to have a concept of military victory, even
in nuclear war, we should seek employment policies that would make
a Soviet victory as seen through Soviet eyes, as improbable as we can
make it in any contingency. Thus, we should develop plans and capa-
bilities that minimize Soviet hopes of military success. These should
include targeting options against Soviet military forces, command and
control, and military support that would maximize the threats to the
objective targets while minimizing collateral damage. We should also
have a capability to threaten escalation ourselves. This threat to escalate
if and as necessary is at the heart of NATO’s flexible response strategy.
It is likely to be especially effective if it threatens Soviet ability to main-
tain effective military forces in the field.
It is sufficient for purposes of deterrence if the Soviets perceive
that there be a reasonable likelihood that we could (and would) escalate
or respond successfully; it is not necessary that we have highest confi-
dence that escalation control will work, or, still less that we can win the
war. However, to lend credibility to a U.S. threat to escalate, we need
employment options and supporting capabilities which the Soviets
might perceive to be advantageous to us. Such options require greater
flexibility and endurance than we now have in our nuclear posture.
2. Escalation Control. There are and will inevitably always be great
uncertainties about our ability to control escalation and terminate con-
flict on terms acceptable to us and our allies. Nevertheless, we conclude
that it remains in the U.S. interest to have plans and capabilities that
could limit damage by controlling escalation and terminating a con-
flict before it can extend to all-­out nuclear war. Thus, we reaffirm the

desirability of a policy of escalation control based on a range of SIOP
and non-SIOP options. We find, however, that there are serious deficien-
cies in current plans and capabilities to carry out a strategy of escalation
control. There has been inadequate political input into the planning of
nuclear options, particularly non-SIOP options. There are deficiencies
in the integration of limited nuclear options with non-­nuclear plans,
and an absence of political, economic and psychological plans to com-
plement non-SIOP options. Further, the plans for limited use of nuclear
weapons have not been sufficiently exercised with the participation of
high level political and military leaders. The vulnerability of forces and
Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (C3I) also lim-
its the effectiveness of an escalation control strategy. As a result, the
US Government may not be adequately prepared to deal with a crisis
which could involve nuclear weapons, should it occur. Dealing with a
nuclear crisis in the multilateral framework of NATO would be even
more difficult.
3. General War Plans. Our general war plans are designed to meet
the following principal objectives, the last three of which are to be
accomplished “to the extent practicable:” (1) impede recovery of the
Soviet Union both in the short term and the long term; (2) destroy
Soviet national political and military leadership and command and
control; (3) destroy Soviet nuclear forces, and (4) destroy Soviet non-­
nuclear forces.
Although targeting to impede recovery receives highest priority [less than
1 line not declassified] it is not clear that threatening to impede recovery by
destroying large amounts of Soviet population and industry is the most effec-
tive deterrent, particularly in situations less than general war. Nor is it clear
that our current targeting would, in effect, subsequently impede recov-
ery, in the long-­term (as distinct from reducing Soviet GNP sharply,
which it clearly would do). Furthermore, we have no confidence that
our present targeting plans would prolong Soviet recovery more than
our own if massive attacks were launched by both sides. While plan-
ning contemplates the possibility of withholding attacks on recovery
targets if substantial US urban/industrial assets survive an initial attack
(and this is appropriate in our view), the endurance and survivability
of our forces and their supporting command, control, communications
and intelligence are not sufficient to support such a strategy.
In all large scale attacks on Soviet recovery targets (and indeed on
military forces) there would be substantial Soviet population losses (at
least tens of millions). But, if Soviet civil defense plans are successfully
implemented, these levels could be significantly reduced. If the Sovi-
ets or the US could effectively shelter and thereby protect a significant
portion of their labor force, this should have an important bearing on

recovery, for the surviving skilled labor force will be an important ele-
ment in achieving recovery.
[13 lines not declassified] Under present plans the attack on polit-
ical leadership would involve substantial collateral damage to the
general population assuming that the population is unsheltered and
unevacuated.
[1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified]
The U.S. targets the Soviet nuclear threat to achieve two objectives: the
first is limiting damage both to the U.S. and our allies; the second is to prevent
the emergence of a post-­war nuclear balance that would facilitate coercion by
the Soviet Union. It also is apparent that the criterion for destruction of
Soviet nuclear capabilities, i.e., “to the extent practicable with available
allocated nuclear forces” is extremely general—­hardly a precise guide-
line for target planners. Moreover, there are substantial uncertainties
associated with this objective (as with others). [5 lines not declassified]
One fact is clear, however. The proliferation and hardening of Soviet
missile systems have substantially eroded our counterforce capabilities
over the past decade. We have found no plausible changes to targeting
policy or force structure in the course of this study that give any prom-
ise of restoring the relative capabilities we enjoyed in the early 1960’s.
This does not mean, of course, that we can or should do nothing to
improve the present or prospective balance. Cruise missiles will put
Soviet land based missile systems and other hard targets at risk again,
but this will not give us a prompt capability; MX and TRIDENT II will,
however.
With respect to the damage limiting objective, today there are two dis-
tinct views as indeed there have been for some time. One view holds
that since we cannot expect to limit to low levels the damage resulting
from a large scale nuclear attack, that it is no longer a meaningful
objective and should be abandoned or at least given a low priority in
employment policy. A central concern is that continuance of damage
limiting as a major objective of U.S. policy could lead to increased
arms competition without any resulting improvements in U.S. secu-
rity and could divert forces from more promising objectives. The
opposing view is that we must continue to do the best that we can to
protect the U.S. from the consequences of a nuclear war if deterrence
fails. Given the uncertainties of nuclear war, and the wide range of
possible scenarios, there might well be situations where the capabil-
ity to reduce damage by perhaps tens of millions of American lives
would be far from futile. This view also stresses the potential effects
on deterrence and crisis management in situations short of nuclear
war if U.S. society were to become far more vulnerable than the Soviet
Union.

With respect to the objective of preventing an unfavorable postwar
nuclear force balance, the debate turns on what constitutes a balance and on
the best means for achieving it. Recent changes in the strategic balance
pose us with a dilemma—­how much of our force should we use in an
effort to erode the Soviet nuclear threat and how much do we hold
in reserve to secure a post-­war balance? A substantial portion of the
forces available for SIOP [less than 1 line not declassified] is used for the
counter-­nuclear mission even though relatively low damage expectan-
cies are anticipated. Allocating additional weapons with current capa-
bilities would not be productive. Indeed a considerable number of the
weapons now used are SLBMs which have low DEs [less than 1 line not
declassified] against hard Soviet missile silos. Furthermore, as ICBMs,
which have a better hard target capability, become more vulnerable to
attack, withholding them for use in other missions may only result in
their loss. Some argue that we should allocate only weapons with the
best hard target capability to the nuclear threat and not allocate SLBM
weapons with low DEs to hard targets. Others argue that the present
scheme of cross-­targeting is a hedge against failure of one leg of the
TRIAD, and that given uncertainties as to what actually would kill a
silo (or interfere with reload and force reconstitution), we should con-
tinue to allocate [less than 1 line not declassified] to each silo, (even if some
have low DEs against the silo itself) at least as long as we have sufficient
weapons.
Because a substantial portion of the Soviet nuclear threat is hard, a major
issue is how much and what kind of capability is required for this targeting
objective. This is an area in which programmed force changes—­and
acquisition decisions—­and employment policy are closely linked. For
example, the large ALCM force that will be available by the mid-80’s
will have the accuracy for a considerable counter-­silo potential if ALCM
penetrability is high. The US also faces basic decisions about the char-
acteristics of future ICBM and SLBM forces in which the requirement
for Quick Reaction Hard Target Capability (QRHTC) is a driving factor.
From the standpoint of targeting it seems clear that we ought to
retain a substantial hard target capability. Such a capability is required
not only to be able to attack Soviet ICBM silos effectively, but also for
the growing number of hardened C3 facilities and some other hardened
installations. Improved HTC would enable us to reallocate weapons
with low DEs against hard targets to other missions. Whether a sub-
stantial portion of our HTC needs to have a rapid response capability
cannot be determined on targeting considerations alone. The targeting
requirements for rapid responses are very scenario dependent. For
example, if Soviet forces are alert when the US launches a counter-
force attack the probability of their preemption or launch under attack
is high, and the difference in response time between a few hours and

a few minutes may be inconsequential. On the other hand, given the
many uncertainties noted above, a quick hard target capability might
well improve the outcome of a nuclear exchange from our standpoint
or complicate Soviet calculations of the outcome and thereby help to
strengthen deterrence.
We have also found that with current plans, attacks against Soviet non-­
nuclear military forces are likely to be ineffective in many scenarios. The
current set of targets attacked in the other military targets category,
includes only fixed installations. Our knowledge of Soviet war plans
suggests that with plausible amounts of warning, both forces and stocks
would be dispersed rapidly away from these fixed installations. Thus,
much of this attack, unless the US achieves total surprise, is likely to go
on empty or partially empty kasernes and other bases, and the Soviets
would be left with substantial military power to coerce other nations, to
seize valuable industrial resources in Western Europe and the Middle
East and to assist them in post-­war bargaining with the United States.
On the other hand, there are clearly a number of fixed military instal-
lations that will remain valuable in supporting the Soviet war effort,
regardless of warning. For example, secondary airfields, transportation
centers, etc. Current planning does not give these targets high priority
in relation to facilities that are likely to be evacuated with warning. We
believe future planning should take this into account. For the longer
run, priority should be given to capabilities to attack dispersed mili-
tary forces. Trans-­attack reconnaissance and responsive targeting are
needed to do this.
With regard to the strategic reserve force we find that the force and its
supporting command, control, communications and intelligence (C3I) may
need to survive for weeks or even months after an initial nuclear attack. These
elements lack sufficient endurance today to meet such an objective. If
the SRF is to meet its stated objectives, the principal criteria for compo-
sition and sizing should be its endurance and its relative capabilities in
relationship to Soviet plans for secure reserve forces. Indeed, many of
our requirements for more flexible and discrete targeting at lower lev-
els also imply larger reserve forces. The force mix in the Secure Reserve
Force also needs reexamination to assure that it has maximum endur-
ance. C3I supporting the reserved forces also needs greater endurance.
Furthermore, the current provisional target sets for the Secure Reserve
Force (primarily low-­priority economic targets) do not contribute sig-
nificantly to the objective of post-­war coercion.
In relation to NATO our deterrence and escalation control objectives
require an effective NATO employment policy. Allied concerns about our
ability to deter aggression against NATO have grown as Soviet capa-
bilities have grown. More effective plans for targeting the Warsaw Pact
threat to NATO with strategic weapons and closer coordination of US

and NATO planning could help to alleviate these concerns. However, to
make such plans effective requires more responsive and survivable C3
and intelligence, and even closer integration of employment planning
and crisis management between the U.S. and its allies at both the mili-
tary and civilian levels. For the longer run, the availability to SACEUR
of an option to target a full range of threats to Allied Command Europe
(ACE) without invoking the SIOP would also strengthen deterrence
and the confidence of our allies.
There is no plan at present for launch under attack of only the ICBM
force. If the ICBMs were launched against their current SIOP targets
there would be substantial collateral damage to Soviet population and
this would likely invite retaliation against US urban/industrial assets.
In any event, the set of targets for our ICBM force is not in itself planned
to meet any specific objective. We ought to have an option to launch
only our land-­based ballistic missiles against a target set which would
serve some defined objective while minimizing collateral damage,
thereby reducing the prospect of retaliation against a broad US urban/
industrial target set. The launch under attack doctrine should not be
seen as a solution to the problem of ICBM vulnerability. In many situa-
tions, LUA, would, in effect, rule out a real choice by the President. The
President should not be forced to make a “use or lose” choice if there
are other options available. Reliance on LUA increases the risk of an
accidental war and thus would increase instability in a Soviet-US cri-
sis. However, we do believe that targeting plans should include a LUA
option for ICBM forces only that is less escalatory than current plans.
The current SIOP targeting policy for China is out of date. It was based
on a period when China was seen as a threat comparable to the Soviet
Union. We believe that our China targeting policy should be reformu-
lated to bring it more into line with current political and military real-
ities. China poses no strategic nuclear threat to the US today and will
only have a minimal capability within the next several years at least.
At present, US-Chinese relations are improving, and the PRC is clearly
more menacing to our adversaries than to our allies. Political relations
could change, but we would likely have a good deal of warning. In any
case, while it is not clear what will deter China, it seems unlikely that a
primarily agrarian society with a small industrial base will be deterred
from regional aggression against its neighbors by the threat of massive
attacks on industry. We not only do not understand the recovery pro-
cess as it relates to China, but we are quite arbitrary in assigning value
to those targets we select. The current requirement to program at least
one weapon on an industrial facility in the top 125 urban areas in the
PRC, drives, to a large extent, the high weapons requirements for China
targeting even though over 50 percent of China’s industry is located in
25 cities.

C. Major Policy Alternatives
We have developed several alternative employment policies that
we believe, on the basis of our study, to be representative of the choices
facing national leaders with respect to future employment policy. The
identification and assessment of major policy alternatives is a some-
what artificial exercise. If precedent is any guide, policy is more likely
to be determined incrementally by a series of discrete decisions about
what to procure and when, how to phrase a given policy statement,
what to include in an arms control proposal, etc. Thus, there are, in
actuality, a number of choices that could be made. Nevertheless, it can
be useful to identify and assess broad policy as a framework for mak-
ing more specific decisions. And such decisions should, if possible, be
made with some set of overall objectives in mind.
There are several factors that are likely to dominate the choice of
alternatives. Most important are assessments of Soviet views and objec-
tives with respect to the role of nuclear weapons; and in light of these
Soviet views and objectives, judgments as to what actions we should
seek to deter with nuclear forces, and how best to do so. In this connec-
tion we also need to consider: (a) what flexibility in our nuclear posture
(i.e., how broad a range of options) is desired and what is feasible and
how much we should spend on it; (b) how much endurance do our
forces require and how much is possible; (c) how much damage limit-
ing capability is considered necessary and how much is possible; and
(d) the costs of achieving these capabilities. One alternative, of course,
is to continue current policy as described above. We offer below four
broad alternatives to current policy.
All of the following options will meet the current objectives of
nuclear policy to some degree. However, they differ in their relative
emphasis on flexibility, endurance and counterforce; and as a result
could have substantially different cost implications. However, each
contains at a minimum, an assured destruction capability.
a. One alternative is to strengthen current policy, particularly by improv-
ing the flexibility of plans and the endurance of forces and their related com-
mand, control and intelligence. Under such a policy, an assured capability
to destroy industrial targets of value to the Soviet Union would remain
the backbone of deterrence, and would receive emphasis in declaratory
policy. However, the goal of “impeding recovery” would be redefined
to focus [2 lines not declassified] The forces and related C3I to accomplish
this mission should be given additional endurance over time so that
attacks on industrial targets can be withheld so long as substantial U.S.
industrial value remains undamaged. Added emphasis would be given
both in planning and declaratory policy to a more effective means of
targeting Soviet conventional forces and command and control as a
supplement to assured destruction of industry. Counterforce objectives

would deemphasize damage limiting and focus targeting on prevent-
ing the emergence of marked asymmetries in US and Soviet capabilities
that could be exploited by the Soviet Union to coerce us or our allies
following a nuclear attack; or which, if perceived as an advantage by
the Soviets, could affect crisis bargaining short of nuclear war. This pol-
icy would also retain non-SIOP options, but strengthen the procedures
to integrate non-SIOP nuclear options with other military and politi-
cal measures. This policy would involve alteration of current target-
ing plans and declaratory policy in order to take into account what we
know of Soviet views of nuclear strategy, in particular their sensitivi-
ties to losing control over their society, and the deterrent effect that we
might achieve by planning to attempt to deny the Soviet Union a war
winning capability. Some believe such changes to current policy repre-
sent the minimum necessary to strengthen deterrence in light of what
we know of Soviet objectives and their growing military power. Others
believe that changes to current policy are not necessary to strengthen
deterrence and would be provocative and costly.
b. A further departure from current policy would be to focus both employ-
ment and declaratory policy more heavily on denying the Soviets any confi-
dence of achieving a favorable war outcome. A high priority effort would
have to be put on developing greater endurance and on improved
targeting of [less than 1 line not declassified] New capabilities would
be required to support such a targeting policy, particularly more sur-
vivable C3I. Countervalue targeting would (as in a.) focus on Soviet
[1 line not declassified] However, these attacks would be designed to
be withheld for [less than 1 line not declassified] as part of an expanded
reserve force concept. Targeting population or targeting industry to
impede long-­term recovery would not be a specific SIOP objective,
but an assured destruction capability (to be withheld so long as the
Soviets spared U.S. cities and industries) should be maintained. Target-
ing of both Soviet nuclear and conventional forces would be designed
principally to assure that they could not expect to achieve a favorable
nuclear or military balance following a counterforce exchange. How-
ever, damage limiting to the extent feasible would also be retained as an
objective of counterforce targeting. Non-SIOP option planning would
be improved as in a. above. Declaratory policy would stress that the
overall objective of our nuclear policy is to deny to the Soviet Union
a favorable outcome from a nuclear war. Some argue that this policy
could help to convince the Soviets that the US was seeking serious war-­
winning objectives (as some maintain the Soviets do) and thus, would
be a far more effective strategy in extending deterrence and preventing
coercion, and that it would give the U.S. more reasonable war objec-
tives if deterrence fails. Others argue that by reducing emphasis on
the prospect of massive retaliation and by implying that the U.S. was

more prepared to fight a nuclear war than we have been in the past,
we would weaken deterrence and decrease stability. This policy could
prove more costly than Option a., but whether it would be substantially
more costly is not certain.
c. Still a further departure from current policy would add a higher con-
fidence capability to limit damage. This would require not only greater
capability against Soviet nuclear forces than in Option b. above, but
also substantial improvements in defenses. Under this policy, we might
return to the targeting objectives of the earlier SIOPs. For example, we
might attempt to achieve something like [1 line not declassified] threat-
ening the U.S. and our allies under all circumstances of war initiation.
Obviously, the forces required for such a strategy would be substan-
tial and would have to be acquired over a period of years. Thus, this
could not be a short-­term objective of U.S. policy. Some would argue
that a damage limiting capability at least comparable to that of the
Soviet Union is the sine qua non of essential equivalence and a necessary
requirement to make a strategy of escalation control credible. Without
the ability to deter escalation at the higher levels the U.S. could not
count on controlling escalation at lower levels. Others argue that the
achievement of such a damage limiting capability would be highly
destabilizing and would hardly be feasible given the Soviet capability
to respond to whatever measures the United States might take. It seems
clear that this option would be more costly than current policy or either
of the two prior options.
d. Finally, the U.S. might choose to move to the other direction from
current policy and rely more heavily on assured destruction defined in either
terms of industry, population or cities. This would avoid the need, perhaps
quite costly, to improve current deficiencies in flexibility and endur-
ance. Moving in this direction would imply a judgment that the post-­
war nuclear force balance is not a meaningful measure of “victory”
and that the prospect of massive destruction is a credible deterrent for
large scale attacks including those aimed at nuclear forces. A continued
capability to execute a wide range of limited attacks would be possible
with the forces provided by this approach, but, in general, the approach
assumes that any nuclear exchange is likely to escalate very rapidly to
all-­out countervalue exchanges. Indeed, it depends on that prospect for
its deterrent effect. The argument against this approach is that it would
narrow the scope of deterrence. In particular, such a policy would have
an adverse impact on extended deterrence and thus on alliance rela-
tionships, and might suggest opportunities in the future for the Sovi-
ets to utilize their nuclear forces for coercion of the US and our allies.
It would provide the US with a very narrow range of options should
deterrence fail.

D. Major Recommendations
1. Greater flexibility should be built into the SIOP through the develop-
ment of more discrete building blocks which could break down the present
target base into smaller increments and thereby give the President a
broader range of options if he should ever have to consider SIOP type
attacks. Each building block should have distinct targeting criteria
which take into account not only the timing and damage requirements
for attacking the objective target but also collateral damage to other
target sets. Given the planning complexities, the development of build-
ing blocks requires an evolutionary approach with close interaction
between policy levels and planners. Care must be taken to insure that a
balance is struck between the quantity of useful options desired and the
need to maintain a relatively simple and responsive execution process.
(See Issue #1)4
2. The requirement for endurance should be considered a high priority
requirement in the future planning of US forces, command, control communi-
cations and intelligence assets. Endurance—­the ability of strategic nuclear
forces not only to survive the initial attacks but to remain an effective
military force for a prolonged period afterwards—­is a key element in
any strategy that pays attention to post-­exchange balances and/or the
possibility of a drawn-­out series of exchanges. Specific recommenda-
tions for endurance measures involve acquisition policy, and thus are
beyond the scope of this study. However, we can say that to carry out
current employment policy effectively, much less the more demanding
alternatives outlined above, the endurance of command, control, com-
munications and intelligence assets need to be improved substantially
so as to make it possible to support the concept of a Secure Reserve
Force and withhold attacks (e.g., on Soviet non-­military industry) so
long as substantial US urban/industrial assets remain undamaged. It
is important that modifications in employment policy and plans that
rely on greater endurance proceed in phase with the improvements in
our force posture and supporting C3I that are necessary for endurance.
(See Issue #2)5
3. We should target Soviet nuclear forces and develop our own forces so
as to maintain roughly equal counterforce capabilities. In particular, counter-­
nuclear targeting should be designed primarily so as to assure that the Sovi-
ets are unable to shift the balance of nuclear power drastically by attacking
our forces, and so that it is clearly perceived they cannot. This objective
cannot be achieved solely by attacking Soviet forces and thus is not
solely a function of targeting policy. It also requires that we be able
to hold in reserve forces comparable to reserved Soviet forces, so as
4 Issue #1 in the report is titled “Flexibility.”
5 Issue #2 in the report is titled “Endurance.”

to prevent post-­war coercion and thus protect these forces and their
related C3I. While we lack the ability to limit damage to the US society
meaningfully in a large scale Soviet attack, we are reluctant wholly to
eliminate this as an objective of US policy, particularly because to do
so explicitly would appear to confirm a major asymmetry between
US and Soviet policy and would ignore important uncertainties about
the effectiveness of a damage limiting strategy. However, if we focus
on avoiding asymmetries in nuclear power in developing targeting
plans, we are also likely to do as well as we can expect to do in limiting
damage.
We recommend the following specific guidance for targeting the Soviet
nuclear threat to the US and our allies. First, we should, for reasons
of alliance solidarity, continue to give equal priority to targeting
threats to the US and to our NATO allies. Second, when forces are
fully generated and there are sufficient weapons available to meet
other targeting objectives adequately, including the maintenance of
a Secure Reserve Force, we should continue to plan to place at least
one weapon on each target that constitutes a nuclear threat to the US
or our allies, using the most effective weapon for each type of target
and taking into account the desirability of promptly using forces with
less endurance. For the longer run we should have sufficient weapons
with hard target capabilities to meet this objective without utilizing
weapons with low PK. Third, in the retaliatory case, priority should
be given (among nuclear threat targets) to [6 lines not declassified] It
will be important in the longer run to improve the US capability to
acquire information rapidly on the status of Soviet strategic forces
following an attack. (See Issue #3)6
4. New priorities should be established for targeting Soviet non-­nuclear
forces taking into account the probability that Soviet forces will be dis-
persed upon warning. Any victory-­denial approach should pay close
attention to the ability of nuclear weapons to affect the post-­exchange
balance of military forces, broadly defined, not just nuclear forces. This
will require a special effort to identify the [1 line not declassified] does not
decrease greatly with warning, to include [1 line not declassified] The tar-
get value system would be adjusted to assure the destruction of these
targets and to give [1 line not declassified] For the longer run, we should
initiate a high priority special study on the feasibility of targeting [1 line
not declassified] requirements for accomplishing this. Particular atten-
tion should be given to how strategic forces might be utilized more
effectively in support of NATO. A target package should be developed
6 Issue #3 in the report is titled “Targeting the Nuclear Threat.”
7 Issue #4 in the report is titled “Targeting Soviet Theater Forces.”

5. Targeting of the Soviet [5 lines not declassified] A high priority effort
should be undertaken to identify and target [3 lines not declassified] We
should continue to have an option to withhold attacks [4 lines not declas-
sified] should receive further study on a high priority basis along with
6. Targeting of Soviet [2 lines not declassified] This attack should be
designed so as to minimize collateral damage to population [less than 1
line not declassified] consistent with achievement of the attack objective.
It should be possible to carry out this attack [1 line not declassified]
Second, [4 lines not declassified] by the US during and after the war.
We recommend that the US continue current policy with respect to the
targeting of population, in which population, as such, is not an objective tar-
get. At the same time, we recommend continuing to plan. [2 lines not
declassified] Unless Soviet civil defense becomes far more effective than
presently estimated, there will be substantial population at risk in any
such large scale attack, as is the case now. We find no reason to believe
that targeting population per se, would be a more effective deterrent
or a more useful objective in general war than targeting the specific
economic objectives suggested above along with the control apparatus
and military power which the Soviets appear to consider of high value.
Furthermore, targeting population would require substantial addi-
tional allocation of weapons if we assume that the Soviet civil defense is
implemented and effective, and therefore would divert weapons from
other objectives. However, estimates of population fatalities will con-
tinue to be an important criterion for any decision maker contemplat-
ing the use of nuclear weapons. Our data and methodology for making
such estimates should continue to be improved. We should also keep
under continuous examination the feasibility and the implications for
other targeting objectives of adjusting our targeting so as to be able to
attack some defined portion of Soviet population even if it is evacuated
and/or sheltered. Whether we should have a specific target set for use
in such a case remains an unresolved issue.
7. We should continue to plan a Secure Reserve Force (SRF) as part of the
strategic reserved forces. Our long run objectives should be to assure that
reserve forces in a prolonged nuclear war at any stage of that conflict
would be superior or at least comparable in capability to the forces of
the Soviet Union. A principal objective of the Strategic Reserve Force
would be to deny the Soviet Union the possibility of changing the cor-
relation of forces. We need to consider the role of theater-­based forces
in a secure reserve concept and the possibilities for augmenting forces
during a crisis or after a limited attack. We need to develop capabilities
that would permit flexible retargeting of the reserve force for we see
8 Issue #5 in the report is titled “Targeting Soviet Control Apparatus.”

no way in which this force can be realistically pretargeted prior to a
nuclear engagement.
For the short run, we recommend that the composition of the Secure
Reserve Force be based heavily on the probability of survival and
endurance in its components. Given this concept, the principal objec-
tive of the Secure Reserve Force should be to achieve enduring sur-
vivability. What it is targeted against is less important than its ability
to survive and endure. However, during the period when we lack an
enduring intelligence and retargeting capability, the Secure Reserve
Force should continue to have tentative targets likely to have high con-
tinuing value even after an initial attack, e.g., bomber bases. This would
permit, under worst circumstances, follow-­up strikes to be executed “in
the blind” against targets likely to have continuing value to the Soviet
Union. (See Issue #7)9
8. In addition to developing more discrete SIOP options, the process for
the planning and use of non-SIOP options should be improved. The only way
to develop realistic political/military contingency plans is through a
continuing interactive process between the planner and the policy/
decision maker. It is in the nature of limited nuclear options that there
will be a high political input into any consideration of the use of such
options. And, if they are to achieve their stated objectives, the other
associated military and political measures must be closely integrated
with the use of limited and regional nuclear options. We, therefore,
recommend that the current planning process be modified to include
regular interaction between the JCS and OSD, including selective rep-
resentatives from the State Department, the NSC staff and the Intelli-
gence Community. Planning should include periodic exercises to test
both the feasibility of implementing the plan and to expose policy/
decision makers to the plans and give them an opportunity to eval-
uate them under as realistic conditions as possible. While DoD can-
not organize the crisis management machinery of the US Government
unilaterally, the SecDef should recommend to the President’s National
Security Advisor the development of a national crisis management
mechanism based on the planning procedures described above. (See
Issue #8)10
9. Closer coordination of nuclear planning between US and NATO
planning staffs should be undertaken. In particular, USCINCEUR and
CINCLANT should be encouraged to develop additional US employ-
ment options in support of SEPs. Closer integration of nuclear plan-
ning between US and NATO planning staffs is needed, particularly in
the development of target plans which integrate theater and strategic
9 Issue #7 in the report is titled “The Strategic Reserve Force.”
10 Issue #8 in the report is titled “Planning in Support of Escalation Control.”

nuclear forces in striking the Warsaw Pact nuclear and conventional
military threat to NATO. Should further analysis suggest that more
effective ways can be found to target the Soviet/Warsaw Pact threat to
NATO, these should be the basis for discussion with our allies under
the aegis of the NPG. The opportunity should be seized to involve the
allies in a more meaningful way in the development of alliance nuclear
employment policy. Improvements in the vulnerable and outdated
NATO C3 system clearly are needed, along with better means for rapid
processing of intelligence. We need to take steps that assure that both
NATO Selective Employment Plans (SEPs) and SACEUR’s Nuclear
Operations Plan (NOP) are consistent with our own; that if current
LNOs or SAOs are employed there will be corresponding NATO plans
that are complementary rather than conflicting. (See Issue #9)11
10. The JCS should develop a launch under attack package for ICBMs
only that will be directed at a range of military and defense production
targets but will result in minimum collateral damage consistent with
achievement of its targeting objective. This launch under attack pack-
age should be ready for use beginning in the 1981–82 period and should
include a broad set of nuclear and non-­nuclear targets and command
and control. It should also include such targets as the Soviet ASAT
launch facilities and Soviet ASW bases which might support attacks
which could reduce US endurance. The attack should be designed so as
to minimize collateral damage to population consistent with achieve-
ment of the attack objective. We do not see LUA as a solution to the
problem of ICBM vulnerability, but believe such an option should, nev-
ertheless, be available to the NCA. (See Issue #10)12
11. Employment policy for China should not require the extensive plan-
ning process which is devoted to the Soviet Union. We should, of course,
recognize that China does pose a threat to some US interests in the Far
East and that the PRC might attempt to coerce US friends or gain assets
of interest to us, particularly in the aftermath of a US-Soviet exchange.
We would assume that if China’s posture substantially changed, we
would be sensitive to this and could accommodate modifications in
our targeting policy accordingly. Implicit in this recommendation is the
belief that U.S. and Allied conventional and U.S. theater nuclear forces
(using non-SIOP options) are sufficient to deter the likely range of Chi-
nese threats in peacetime and that the SRF, available for protection and
coercion worldwide could be used to deter China in a trans- and post-­
attack environment. (See Issue #11)13
11 Issue #9 in the report is titled “The Policy Interface with NATO.”
12 Issue #10 in the report is titled “Launch Under Attack.”
13 Issue #11 in the report is titled “Employment Policy for China.”

12. The data base for targeting needs to be revised and expanded. It is evi-
dent from past experience that the design and maintenance of a respon-
sive target intelligence data base is very complex and any change in
policy portends significant modifications in data. For these reasons,
we recommend JCS evaluation of the impact that the targeting policies
contained in this report will have on the ability to produce and main-
tain an adequate, comprehensive, responsive target intelligence data
base. The JCS should provide a plan, with appropriate milestones and
resource requirements, to provide a flexible data base.
13. The development of nuclear employment policy is an ongoing pro-
cess that requires continuing interaction between policy makers and planners.
Presently, there is no mechanism or arrangement that could assure that
our employment policy is developed on this basis. The Secretary of
Defense should create within OSD a mechanism to conduct the neces-
sary follow-­on work and assure its continuity.
[Omitted here is the body of the report.]
106.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, December 2, 1978
SUBJECT
The U.S. Defense Program
As background for our meeting Monday, this memorandum provides
(1) a brief overview of the kind of defense the United States will have at various
funding levels, and (2) a discussion of four selected issues of unusual impor-
tance: the future of strategic forces; the naval shipbuilding program; improv-
ing the capabilities of our Army divisions in Europe to meet the ­Warsaw Pact
threat; and improving further the efficiency in the Department of Defense.2
undated chart prepared in the Department of Defense entitled “Department of Defense—
YOA & Outlay Summaries” and undated papers prepared in the Department of Defense
on several specific issues.
2 Carter attended a meeting on defense appropriations on Monday, December 4,
from 9 to 11 a.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House. (Carter Library, Presidential
Materials, President’s Daily Diary.) No minutes of the meeting were found.

I. Levels of Defense Effort
In preparing the FY 1980 Defense submission, alternative pro-
grams have been addressed at several levels, three of which I shall dis-
cuss here.
My three top priorities in developing the Defense program and
budget have been: maintaining parity with the Soviet Union in strategic
forces; increasing NATO’s capability to withstand a “blitzkreig” war
with the Pact in Central Europe; and modernizing and increasing the
readiness of forces. The basic level program, which would meet your 3%
real growth goal, would produce total obligational authority of $138 billion for
after. It would provide for a first step toward making those goals. That
program, however, would still result in further deterioration of our relative
military position vis-­a-­vis the Soviet Union if they continue to increase their
capability at the rate of the past decade.
Since the pace of Soviet military growth shows no sign of abating,
I believe we must be prepared to continue to fund growth at no less
than that rate. Though the strategic balance is still generally satisfactory
today, it is much less so than five years ago. The Soviets are rapidly
overtaking us and we must react strongly to assure essential equiva-
lence. Furthermore, the conventional force balance in Europe today is
not satisfactory. To maintain our naval forces near their present size
into the 1990s requires action now, and their readiness and survivabil-
ity need improvement now. In short, we should consider our 1980 defense
budget as part of a longer-­term program that will require increased effort, and
consequently increased expenditures for defense, on our part as long as the
Soviet Union continues on its current path.
The military balance resulting from our following the basic level pro-
gram, even with its 3% growth, would almost certainly be less favorable in
1984 than it is now. In the strategic balance, our lead in almost all measures
will have disappeared by the mid-1980s. There could well be a widespread per-
ception that the Soviet Union had achieved at least some sort of marginal supe-
riority in the strategic area by that time. We are uncertain about what, if
any, practical effect such an advantage might have on the outcome of a
strategic war. But such evidence as there is strongly suggests that many
of the Soviet leaders believe otherwise with regard to both military util-
ity and political intimidation. And the area of strategic thermonuclear
war is one in which, because there is no experience, perceptions and
doctrine are critical.
As for the conventional balance in Europe with a basic level pro-
gram, the Pact would have an advantage in terms of equivalent forces
of almost 2:1 over most of the early days of a NATO/Warsaw Pact mobi-
lization. Additional armor and mechanization, together with preposi-
tioning of U.S. equipment, and improvements on the part of our allies,

may improve the situation slightly by the mid-1980s. We have also been
making headway in improving rationalization, standardization and
interoperability, with consequent gains in efficiency. We would remain
ahead of the Soviets by most naval measures, especially in ASW.
I believe that maintaining at least the current military balance with the
Soviet Union is an essential component (although not the only component) of
our national security. The fiscal resources for the basic level program do not
assure us of maintaining that balance, though with hard work and luck if our
allies increase expenditures and efficiency of alliance efforts, we may be able to
do so in conventional forces. There are many items that I have not been
able to include in the basic program that are needed for confidence in
maintaining the present balance. I have included most of these items
in an enhanced level program, starting at a level of $144.5 billion for
growing at 3.7% per year for the following four years. I believe a pro-
gram at that level would give reasonable confidence assuming corre-
sponding allied efforts of maintaining the existing balance (given the
limits on the precision with which we can measure that balance). I also,
for the sake of completeness, include a description of a program at a level below
the basic. That decremented level, which as noted hereafter would force elim-
ination of critically needed programs, would in my opinion result in military
imbalance to a degree which would constitute a severe risk.
A. Basic Level
The basic level program would provide the following:
In Strategic and Theater Nuclear Forces:
man IIs, and 54 of the large single-RIV Tital IIs. Initial deployment of M–X
in 1986. Interim mobile system (MM III) in 1983.
new Trident SSBNs funded between 1980 and 1984.
3000 ALCMs by 1989. First deployment of wide-­body cruise missile carrier in
1987.
• Initial deployment in Europe of the ground-­launched cruise mis-
sile in 1982, and of the long-­range Pershing in 1984.
In General Purpose Forces:
• 19 active and 9 reserve Army and Marine divisions.
• Conversion of 3 light Active Army divisions to armored/mechanized
mechanized and 13 light.

• 9 new armored or mechanized battalions in the active Army by 1984.
• Prepositioned equipment in Europe for 3 more division equivalents (for
Soviet production) by 1983, and 50 IFV/CFVs per month (a quarter the
Soviet rate) by 1980.
and 1 reserve in the Marine Corps, for a total of 56 wings.
Soviets produce tactical fighter and attack aircraft at the rate of 1200
per year).
• Funding during the 5-­year period of 67 new ships, implying an eventual
steady-­state fleet size of about 350 ships, though the backlog of ships already
• Buy 20 KC–10s, modify civilian wide-­bodied aircraft, stretch and add
refueling to the C–141 fleet, give the C–5 wing longer life, and increase
C–5 and C–141 utilization rates.
B. Enhanced Level
Here are some examples of increases in capability above the basic
level program that the enhanced level offers.
In Strategic and Theater Nuclear Forces:
• Eight instead of five Trident submarines begun in 1980–1984.
• Full operational capability for the B–52/cruise missile force
• Two more Pave Paws radars to complete coverage against Soviet
SLBM attack [less than 1 line not declassified]
• Development of an MRBM similar to the SS–20 that the Soviets
are deploying.
Among other things, these changes would increase U.S. strategic
warheads by about 20 percent by 1990. This could be important, since
the Soviets may be able to reduce our current 2:1 advantage in war-
static advantage—­by 1990.
In Land Forces:
and of the Army’s new armored personnel carrier from 50 to 105 per
month. (Both these latter figures are still only about half the current
corresponding Soviet rates.)

• The equivalent of four more 155mm battalions in Europe. (Since
1973, Pact artillery and rocket launchers in Eastern Europe have grown
by 25 to 30 percent. This calls not only for more artillery on our part, but
also for more armored personnel carriers to protect our troops.)
• Fifty percent more of our new Patriot SAMs in Europe by 1984 to
counter growing Soviet offensive airpower (e.g., an increase of up to 60
percent since 1974 in payload that could be delivered 2000 n.mi. inside
NATO territory.)
In Tactical Air Forces:
• An 80 percent increase in the number of sorties we could fly in
increase for NATO as a whole in the first week, and about 35 percent in
the first month. This could be very important—­the Pact now outnum-
bers NATO in air-­to-­air capable fighters by about 25 percent, a figure
likely to grow to about 50 percent by the mid-1980s. These sorties take
on extra importance in light of the reliance we place on airpower to
react rapidly to intense and localized Soviet armored thrusts.
• Accelerate production of the A–10 attack aircraft by 13%, and
buy 50% more electronic countermeasures aircraft, 25% more air-­to-­air
missiles, and 40% more precision-­guided weapons.
• R&D for a new all-­weather standoff attack system for the A–6,
for a new short-­range air-­to-­air missile, and for a new turbofan engine
for tactical aircraft.
In Naval Forces:
• Twenty-­seven more new ships for a five-­year total of 94—­a rate
sufficient to sustain a 500-­ship fleet in the long run—­instead of the basic
level of 67 new ships, which is enough to sustain only a 350-­ship fleet.
• New 8” guns for DD–963 destroyers, for amphibious fire sup-
port. (At present, the United States has nothing larger than a 5” gun in
the fleet.)
• Twenty percent more new P–3C patrol aircraft, our most cost-­
effective antisubmarine system.
• Clipper Bow—­an active radar satellite for ocean surveillance—­
ready in 1983 instead of 1988.
In Mobility Forces:
• Modernization of our tactical aircraft force. (The aging C–130s
cannot carry the tanks and self-­propelled artillery on which our ground
forces increasingly depend.)
• Twenty percent to 30 percent faster deployment from Central
Europe to the flanks of NATO or the Persian Gulf, and far more rapid

movement within countries having poorly developed ground transpor-
tation system (e.g., twice as fast in Iran).
• Provisions for higher utilization rates of our existing strategic
airlift aircraft (C–5s and C–141s), and prepositioning of another divi-
sion’s equipment in Europe by FY 1981 instead of FY 1982.
In Logistic Support and Readiness:
• The enhanced level would permit a number of actions to improve
logistic support and readiness. Their cumulative effect could be vital in
terms of real combat capability.
In my view, the program at the enhanced level would give us
reasonable confidence of maintaining the relative position we hold
today.
C. Decremented Level
In developing these alternative programs, we also investigated a
decremented level, roughly 4% below the basic level program (e.g., roughly
$133 billion) and growing thereafter at a slower rate (e.g., about 2%) than
the basic program. Some of the important changes in dropping to that
level would be:
In Strategic and Theater Nuclear Forces:
• Slip the initial deployment of M–X by a year, and that of Trident II, the
ground-­launched cruise missile, and the antisatellite program by two years
each. Eliminate the interim mobile MM III.
• Cancel the wide-­bodied cruise missile carrier, airborne launch control
ing II, and all R&D for a new manned bomber.
• Cut the B–52G alert rate from [less than 1 line not declassified]
(roughly [number not declassified] fewer aircraft with [number not declas-
sified] weapons would escape a surprise Soviet attack.)
In General Purpose Forces:
• Close the M–60 tank production line before the XM–1 starts
(leaving us no surge capability), and cut the eventual XM–1 rate by a
third—­to 60/month, or about a quarter the Soviet T–72 rate. Delay start
of IFV/CFV production until FY 81.
deployed support spaces, 3000 more support spaces for non-NATO, contin-
gencies, a third of our 155mm guns for early use in NATO, and all 16
of the new electronic warfare and intelligence battalions planned as
part of the LTDP (the Soviets now use 15–20 times as many jammers
as has the U.S. Army, and roughly 50 times as many intercept location
systems).

• Cancel the Roland surface-­to-­air missile program (an international
project), the advanced scout helicopter program, and ¼-­ton, 2½-­ton,
helicopters.
• In the Marine Corps, eliminate the XM–1 tank program, modern-
ization of LVT–7 amphibious tractors, helicopter reliability improve-
ments, and procurement of laser designators for precision guidance.
• In tactical air, eliminate one USAF wing, all three Navy carrier-­
based ELINT squadrons, all five USAF Special Operations squadrons,
and half of the Marine Reserve A–4 squadrons.
• Cancel procurement of the GBU–15 electro-­optical glide bomb,
new Navy carrier-­based cargo aircraft needed to replace obsolete C–1s,
• End all V/STOL programs, including both the Navy’s exploratory pro-
gram and the Marines’ AV–8B.
• End development of the EF–111A, the Air Force’s only radar jam-
ming aircraft.
• End several advanced radar and reconnaissance programs.
• In naval forces, retire 42 ships early (thus prolonging instead
of reversing the decrease in size of the fleet), and cut ready Marine
amphibious lift to less than a Division/Wing team (i.e., 85%). (A dozen
ours by 1986 at this level.)
• Fund 3 fewer ships, do not modernize the missiles on our nuclear
Tomahawk.
• End 5 major naval R&D programs (Captor, advanced lightweight
torpedo, replacement for the P–3, the ASMD missile, and SIRCS).
• In mobility forces, end the KC–10 program, modernize only 60% (vs.
all) of the C–141 fleet, and cut our overall strategic airlift capability (e.g.,
by 17% for a deployment to Iran).
• In R&D, cut real growth rates from 10% to 7% in basic research, and
growth in later years.
• In C3, eliminate CINCLANT, CINCPAC, and USCINCEUR air-
borne command posts, cancel the digital data link for AWACS, and
E–4Bs rather than 6, cancel the over-­the-­horizon radar project, slip the
IOC of Navstar GPS by 2 years, and the IOC of the Clipper Bow radar
ocean surveillance satellite by 3 years.
Though the roughly 4% reduction in funding from the basic to the
decremented level may seem modest in comparison with the obvious

havoc it would wreak in the defense program, I believe that what I
have described above is realistic, and that though alternative kinds of
reductions in R&D, procurement, or forces could be taken, they would
be equally destructive of our military capability.
The decremented level illustrates the sensitivity of the defense program to
its funding. However, I do not consider it a serious alternative. In my judg-
ment, it would clearly mark a degree of military retrenchment by the United
States which, in the face of the Soviet buildup, would prevent us from counter-
ing the forces of the Soviet Union and its allies.
II. Impact on Allied Perceptions—­and Performance
In launching the Carter initiatives to strengthen NATO’s defense posture,
we had two aims. One was to improve efficiency through rationalization. The
other, and chief immediate aim, was to generate greater Allied contributions—­
without which U.S. defense budget increases alone would not do the job. But
this required the United States, as the price of leadership, to commit itself as well
to the same 3% real annual growth. So far this has worked. Nine countries—­
which together account for over 90% of Allied defense outlays—­have pledged
By the same token, if the United States again falls below 3% only eight
months after the Washington Summit blessed the Long Term Defense Plan,
it will inevitably invite—­and in my judgment ensure—Allied cuts as well.
We have no way of estimating the magnitude of such cuts: they will depend
on each country’s political and economic situation. A conservative esti-
mate is that the reduction would on the average amount to a cumu-
lative decrease over five years in defense effort among our allies of
Nor can we specify the particular Allied programs that would be
cut, except that most would necessarily be from readiness and defense
investment, i.e., modernization rather than force size or people costs.
Thus the cuts would inevitably delay, if not undermine, implementation of
key LTDP measures, adversely affecting the long-­term goal of rational-
ization, standardization and interoperability.
The impact on Allied perceptions of U.S. determination, while even less
quantifiable, is likely to be still more serious. Having just taken the initiative
in NATO and demonstrated vigorous leadership, we would again be seen as
all too quickly changing course. Though our anti-­inflationary rationale would
be understandable to—­and quickly adopted by—European elites, our move
would also be interpreted, given our necessary attention to strategic forces
and SALT II, as a lower level of concern and commitment about the NATO/
WP balance than over the superpower strategic balance—­whatever the cost to
Europe. A corresponding perception would arise among the Japanese.
It is doubtful that we could rebuild this momentum; even if we could,
years would be required.

The likely reactions by Moscow, Peking, and Tokyo, as well as those of
states friendly to us in the Middle East and Persian Gulf, would be a percep-
tion that the trend in the balance between ourselves and the Soviet Union,
already of concern, now could be depended upon certainly to worsen. They
would further question U.S. resolve—­with obvious consequences for our for-
eign policy and our position in the world.
III. Domestic Considerations
The international political implications of not following through
on the 3% pledge thus are obvious and dramatic. The domestic politi-
cal implications may not be as immediately visible, but they probably
would be significant.
One reason for the success you have had in meeting criticism of the B–1
decision, the nuclear carrier veto, the Korean ground forces withdrawal, and
other similar actions has been the ability to counter charges that these actions
were evidence that this Administration is soft on defense. You and I have been
able to counter these charges by stating consistently that you were committed
to real growth in the defense budget after years of neglect. Critics were left to
argue about the choices among individual programs, but not about the needed
overall level of defense spending.
If you now decide not to approve 3% real growth for FY 1980, these
critics—­both in and out of Congress—­would have their positions considerably
strengthened. Particularly distressed would be those members of Congress (of
both parties) who have supported our most controversial program decisions on
the basis of the commitment to overall real growth.
One of the more immediate results of this would be to make it more dif-
ficult to obtain Congressional and public support for a SALT agreement with
the Soviet Union. It would give ammunition to the opponents on an issue
whose very complexity forces many of the public to form an opinion on it
simply according to their general confidence in the judgment and commit-
ment reflected in our national security policy. I believe it would also seriously
complicate the ability of the JCS—­whose attitudes also are influenced by their
perception of the quality of the commitment of defense, as evidence in tangi-
ble ways—­to support such agreements. Though (with one or two possible
exceptions) they would in my judgment not declare against a SALT
agreement, the quality of the support they would give under Congres-
sional questioning would be seriously eroded. And even one defection
among the Chiefs would greatly aid opponents.
Every recent poll I have seen shows broad, and growing, public support
for a real increase in the United States defense effort. There has been wide edi-
torial support, lately even from commentators not usually friendly to defense.
The election results earlier this month, although somewhat mixed, also
I believe in general reflect this support. Your public statements have
consistently recognized defense needs, avoiding adverse effects from

that trend. Without an increase in defense spending at the 3% level, which has
been committed to and urged on our allies, the issue of credibility will certainly
be raised, as it has been already even by such a socially-­sensitive paper as the
Washington Post.3
At the same time, there is no question that reducing the level of
real growth in defense spending will help—­although marginally—­in
meeting a reduced-­deficit target (although as I have pointed out often,
Defense has shrunk dramatically as a portion of the federal budget
from what it was fifteen years ago, and cannot be held responsible for
the current deficit problem). To some degree it might make it much eas-
ier for other departments and constituencies to accept program reduc-
tions, though I doubt that they would ever acquiesce; at the same time,
probably many overlapping and conflicting claims would be made
against any supposed “defense dividend.” As you know, a decision
among ten such claimants would produce nine infuriated losers and
one ingrate.
In summary, excluding national security needs, which I believe
to be the central issue, and considering only the political questions, I
believe that while cutting the defense figure would ease slightly a tough
budget problem, it would be of only marginal help, and not enough to
offset the many negative consequences of such an action. In the overall
political picture, I suspect that while a visible shift away from defense would
give short-­term satisfaction to some constituencies (although they would prob-
ably continue to complain that the shift was only a token), over the next few
years the majority of the American public will weigh steadfastness on defense
as a virtue and an extremely important one.
IV. Conclusion
I have planned the defense program in light of the needs of the
future—­a future which our actions now are shaping—­as well as in light
of present contingencies. I have built it with my eye on the defense
programs we need, not a particular budget figure—­but not of course
without paying attention to realistic constraints on resources. The diffi-
cult task has not been to build a program to reach the range of a 3% annual real
growth budget level. Rather, it has been to cut enough important programs in
order to reduce it down to that level, yet retain an overall program which I can
assure you will provide adequately for the security of the United States.
The programs presented here are as they have been balanced by
me, with the advice of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secretaries of the
Army, Navy and Air Force, and our staffs. Not every item is sacrosanct,
and each is open to your questioning. But the programs have been
assembled at each level into what I consider a coherent whole. There
may be particular items included at any level which for reasons of pol-
icy you may decide not to include. In the event that you do, I would
have to rebalance the overall program at that level to take account of
such omission.
Harold Brown
107.	 Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, December 4, 1978
SUBJECT
Net Assessment of C3
This memorandum responds to tasking I received from Bob Gates
(Tab A).2 See the last page for a point summary. (U)
Concern about the comparative status of US and Soviet C3 has
been growing for some years. In 1976 Congressional committees sought
a comprehensive net assessment on the subject from DOD, with annual
updates. The Director of Net Assessment in OSD produced the first
report in July 1977, a substantial study with voluminous appendices.3
A follow-­on report, updated with new intelligence and revised on the
basis of additional analysis, was produced in January 1978. A draft
report to be issued early next year has been completed.4 This activity
has proceeded in a context in which many other organizations have
been developing or contributing to net assessments of US and Soviet
C3. The level of effort, priority, and organizational prominence of the
subject has been rising in the Intelligence Community for some years. It
has been the subject of several, some continuing, projects by the Defense
Ermarth, Box 2, Command, Control, and Communications. Secret. Sent for information.
Copies were sent to Utgoff, Rosenberg, Odom, Thomson, and Molander.
2 Not found.
4 See Document 95.

Science Board. Senior levels in the DOD are unusually concerned about
and focused on C3I issues currently. (U)
To date, net assessments of US and Soviet C3 have achieved:
—Improved and more orderly data bases on the subject;
—Descriptive characterizations of the two sides’ programs;
—Better understanding of the contrasting priority and place in
overall military strategy assigned by the US and the USSR to C3 and
C3I.
—Better understanding of the contrasting technology, manage-
ment, and organizational approaches applied by the two sides. (C)
The analyses of OSD/NA have by and large agreed with the now
widely held judgment that the Soviets have sought and achieved a
more robust and enduring C3 infrastructure at all levels of military
operations than we. But these analyses have usefully stood apart from
the crowd in emphasizing possible sources of vulnerability in both
the physical structure of Soviet C3 and the Soviet organizational style,
i.e., high degrees of centralization.5 By the same token, OSD/NA has
stressed potential US strengths that could be exploited, e.g., superior
communications technology, a rich civilian communications system,
decentralized styles of management and command. The work of this
office has also stressed the importance of basic doctrine, training, and
organizational patterns. It has stimulated the study of counter-C3 tac-
tics by several operational commands. (S).
Thus, a good deal has been and continues to be done on C3I net
assessments. OSD/NA is charged by Congress to produce an annual
report. Further tasking by the NSC is not indicated. Further, the amor-
phous and large community that struggles with C3I as a problem of
policy, resources, and programs is well charged up. It is most in need
of a conceptual framework and policy guidance to shape its work. To some
extent this can come from the Secretary of Defense. But, because much
of the problem runs to the heart of defense policy and strategy, basic
guidance must come from the President and the NSC. (C)
Strategy and C3I (U)
Clearly, military C3I capabilities we seek are a function of our strat-
egy. Even minimalist “fixes” to assure that SIOP execution messages
get out represent strategic judgment as to the kind of war we expect to
face and how we expect to fight. Beyond this, enhanced capabilities to
manage crises, battles, and large conflicts at all relevant levels of vio-
lence; improving the survivability, endurance, and reconstitutability
of such capabilities; relating such military capabilities to civil defense
5 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this and the previous
sentence.

and continuity-­of-­government programs—­all this requires explicit
and farreaching, although not necessarily radical, strategic choices to
The Administration has from the beginning been in a process of
your sustained interest in C3I issues have been part of this process.6
The next major step is SCC/NSC consideration of the DOD reports on
nuclear targeting and the Secure Reserve Force, a step we are currently
organizing. (S)
After several months of wrestling with the challenge of strategic
planning from the NSC staff, I’ve come to the view that a) the politics,
bureaucratics, and substance of strategic policy reform insist on an evo-
lutionary approach, and b) the process currently in train appears very
promising. Our challenge is to keep it on track and moving. (C)
Much hinges on implementation of policy guidance emanating
from the NSC. The DOD studies reveal the extent to which current
strategic failings result from inadequate follow-­through on NSDM 242
and PD–18.7 To assure that follow-­through we shall have to enhance
the visibility of the policy, program, and budget process within DOD,
exerting corrective influence where necessary. (S)
To help shape this evolutionary process, I propose to organize a
small, relatively informal Strategic Planning Group, on the model of
the East-West Planning Group. Some 6–8 people from NSC, State, and
Defense would constitute the group.8 (U)
C3I Organization (U)
Making things come out right is more than a matter of the right
guidance. Especially for large and continuing activities, they must be
structured so that the actors have the right incentives. Bill Odom has
pointed out in numerous memos how the Service-JCS-Command-OSD
structure short changes C3, perhaps not in terms of money—­much is
spent, but in terms of purposefulness and cohesion (the Russian term
tselestremlyonst’ is very apt; it comes up often in their discussions of the
C3). The “I” of C3I, meanwhile is not structured outside of DOD to look
earnestly at military support roles where they compete for budget with
peacetime requirements. (C)
The marriage of C3 and Intelligence in C3I is useful in bringing
related things together. But it is still a shotgun marriage, dominated
National Space Policy, October 10, 1978, are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XXV, Global Issues; United Nations Issues.
8 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the margin to the left of this paragraph and
wrote: “good.”

in practice by the communications technicians (as in WMCCS) and the
sensor technicians (as in DSP and the Special Air Force). They should be
but servitors of the “command” function (with “control” as its nether
side). Command—­how the forces are directed to fight—­is a matter of
strategy, doctrine, training, battle assessment and planning. It is a very
cerebral and people-­oriented function. (C)
Hans Mark relates the story that, at Trafalgar, Nelson sent up
two signals: “Engage the enemy,” and “England expects every man
to do his duty.” A very simple C3 scheme sufficed because he had
strategized, planned, trained, and fought with his captains to the
point where they knew how to conduct operations with little guid-
ance, even in the face of the unexpected. We are vulnerable to getting
lost in a technological swamp at the other extreme: sensors that can
see everything, communications from the President to the foxhole.
Strategy itself determines what we wish to see and what we wish to
communicate to forces. If it fails to do that, the technicians will have
no limiting criteria against which to build their systems or we will be
left with pre-­canned fire plans for World War III (SIOP and its lessor
bretheran). (S)
As we move down the evolutionary path of doctrinal reform, we
shall discover that defining requirements for communications, ADP,
and sensor technology is as vital as defining force requirements. This
task will have to be taken out of the hands of the C3I technicians and
placed in the hands of these strategic planners now almost entirely pre-
occupied with force structure. This may require organizational change
in OSD, the JCS, and the Service staffs. More than any other single phe-
nomenon, grappling with the strategic C3I problem will force us in the
direction of a general staff.9 (C)
Furthermore, if we properly subordinate sensor, data processing,
and communications technology to strategy, we shall find that the
“people problem” of command (the commander and his battle staff)
has reappeared on center stage, where it has always been in Soviet doc-
trine. Are the people, from the NCA down, who must make the com-
mand decisions that implement strategy and who must advise on those
decisions trained, exercised, survivable? [8 lines not declassified] (S)
In considering the DOD targeting and SRF studies, we shall first
of all, be concerned with redefining basic strategy for various levels of
conflict, and, second, with the likely implications for force posture and
programs. We must also, however, raise organizational questions. What
does a more open-­ended approach to operational planning require in
the way of command structure and staff support in war? How should
9 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the margin to the left of the last three sentences
of this paragraph.

those organs be made survivable? Trained and exercised? Does evolu-
tion in strategy require change in the peacetime structure of defense
and national security decisionmaking? (S)
As a first step into this thicket I plan to examine the Steadman and
Ignatius reports10 to determine how their findings jibe with the impli-
cations of the two studies on strategy, if at all. From this, issues ripe for
near term decision could emerge; issues for further study certainly will.
It will be appropriate to task DOD with specific study of organizational
implications of doctrinal change and increased reliance on C3I after the
targeting and SRF studies have been reviewed by the NSC. (C)
C3I and Military Assessment (U)
So far, there has been no comprehensive attempt to examine
in any operational detail how US and Soviet strategic C3I resources
would perform in a major nuclear conflict involving attacks on those
resources. Most strategic exchange analyses over the years have delib-
erately ignored the implications of C3 targeting.11 JCS’s RISOP–SIOP
exchanges have typically included such targeting, but have not in the
judgment of many critics, translated that phenomenon into a realistic
degradation of the respective sides’ force performance. In short, the go-­
code still gets out and the forces still perform in this highly preplanned,
massive exchange. (S)
Important new insights into the vulnerability of Soviet strategic
C3I will result from further study of discrete targeting packages, as rec-
ommended by Harold Brown in his transmittal of the targeting study.12
C3 targets will represent one or more of the packages. Ultimately opera-
tional net assessment of C3I in war cannot be separated from the totality
of military and even political interactions in a given scenario. Our stra-
tegic interaction analysis is deficient across the board because it lacks
attention to operational detail, uncertainty, scenario variations, the role
of non-­strategic and civil capabilities, and C3I. (S)
A number of people in OSD, the Services, and the JCS are con-
cerned about this and are seeking ways to improve official analysis of
strategic exchanges and balances. They are moved in part by the need
to counter highly simplified quantitative analyses which, depending on
the prejudices of the analyst, either minimize our deficiencies (as did a
Report of a Study Requested by the President and Conducted in the Department of Defense
(Washington, Government Printing Office, July 1978) and Paul R. Ignatius, Department
Headquarters Study: A Report to the Secretary of Defense. (Washington, Government Printing
Office, June 1978)
11 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this portion of the para-
graph and wrote: “we need this.”
12 See Document 105.

recent ACDA report) or exaggerate them (as is probably the case in the
work of T.K. Jones). (C)
One approach to stimulating progress on this front might be to task
Harold Brown with an assessment of strategic analysis in DOD and
elsewhere in the light of the above critique. He is getting strong mes-
sages of this sort from within DOD, however, especially from Andy
Marshall. I am personally known to be a critic of most official analy-
sis.13 A formal initiative from the NSC would risk provoking an uncon-
structive, defensive reaction from much of the analytical community in
Defense.14 For now I believe the best course is to maintain low-­keyed15
pressure on the system. We should examine the next version of the
DOD Consolidated Guidance and the results of some new efforts in
the JCS for signs of progress. If they are dissatisfying, we can take more
formal steps early next year. (U)
In Summary (U)
—Periodic net assessments of US and Soviet C3 are in progress.
—Policy guidance on strategic C3 should result from review of the
targeting and SRF studies.
—As we move toward shifts in doctrine and upgrading of the role
of C3I, organizing the C3I business better in peace and war will become
an issue we may be obliged to task DOD to study.
—The quality of military exchange analysis needs improvement;
but a low-­keyed campaign of steady pressure is the best approach for
now.
—I am going to organize a strategy planning group, on the model
of the East-West Planning Group, to gain better visibility into the rele-
vant DOD processes that must be shaped and to provide a standing but
informal mechanism for airing problems.16 (C)
13 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this portion of the para-
graph and wrote: “OK.”
14 Brzezinski underlined the word “unconstructive” and wrote “I wonder?” above it.
15 Brzezinski underlined the phrase “low-­keyed.”
16 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this point and wrote a
checkmark.

108.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 18, 1978
SUBJECT
Sorting out the ICBM Vulnerability Issue (U)
Background
Another year has gone by and we still aren’t ready to resolve the
issue of how to deal with the decreasing survivability of the Minute-
man force. Harold has pursued MAP—­but it hasn’t worked out. Har-
old therefore proposes to carry out a 90-­day final examination of MAP
and the air-­mobile concept, make a decision on both the missile and
its basing mode at the end of that period, and go into full-­scale devel-
opment by means of funding in both the FY 80 budget and the FY 79
supplemental. OMB, on the other hand, proposes to keep both the
missile and its basing mode in advanced development until the end of
FY 79, make both choices then, and proceed with full-­scale develop-
ment in FY 80. (S)
Both proposals have serious problems—DOD’s because it will
seem like a rather hasty decision, given the newness of the air-­mobile
concept; OMB’s because adequate support for SALT II ratification will
require a more solid commitment to solving the ICBM vulnerability
problem—­before the vote gets taken. (S)
As I see it, you have four basic questions to resolve—
—Should you authorize full-­scale development of a new missile
before a basing mode has been chosen?2
—When should the basing question be resolved?3
—If the basing modes are to be examined further, which modes
deserve attention?
—What should be done to bridge the early ’80s gap when MM will
be highly vulnerable but our long-­term solution not yet deployed? (C)
Proceeding with a Missile
The virtue of making a separate missile decision now is that it
would seem to demonstrate the kind of commitment to modernizing
the ICBM force that is probably needed if we want to get the SALT II
2 Carter wrote “no” in the right margin next to this point.
3 Carter wrote “spring” in the right margin next to this point.

treaty ratified. There are some very powerful arguments why we
shouldn’t make a separate missile decision, however. (C)
First, while the Congress generally supports proceeding with the
M–X, it has already made clear that it does not want to put the M–X into
the MM silos, and some on the Hill will worry that starting a missile
now is a step in that direction. Others will be concerned that by start-
ing a missile now, you may gain enough support to get SALT ratified,
but then would not carry through to full deployment in a new basing
mode. Neither group would want to say no to the missile, however, and
both could be strongly motivated to table SALT II until the basing issue
gets resolved. (U)
Second, Harold told the Congress last year that it was unreason-
able to proceed with a missile before settling the basing mode issue.
This argument would surely be thrown back at us and it has some
validity.4 If we proceed with MAP, we will want a considerably larger
missile than if we proceed with the air-­mobile system. While the funds
wasted by carrying both designs along for a few months would proba-
bly be modest by DOD standards (a few million)—­the fact that money
is being wasted will be obvious and very easy to criticize in the current
budget environment. (U)
Third, proceeding with a missile before you have chosen a basing
scheme does not give the appearance of an orderly decision process no
matter what the realities—­and the value of an orderly process, particu-
larly with as important a decision as this one, is very high. (U)
I therefore believe that you should make these decisions together,
if the basing decision can be made fairly soon—­but that is the next
question. (U)
Timing for the Basing Decision
There are too many uncertainties about the alternatives to MAP
to make an immediate decision. The Air Force did some very detailed
studies of the air-­mobile concept several years ago. However, the cost
estimates and SALT impact analysis that were done are out-­of-­date,
and DOD has been re-­examining the concept for only a few months. (U)
At the other extreme, delaying the decision until the end of 1979 as
proposed by OMB seems virtually impossible without jeopardizing the
SALT II ratification vote, or significantly delaying it. (C)
Making both decisions in late March or early April, as Harold
now proposes, seems like the only reasonable course of action. The Air
Force believes that with a 60–90 day final examination it can reduce
the uncertainties about the air-­mobile system and MAP systems to the
4 Carter drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this and the previous
sentence.

point where making a decision will be appropriate. While so short a
period for a final examination may not appear to be the ultimate in
orderly decision-­making processes, we can make clear that the air-­
mobile idea has been studied in detail before—­and that this relatively
short period is enough for an update of these studies plus a careful
comparison. (C)
Options to Be Given Further Study
At this point, two systems you are quite familiar with would be
in the finals—MAP, and the air-­mobile system. Further, some of the
arguments given above suggest that introduction of wholly new ideas
at this point simply isn’t a good idea. If there is another horse to be
entered in the race, the only reasonable candidate in my view would be
an off-­road mobile system, an idea that also received detailed study by
the Air Force some years ago. (C)
This concept would involve deploying 150–200 large transporter/
erector/launcher vehicles at perhaps fifteen military bases scattered
across the Western part of the US. The vehicles would carry an M–X
size missile and be capable of off-­road operations without resupply
for 60 days. Except for occasional exercises, they would remain at their
bases. In a crisis they would disperse throughout the rural areas within
100–150 miles, hiding during the day and changing their positions
each night. The total available dispersal area of perhaps 400,000 sq.
miles is far too large for the Soviets to barrage. Attached is a table
summarizing the main features of the MAP, air-­mobile and off-­road
mobile systems. (S)
In my opinion, the pros and cons of asking DOD to include off-­
road mobile systems in their final evaluation are as follows: First, you
will be under enormous pressure to go forward with one of the options
considered in this evaluation. There are many uncertainties about the
air-­mobile system, particularly its cost. If the system gets disqualified
on cost, we will be into MAP for better or worse. Second, if the off-­road
mobile system’s drawbacks are ultimately acceptable, it might save us
a lot of money. (C)
The verification problems posed by this system are uncertain, but
probably easier to deal with than those posed by MAP. You should note
that the verification [3 lines not declassified] (S)
The most significant of the drawbacks to the system are its need for
occasional exercises in the public domain, and the fact that its surviv-
ability depends upon getting [7 lines not declassified] (S)
Bridging the Early ’80s Gap
There are three possible alternatives for increasing our strate-
gic forces’ capabilities during the early ’80s when Minuteman will be

vulnerable but we won’t yet have deployed its ultimate replacement.
The first two would involve initially installing Minuteman on the air-­
mobile aircraft if we decided to go forward with that option, or install-
ing it on a modification of its current transporter to create a road-­mobile
The Air Force is very cool on both of these possibilities. They feel
that the components of the air-­mobile system other than the missile
can be deployed only 1–2 years in advance of a new missile, and thus
deploying Minuteman in the system isn’t worth the cost and effort. (C)
In the case of the road-­mobile option, they believe that the system
could be available somewhat sooner, but that its military value would
be small. Given these facts and the fact that almost none of its compo-
nents would be usable in any of the long-­term solutions that employ
a new missile—­including off-­road mobile—­they think it is a waste of
money. These arguments seem pretty reasonable. (S)
[5 lines not declassified] This would provide more military capability
than the proposed road-­mobile MAP system, and the decision to do it
need not be made right now. (S)
On balance, then, I believe that we should plan on raising alert
rates, if necessary, to tide us through the early ’80s.5 In the context of an
ongoing program to modernize the ICBM force, the perceived strategic
balance should be acceptable. (C)
RECOMMENDATIONS
That you ask Harold to carry out an evaluation of alternative plans
for modernizing our strategic forces to include the MAP and Air-Mo-
bile concepts. His resulting analysis and recommendations should be
forwarded for your approval by April 2nd.6 (C)
That you signal the strongest reasonable level of support for mod-
ernizing the ICBM force by providing sufficient funds in both the FY 79
supplemental and the FY 80 budget for beginning full-­scale develop-
ment of both a new missile and a new basing scheme.7 (C)
That Harold Brown and the Chiefs take the lead in explaining this
situation to the Congress.
5 Carter placed a checkmark in the right margin next to this sentence.
6 Carter placed a checkmark in the right margin next to this paragraph.
7 Carter wrote “?” in the right margin next to this sentence.

Attachment

Table Prepared in the National Security Council8
Washington, undated
MAP
AIR MOBILE
OFF-ROAD MOBILE
Concept
Rotate missiles among simpli-
fied silos when maintenance
needed; approximately 20 silos
per missile.
Carry 2 missiles each in C5A air-
craft or 1 each in stretched AMST
aircraft; strip alert at military
bases—­disperse to civil airfields
in crisis.
Large transporters carrying 1
missile each; normally in gar-
rison but scatter, across wide
area on alert.
Interaction with
Missile Decision
No advantage to small missiles;
larger missiles imply lower total
costs to achieve objective of 800
surviving EMT.
Optimal missile smaller than M–X
(TRIDENT II size missile could
throw 8 RVs with air drop and
northern launch areas).
Same as MAP.
Warning
Requirement
Completely independent of
warning.
Needs tactical warning of incom-
ing missile attack; significantly
harder to attack if dispersed.
[5 lines not declassified]
IOC
’86
Early ’86 with M–X partly com-
mon missile; late ’86 with com-
mon missile.
8 Secret.

MAP
AIR MOBILE
OFF-ROAD MOBILE
Systems Cost
(’78 $)
$28–30B; very uncertain—­some
offset if AMST aircraft serves other
purposes.
$18–20B (very rough guess).
Public Impact
25–35 sq. miles permanently
removed from public use.
100–120 sq. miles may need to be
permanently removed for new
bases; little recurring public impact
except for perceptions of dispersal
exercises.
Negligible public land per-
manently removed; might
compare with Pershing; wide
dispersals will generate claims
damage, and frighten public
unless routine.
Verification
Open production/assembly
process could support adequate
verification by Soviets; reverse
verification tougher—­will Sovi-
ets accept constraints we say we
need?
Seems adequately verifiable using
currently accepted techniques.
Open production/assembly
process could support ade-
quate verification by Soviets;
can be made easy to count in
normal garrison posture.
Survivability/
Endurance
Nominally designed for perhaps
50% survival; endurance can be
made a matter of months.
Nominally assessed to have 70%
survivability; significant endur-
ance problems if support bases
and tactical warning systems
are attacked; spread/hide across
very large number of airfields
helps considerably; ability to
counter Soviet surveillance may be
important.
Vulnerable to surprise attack
but most dispersed systems
should survive; 80–90% nor-
mally ready for dispersal;
endurance can be made a mat-
ter of months.

MAP
AIR MOBILE
OFF-ROAD MOBILE
Responsive
Threat/Competi-
tive Leverage
Cost to expand system may not
be significantly different from
costs to expand threat; Soviets
could drive our costs consider-
ably higher within SALT.
Probably more expensive for Sovi-
ets to expand threat than for us to
expand system; SALT limits may
ultimately bind Soviets.
May be significantly cheaper
to expand system than for
Soviets to expand threat;
plenty of land available if pub-
lic will accept idea.
Political Issues
Environmental objections could
delay system; would we trust the
Soviets with this system? possible
breakout problems; confidence in
successful deception?
Environmental objections could
delay system if new bases needed;
excessive dependence on bombers
could be argued.
Environmental objections—­
but may be less focused
than for MAP, etc.; wisdom of
depending on strategic warning
will be continously questioned.

109.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 18, 1978
SUBJECT
Civil Defense Program Funding (U)
In view of the confusion created by press reports of a $2 billion civil
defense program, I want to clarify several points to help you deal with
the Defense budget decisions and to answer future press queries.2 (U)
The policy decision. Two Policy Review Committee meetings were
held on PRM–32, Civil Defense.3 One dealt only with a policy state-
ment, not program choices. Upon reviewing and commenting on its
results, you signed PD–41, which specified the rationale for our civil
defense effort but not its funding level.4 (C)
The program options. At the other Policy Review Committee
meeting, several program options were offered, ranging from “mini-
mal” to “major.” The table at Tab A displays this range.5 The Policy
Review Committee expressed preferences for something between pro-
includes “civil defense” from option 3 but leaves out the “continuity
of government” element pending further analysis. No annual program
rate was discussed for moving toward the 5-­year goal of a one-­to-­two
week “surge” objective. (C)
In line with this five-­year program scheme, Harold Brown has
million. At no time have you committed yourself to a particular fund-
ing level. You will, of course, make a decision on annual funding in the
regular budget cycle. (C)
For a look at the program elements and a suggested annual rate
of moving to the five-­year goal, see Tab B.6 The five-­year total would
be $1.26 billion. If we add nothing to our present “minimal” funding
tialed the top of the memorandum.
2 See, for example, Richard Burt, “Carter Uncommitted on Money For Plan to
4 See Document 91.
5 Attached but not printed is an undated table listing alternative U.S. civil defense
programs.
6 Attached but not printed is an undated table summarizing prime costs for FY

lion annually plus inflation.) By subtracting that amount from the $1.26
billion figure (Tab B), it is clear that the real increase is about $700 mil-
lion spread over five years. This is a far cry from the $2 billion annual
increase suggested by press reports. (C)
How much civil defense to buy in FY 1980? Since 1975 we have been
buying a skeletal staff capacity for about $96.5 million. A few pilot areas
have inchoate plans. Most cities have nothing. Defense proposed to
upgrade our effort in various program categories as indicated under
the FY 1980 column in Tab B, eventually achieving a nation-­wide one-­
to-­two-­week relocation capability. The program can be stretched out, or
it can be left at $96.5 million. (C)
I encourage you to add no less than $20 million for FY 1980 for two
reasons: (C)
—The step up to roughly $140 million is a small one, but it moves
us from doing virtually nothing to doing something in an area which is
part of the overall strategic balance. (C)
—If you feel you must cut back, some increase is politically import-
ant for giving substance to the civil defense policy as it is perceived,
both domestically and by the Soviets. (C)
What is CRP? You have raised questions about the substance of
crisis relocation planning. I am attaching (Tab C) a short description
of the general concept.7 In judging the efficacy of such planning, it is
important to remember that no plan will work smoothly. It can only
reduce the level of chaos attendant to spontaneous evacuation. In the
1962 Cuban crisis, about 10 million people evacuated spontaneously.
The future choice will be whether or not to facilitate it. The occasion
could arise far short of war—­from a nuclear power plant accident or a
nuclear terrorist threat. (C)
Given some of the hostile press reaction, I thought you also might
like to review the item at Tab D on public attitudes.8 The editorial
opinions of the New York Times and the Washington Post do not, appar-
ently, reflect the broader public attitude.9 (U)
7 Attached but not printed is a December 8 paper entitled “Developing Crisis Relo-
cation Plans and Capabilities.”
8 Attached but not printed is a December 6 paper entitled “Public Support for Mod-
erate-Level U.S. Civil Defense Programs.”

110.	 Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom)
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 30, 1978
SUBJECT
A Review of Continuity for Government Programs (U)
As you recall from the Policy Review Committee meeting on PRM–
32,2 Harold Brown put off making a program choice on “continuity of
government” until better analysis is available. You asked for a quick
analysis by the working group—­in two weeks—­to satisfy Harold. That
did not prove possible for three reasons. First, the Working Group relied
on FPA (for a quick answer there was no other choice) which had failed
during a full year to produce acceptable analysis. Second, many aspects
of the continuity of government program are close-­hold and politically
sensitive (particularly the NCA successor problem and plans for Con-
gress which only two members know about), not matters for treatment
in an ordinary interagency working group as we had for PRM–32.
Third, both the Director of FPA and OMB staffers cogently argued that
the continuity of government programs have been neglected for so long
that they need a fundamental review. (They received major reviews in
in 1970, was never ever brought to an NSC meeting.3) Clearly, a more
comprehensive effort is needed. (S)
Related developments also give urgency and focus to what needs
to be done in FPA programs:
[2 paragraphs (8 lines) not declassified]
—The mobilization inadequacies revealed by the NIFTY NUGGET
exercise this fall have stirred follow-­up activities which impact heavily
on FPA capabilities. (C)
—The FEMA reorganization is now law and to be completed by
NSC–41 [1]. Top Secret. Sent for action. Brzezinski wrote in the upper right corner of the
memorandum: “Why should OMB co-­sponsor it? ZB.”
3 National Security Study Memorandum 58, “Planning Assumptions for Civil

—The growing Soviet “hard target” capability [less than 1 line not
declassified] creates a Minute Man survivability problem. [2 lines not
declassified] (S)
These developments are creating a more receptive attitude in
Defense and OMB to the idea of a fundamental review of continuity of
government. (S)
It should also be obvious to you that this issue is closely related to
changing views on strategic doctrine. It is the crux of the C3I issue on
the civil side. We could neglect continuity of government and emer-
gency succession as long as we held a significant strategic lead. Today,
without that lead, we need an effective leadership protection capability
to enhance deterrence. (S)
The argument can be made that PD–41 provides sufficient policy
guidance (i.e. directing “greater continuity of government”) for FPA to
proceed on its own program review without further assistance from the
NSC. The flaws in this argument are two. First, FPA is so deteriorated
that it does not have adequate staff for making such a review. Second,
FPA does not have adequate clout to make all the Federal agencies—­for
whose “continuity” FPA is planning—­take a review seriously. FPA could
not even force all agencies to review the PEADs (Presidential Emergency
Action Documents), during the first year of this Administration. (TS)
What is needed, therefore, is a combination of staff reinforcement
with expressed support from the NSC and OMB. With these, FPA can
make progress. (C)
—Staff support. The “management” part of OMB and Defense can
be tapped to augment the FPA staff. If necessary, some tasks can be con-
tracted to outside consultants. (C)
—NSC/OMB support. The first thought, of course, is a PRM, but that
is undesirable for two reasons. First, the non-­sensitive FPA programs
have been through the PRM–32 process with no real result. Second,
sensitive programs like Presidential successor plans and maintenance
of the NCA in face of a Soviet de-­capitation attack on our C3I should not
be treated in the PRM working group circles. (TS)
In several meetings with OMB (Szanton and Jayne) FPA (Joe
Mitchell), and Hugh Carter, I discovered that the preferred approach is
an NSC/OMB jointly mandated study, guided by a small NSC/OMB
steering group. The study results, of course, could be reviewed by an
SCC if that is later determined appropriate. (S)
The proposed memo at Tab A would authorize the study by FPA
(FEMA as FPA passes to FEMA) under a White House steering group
signed jointly by you and McIntyre.4 I have worked with OMB on the
4 Not found attached.

memo’s structure and rationale. If you approve in principle, I shall pro-
ceed to get OMB support and return shortly with a final version of the
tasking memo at Tab A. (S)
RECOMMENDATION:5
Proceed with the joint memorandum _______
5 Brzezinski did not indicate a preference, and wrote: “I don’t see why OMB should
play a co-­equal role.”
111.	 National Intelligence Estimate1
Washington, January 16, 1979
Soviet Capabilities for Strategic Nuclear Conflict
Through the Late 1980s
[Omitted here is a cover sheet, scope note, and table of contents.]
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Key Recent Developments
1. In recent years, estimates in this series have called attention to
the broad scope, vigor, and persistence of Soviet strategic offensive and
defensive programs, the increased Soviet emphasis on technological
improvement, and the continued Soviet concentration on counterforce
and damage-­limiting capabilities.
—Last year we forecast that during at least the coming few years
the general picture would be one of continued Soviet advance on
a broad front, while the US effort remained more limited. We called
attention to the likelihood that prospective developments would con-
vey a perception of Soviet momentum and of trends unfavorable to the
United States and its allies.
restrictions not declassified]. The following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparation of the estimate: the Central Intelligence Agency, the intelligence organiza-
tions of the Departments of State, Energy, Defense, and the National Security Agency,
with the participation of the intelligence organizations of the Departments of the Army,
Navy, and Air Force.

—The evidence this year strengthens these judgments. It indi-
cates that some near-­term Soviet advances will be greater than we had
foreseen.
2. During the year, the USSR has continued its steady moderniza-
tion of both intercontinental and intermediate-­range offensive forces
and has made additional progress in research and development to cre-
ate more capable offensive and defensive systems. The most import-
ant recent developments, and their effects on our estimates about the
USSR’s prospects and policies, are as follows:
—The Soviets are flight-­testing modified ICBMs with MIRVs (mul-
tiple independently targetable reentry vehicles) that are considerably
more accurate than currently deployed versions. Extensive and suc-
cessful testing this year indicates that these modified systems proba-
bly will start to be deployed in 1979. We had expected such accuracy
improvements, but not until the advent of new ICBMs several years
later. We now estimate that the Soviet ICBM force will achieve the
potential capability to destroy some four-­fifths of the US Minuteman
silos in 1980–81, three to four years earlier than projected in last year’s
estimate.
—In their testing programs for both ICBMs and SLBMs, the Soviets
have continued to stress MIRVed systems, two of which carry more RVs
(reentry vehicles) than the initially deployed versions. In deployment
programs, the Soviets have evidently decided to install MIRVed mis-
siles in virtually all of their MIRV-­capable ICBM and SLBM launchers.
Thus, the number of missile RVs in the USSR’s intercontinental strik-
ing forces will probably increase considerably more rapidly in the next
few years than we had expected. At the same time, the United States
now anticipates some slippages in its own new programs. We now esti-
mate that for a few years in the early-­to-­mid-1980s, the USSR is likely
to match or slightly surpass the United States in total online intercon-
tinental offensive weapons—­that is, in online ICBM and SLBM reentry
vehicles and bomber weapons combined.
—In air defense research and development, the Soviets this year
demonstrated low-­altitude intercept capabilities in a new lookdown/
shootdown fighter under test conditions. They made further progress
in their R&D on an AWACS (airborne warning and control system) and
a new low-­altitude SAM system. These developments, along with the
great importance the Soviets assign to the damage-­limiting aspects of
their strategic capabilities, lead us to believe that in the 1980s the Sovi-
ets will place increasing emphasis on improving their defenses, espe-
cially against bombers and cruise missiles at low altitudes.
—The Soviets have now achieved initial operational deployments
of MIRVed mobile IRBMs as part of an extensive program to modernize
their strategic capabilities against European NATO, China, and other
areas on the Eurasian periphery. Soviet strategic forces for peripheral
attack are already superior in striking power to those of the compara-
ble Western and Chinese forces combined. The modernization of these
Soviet forces will increase the existing disparity.
—[less than one line not declassified] the Soviets have continued to
emphasize the launch of their strategic missiles upon receipt of tactical
warning from early warning radars and other detection systems that

an enemy strike was en route. Along with continuing improvements
in warning sensors, in force reaction times, and in the flexibility and
survivability of forces and command and control systems, [less than
one line not declassified] the USSR can now employ its strategic forces
for preemptive, retaliatory, or launch-­on-­tactical-­warning strikes, in
addition to the much less likely option of surprise attack. While we
do not fully understand the significance for Soviet strategy [less than
one line not declassified] could reflect: concern that the USSR might not
obtain advance warning of a US decision to strike; recognition that any
decision to preempt would risk initiating a nuclear exchange by mis-
take; growing confidence that Soviet forces could respond in time or
even suffer some losses and still be able to counterattack against a wide
range of US targets; and hope that Soviet power now deters the United
States sufficiently to lessen the chances that the United States would
escalate from theater to intercontinental war. At a minimum, launch-­
on-­warning capabilities and tactics increase the options available to
the Soviet leadership under circumstances of crisis and conflict which
could vary widely.
3. Other noteworthy developments of the past year show that
Soviet strategic programs have neither narrowed in scope nor slack-
ened in pace. These programs continue to reflect the Soviet conviction
that enhancement of the USSR’s strategic posture requires concentra-
tion on supporting capabilities, such as command and control, as well
as on forces and weapons:
—In strategic offensive forces, research and development activity
is in progress on improved weapons in all categories. Systems under
development include several new or modified ICBMs, a new IRBM, a
new large ballistic missile submarine and SLBM weapon system, what
is probably a long-­range ALCM (air-­launched cruise missile), and pos-
sibly a new intercontinental bomber or cruise missile carrier or both.
—In ASW programs, there were initial sea trials this year of a
new class of SSN (nuclear-­powered attack submarine) which can dive
deeper and may be somewhat quieter than its predecessors. There is
evidence that the Soviet SSN force will expand in the future. The Sovi-
ets have continued their efforts to develop more effective ASW sensors,
though they continue to lack broad ocean detection capabilities.
—In ABM defense, R&D in both systems and technology contin-
ues. The limited ABM capability at Moscow remains operational with-
out change.
—In command, control, and communications, the Soviets have
long stressed redundancy and extensive bunkering in an effort to
ensure continuity of command and the availability of information in
wartime. In addition, they are augmenting their fixed facilities with var-
ious kinds of mobile command posts for national and military author-
ities. The command and control system appears capable of supporting
essential decisions and transmitting initial launch instructions to Soviet
strategic forces even if directly attacked. It also appears to have good
capabilities for sustained battle management, but these capabilities
would be severely degraded if key national-­level command bunkers
and communications centers were destroyed.

—[3 lines not declassified] We estimate that present Soviet antisat-
ellite systems are capable of being employed against US satellites at
low and medium altitudes, although the latter capability has not yet
been demonstrated. In the 1980s the Soviets could have systems able
to destroy or degrade satellites at higher altitudes, including those in
geosynchronous orbits.
Implications of Trends in Soviet Intercontinental Offensive Forces
4. Judging by developments under way or foreseeable in the near
term, the early-­to-­mid-1980s will be a period in which Soviet intercon-
tinental offensive capabilities are further improved relative to those of
the West. Substantial increases in our estimates of Soviet countersilo
capabilities and MIRV deployments over the next few years, combined
with some slippages in US programs, lead us to believe that this period
will arrive sooner and last longer than previously anticipated. Begin-
ning around the mid-1980s, if Soviet programs proceed in accordance
with our best estimates and US programs go forward without further
slippages, US weapon systems becoming operational are likely to bring
a new rise in US intercontinental offensive power along with continu-
ing Soviet advances.
5. To assist in interpreting the implications of Soviet interconti-
nental offensive forces over the next 10 years, we compare them in the
accompanying charts with projected US forces. The primary purpose
of these comparisons is to display in graphic form some of the factors
which may affect: the viability and stability of the US deterrent; the
USSR’s evaluation of its comparative intercontinental offensive capa-
bilities and vulnerabilities; and perceptions of relative power in the
United States, the USSR, and elsewhere.
—The future Soviet forces are intelligence projections, whereas the
future US forces are based on Department of Defense projections. The
projections assume adherence by both sides, through 1988, to the pro-
visions of an agreement along the lines now being negotiated at the
strategic arms limitation talks (SALT). The projections of Soviet forces
represent our best estimates of Soviet deployments and technological
progress under a SALT II agreement.
—The forces compared consist of ICBM launchers and their mis-
siles, SLBM launchers and their missiles, and heavy bombers carrying
bombs, SRAMs (short-­range attack missiles), or ALCMs. The compari-
son of delivery vehicles includes all SALT-­accountable systems except
for about 200 B–52 aircraft that are in storage and not operational. Sys-
tems off line for overhaul or conversion are included in the number of
delivery vehicles but are excluded from the comparisons of numbers of
weapons and equivalent megatons.
—The comparisons also exclude a number of options each side
could exercise to alter the striking power or survivability of its inter-
continental forces. Options not illustrated on the US side, for exam-
ple, include the deployment of ICBMs in a mobile basing configuration

and the introduction of the M–X ICBM or a system with comparable
capabilities.2
6. Chart 1 shows how Soviet and US intercontinental offensive
forces compared in the past 10 years and are projected to compare in
the coming 10 years, using four indexes of quantity and quality to illus-
trate the trends.3
—The graphs show that, over the past decade, the Soviets have
moved from a position of inferiority in each of these indexes to a pres-
ent position in which they lead in delivery vehicles and online equiva-
lent megatons, but are still inferior in total numbers of online weapons
and average accuracy of MIRVed ICBMs.
—With respect to the future, the upper left-­hand graph shows that
SALT II would require a reduction in Soviet delivery vehicles and bring
about a more nearly equal situation in this index.
—The lower left-­hand graph shows that the substantial Soviet lead
in online equivalent megatons will increase as the USSR continues to
deploy weapons with relatively large yields.
—The lower right-­hand graph illustrates the effects of the antici-
pated Soviet deployment of MIRVed ICBMs with improved accuracies.
(The accuracies of individual Soviet ICBM systems are shown in figure
2 of part B.)4 The current US defense program does not include further
accuracy improvements for present types of ICBMs.
—The upper right-­hand graph, comparing total online weapons in
intercontinental forces, shows how Soviet MIRV deployments, which
began about five years later than those of the United States, are sub-
stantially increasing total Soviet weapons for intercontinental attack.
In this index, the United States remains about at its current level until
Trident and especially ALCM programs are under way. This Estimate
is the first in which we have forecast even temporary Soviet equality
in this index at any time during the ensuing 10 years under a SALT II
agreement.
—The upper right-­hand graph also shows that, in the middle and
late 1980s, both sides are likely to advance in total numbers of online
weapons in intercontinental forces. In the mid-1980s and after, the US
advance is likely to be somewhat faster than that of the USSR because
of the programed large-­scale US deployment of ALCMs.
7. Chart 2 combines numbers of online weapons and the yields,
accuracies, and reliabilities of weapons and their delivery vehicles
into simplified measures of the total theoretical destructive potential
2 In the body of the Estimate, a variety of alternatives and options are included
and the sensitivity of comparison to these and other variables is examined. Among other
things, the Estimate examines the effects of adding Backfire and FB–111 aircraft, repre-
sentative non-SALT projections for each side, more pessimistic assumptions about Soviet
technological progress, the effects of new deployments modes for US ICBMs; and the
deployment of a system such as M–X. [Footnote is in the original.]
3 Attached but not printed.
4 Part B is attached but not printed.

of intercontinental striking forces.5 For purposes of measurement and
comparison, we assume in each case that every online weapon in the
intercontinental forces of both sides is to be used for one or the other of
two generic applications: lethal area potential assumes exclusive use of
all weapons to destroy soft area targets; hard-­target potential assumes
exclusive use to destroy hard point targets. For a common base of com-
parison, the damage criterion for soft targets is set at a level sufficient to
destroy a reinforced concrete building, while for hard targets it is set at
a level sufficient to destroy a representative hard missile silo.
—It should be noted that the graphs in chart 2 display rough mea-
sures of prelaunch potential against notional targets of purely nominal
hardness. They do not reflect real-­world economic or military target
sets, targeting plans, or operational attributes of weapon systems which
would affect their utility in intercontinental warfare.
—The left-­hand graph shows that the USSR’s program to deploy
MIRV warheads of relatively high yield will cause its lead in lethal area
potential to increase. The absolute potentials of both sides are very
large, however. Even at the stringent damage criterion chosen, the total
US lethal area potential today is [3 lines not declassified]
—The right-­hand graph shows that the USSR’s program to deploy
MIRVed ICBMs with improved accuracies and relatively high yield
warheads will cause Soviet hard-­target potential to match and slightly
surpass that of the United States beginning in about 1980. At that time
each side will have the theoretical potential to destroy [less than one line
not declassified] hard targets. These theoretical potentials will more than
double by 1988. During this period, there will be many more hardened
targets in the USSR than in the United States: in the USSR, some 1,400
to 1,600 hard ICBM silos and launch control centers plus hundreds of
bunkers of varying lesser hardnesses; in the United States, some 1,100
to 1,200 hard silos and launch control centers but only a small number
of other hardened facilities. It should be noted that most of the Soviet
capability is in ICBMs with flight times of about 30 minutes, whereas
a large portion of the US capability is in weapons carried by bombers
with flight times on the order of 10 hours.
8. Chart 3 illustrates the countersilo capabilities of Soviet ICBMs,
which make up that portion of the Soviet force best suited to a first
strike against fast-­reaction opposing forces.6 This consideration would
be of particular importance to the Soviets’ assessments of the capabil-
ities of their intercontinental offensive forces, because their military
doctrine stresses countermilitary targeting to contribute to damage-­
limiting objectives. The chart also illustrates the vulnerability of Soviet
ICBM silos to a first strike by US ICBMs of programed types (that is,
excluding M–X or a system with comparable hard-­target capabilities).
5 Chart 2 is attached but not printed.
6 Chart 3 is attached but not printed.

The Soviets’ heavy dependence on silo-­based ICBMs would make them
especially mindful of the survivability of these weapons.
—The top two graphs show the increasing vulnerability of US
Minuteman silos caused by Soviet deployment of accurate MIRVed
ICBMs. For these calculations, we use a severe damage criterion, which
we assume is the conceptual equivalent of what a prudent Soviet plan-
ner would use in evaluating his own capability.
—The top right-­hand graph shows that if the Soviets elect to employ
and can successfully execute two-­on-­one targeting tactics to compound
the probability of destroying US silos, the number of Minuteman silos
which would be expected to escape severe damage from a Soviet strike
than 100 in the mid-1980s and afterward.
—The bottom two graphs, on the other hand, show that the ongo-
ing Soviet silo-­hardening program largely offsets the improvements the
United States has made and plans to make in the hard-­target poten-
tial of its current types of ICBMs. Some 500 to 700 Soviet silos would
survive attacks by currently programed types of US ICBMs during the
period. The number of RVs in surviving Soviet silos, not shown on the
chart, would in fact increase as the Soviets deploy more MIRVs.
—With respect to the graphs on Soviet silo survivability, it should
be noted that our estimates of Soviet silo hardness are subject to con-
siderable uncertainty. Further, we have no basis for estimating total
system hardness, which is the criterion the Soviets would use. The con-
tinued testing of silo hardness, and a current program to modify even
their newest silos and launch control centers, indicate that the Soviets
are still seeking to improve their ICBM system survivability.
intercontinental striking forces remaining after hypothetical counter-
force attacks by the ICBMs of one side on the other.7 This is another sim-
plified measure of some of the factors relevant to strategic capabilities,
to perceptions about them, and to deterrence. (For a divergent view
about the utility of this type of measure, see paragraph 13.) The calcu-
lations assume that the attacking side employs only ICBMs and strikes
only at the retaliatory forces and bases of the other side. Clearly these
are arbitrary limitations which neither side would likely follow in prac-
tice, although bombers and SLBMs are less useful than ICBMs for first-­
strike counterforce attacks against fast-­reaction enemy forces. Using
these assumptions, we make subtractions of two kinds from prelaunch
potentials in order to show what we call residual forces.
—For the attacking side, residual forces are those ICBMs not
used in the hypothetical counterforce attack plus all those SLBMs and
bomber weapons that could be generated. Thus, for the attacker, the
residuals are those forces available for other missions, either at the time
of the first strike or later.

—For the side attacked, residual forces are those available for
retaliation—­that is, ICBMs calculated to survive hypothetical coun-
tersilo strikes plus bombers on alert and SLBMs at sea. The calculations
assume that ICBMs ride out the attack without being launched from
under attack, and assume that alerted bombers and at-­sea SLBMs are
not vulnerable to first strikes.
—Alternative first-­strike conditions are examined: surprise attacks,
in which the forces of the attacking side are in a generated posture but
those of the side attacked are on day-­to-­day alert; and preemptive
attacks, in which the forces of both sides are in a generated posture.
The former is a worst case assumption for the side attacked. The lat-
ter corresponds conceptually to the conditions the Soviets believe most
likely. Soviet military doctrine anticipates that intercontinental warfare
would likely arise out of a crisis or theater conflict, although it does not
rule out the possibility of surprise attacks.
grow throughout the next 10 years, whereas those of the United States
will remain fairly constant until about the mid-1980s and then increase.
Noteworthy specifics are:
—In lethal area potential, shown in chart 4, the Soviet residual
would far exceed that of the United States throughout the 1980s if
the USSR struck first. The two sides would be about equal if the US
struck first with surprise until about the mid-1980s, after which the
Soviet residuals would be the larger. The Soviet residual potential
would exceed that of the United States if the United States struck first
preemptively.
—In hard-­target potential, shown in chart 5, fairly steady increases
in Soviet residuals would improve the USSR’s relative position consid-
erably in the early 1980s, after which US advances would tend to par-
allel continued Soviet gains if the USSR struck first and would exceed
the Soviet gains if the United States struck first. Except in the case of a
Soviet surprise attack, US residual capabilities would be greater than
those of the USSR in the middle and late 1980s.
—In absolute terms, however, the residual potentials of both sides
are already substantial and will remain so. In all circumstances of
attack, each side would have residual capabilities sufficient to inflict
massive urban and industrial damage on the other. Even in the early
1980s, a Soviet surprise attack, though it would reduce the US potential
by half, would leave the United States with residual lethal area poten-
tial greater than the total urban area of the USSR. Soviet residual lethal
area potential would grow from more than half the total US urban
area today to about [less than one line not declassified] It should be noted
that this analysis uses a very stringent damage criterion—­sufficient to
destroy a reinforced concrete building.
—Finally, a comparison of the surprise and preemptive attack
cases displayed in charts 4 and 5 shows—­as would be expected—­that
both the relative and absolute residual potentials of the side attacked
would be improved in the preemptive cases because in these cases we
assume that its forces had been alerted prior to the attack. In residual
hard-­target potential, the improvement would be greater for the United
States, largely because a greater proportion of its prelaunch potential

is in bombers and ALCM carriers which can achieve enhanced surviv-
ability by higher alert rates.
11. Chart 6 illustrates the marked and growing asymmetries in the
composition of Soviet and US intercontinental offensive forces, using
residual potentials after hypothetical surprise attacks as the example.8
—The left-­hand graphs display the continuing heavy Soviet depen-
dence on silo-­based ICBMs. Soviet SLBM RVs, while increasing in num-
bers, add very little to residual lethal area and hard-­target potentials
because of their relatively low yields and poor accuracies. In this cal-
culation, bombers make no contribution to Soviet residual potentials
because the USSR keeps no bombers on alert—­hence, we assume that
none would survive a US surprise attack. Because virtually all of the
USSR’s residual potential would be in ICBMs having short flight times,
strikes against the United States by Soviet residual forces could arrive
promptly.
—The right-­hand graphs illustrate that the US force mix is more
balanced at present, but that silo-­based ICBMs would be reduced to
only a negligible fraction of residual potentials in the future. The pro-
jected increases in the US residual potentials in the middle and late
1980s are caused by US deployment of Trident SSBNs and especially
ALCMs.
—Increasing US dependence on aerodynamic vehicles (bombs,
SRAMs, and ALCMs) is illustrated by their growth as a proportion of
US residual potentials. With respect to hard-­target potential, for exam-
ple, in the case of a Soviet surprise counterforce attack in 1988, more
than four-­fifths of the US residual potential would be in aerodynamic
vehicles having relatively slow flight times and subject to attrition by
Soviet air defenses.
12. The results displayed in this Estimate are not to be taken as
indicators of the results which might occur in war. Clearly, just the
technique of allocating all residual forces against either hard or soft
targets of nominal hardness before comparing them fundamentally
divorces these analyses from the world of reality. Instead, the technique
is intended only to display the general characteristics and qualities of
the forces in comparable terms, and to illustrate trends in the two forces
over the period of the next decade. Specifically, the calculations seek to:
—Compare gross capabilities against hard or soft targets in compa-
rable situations in order to display whether one force or the other has
more of an accent toward hard or soft target capability.
—Compare the relative capabilities of the two forces to absorb a
first strike, by displaying how much retaliatory potential would sur-
vive on the side attacked (a factor which a side contemplating a first
strike would have to consider along with its own remaining potential).
—Display the relative reliance of each weapons mix upon one type
of weapon or another.
8 Chart 6 is attached but not printed.

with respect to the usefulness of such theoretical analyses. In part as a
result of this difference of opinion, the Studies, Analysis, and Gaming
Agency (SAGA) of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during this past year has
conducted a simulation of a nuclear exchange between US and Soviet
forces. This simulation differs from the work in this Estimate in two
cardinal respects:
—It seeks to be more realistic with respect to what might happen
in wartime. The simulation attempts to take into account many more
elements, such as a full range of economic and military targets on each
side, the targeting doctrine of each side, and the possible attrition of
bombers and cruise missiles by air defense.
—It analyzes the results of a two-­sided exchange in which the
opposing forces seek to achieve specified levels of damage against a
wide range of military and nonmilitary targets. The NIE looked only at
the remaining and surviving forces after a first strike by only the ICBMs
of one side against only the strategic nuclear forces of the other.
14. These different analytic approaches shed light on different
aspects of the question of deterrence.
—The residual calculations in the NIE focus on the question of the
capability of a side after its strategic forces had been attacked first. They
shed light on the question of deterrence to the extent that the criterion
is whether, after absorbing a first strike, a side would have enough
destructive potential remaining to deter the other from attacking in
the first place. Broadly speaking, this is the outlook of the doctrine of
assured destruction as the principle of deterrence.
—The other form of analysis focuses on what the situation would
be after a full-­scale two-­sided exchange. Broadly speaking, such anal-
ysis sheds light on ultimately war-­fighting potential as the principle of
deterrence.
15. The SAGA simulation has reached only preliminary conclu-
sions thus far, and a number of the key assumptions are still being
reviewed and tested for sensitivity. Thus, it is too early to draw opin-
ions as to the nature of the balance of strategic forces from the SAGA
effort. Next year, we hope, the results of both techniques will be avail-
able for comparison.
16. Over and above the question of whether the NIE and SAGA
techniques lead to differing conclusions about the strategic balance,
there remains a divergent view in the Intelligence Community about the
propriety of the quasi-­dynamic assessments of residual potentials con-
tained in the NIE. The holders of this view believe that: (a) the analysis
of relative US and Soviet strategic nuclear capabilities in wartime cir-
cumstances is not a proper function of the US Intelligence community;
and (b) such analysis is best done within the Department of Defense,
with Intelligence as a full partner. The holders of this view also believe
that only the form of analysis that considers comprehensive two-­sided

exchanges can convey valid and useful impressions about relative US
and Soviet strategic nuclear capabilities.9
17. The Director of Central Intelligence believes that both forms of
analysis have their merits for the purpose of informing national deci-
sionmakers about trends in the relative capabilities of forces. In his
view:
—It is highly desirable to proceed with the SAGA simulation of
wartime capabilities.
—The Intelligence Community welcomes an opportunity to partic-
ipate as a partner in such an endeavor.
—Ultimately, what is needed is a net assessment effort under the
direction of the National Security Council, with participation by the
Department of Defense, the Department of State, the Intelligence Com-
munity, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the prospective
Federal Emergency Management Agency, and perhaps others.
Implications of Trends in Soviet Air Defense and ASW Capabilities
18. Air Defense. In light of the trends we anticipate in intercon-
tinental offensive forces, the effectiveness of Soviet air defenses
against aerodynamic penetrators will become even more important
to US deterrent and striking capabilities in the 1980s than it is today.
At present, the massive Soviet air defense forces would have good
capabilities against aircraft at medium and high altitudes. There are,
however, major technical deficiencies in their ability to intercept pen-
etrators at low altitudes, and these are compounded by the low level
of proficiency the air defense establishment has demonstrated to date.
The Soviets are now working to develop improved systems for low-­
altitude defense. In the early 1980s, they will probably begin to field
lookdown/shootdown fighters, an improved low-­altitude SAM sys-
tem, and an AWACS capable of detecting and tracking low-­altitude
targets at least over water.
19. Chart 7 displays estimated trends in the Soviet potential to per-
form functions essential to low-­altitude air defense over the next 10
years.10 It illustrates this potential for the region of the USSR west of the
Urals, which contains much of the nation’s population and economic
and military assets, and in which the bulk of Soviet air defense forces
are concentrated.
—As illustrated in the top left-­hand graph, beginning in the early
1980s, the numbers of improved Soviet weapon systems will probably
grow fairly rapidly if, as we anticipate, the USSR places considerable
9 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the
Senior Intelligence Officers of each of the military services. For an elaboration, including
views and commentary on preliminary results of the SAGA study, see part E, paragraphs
198–201. [Footnote is in the original.]
10 Chart 7 is attached but not printed.

emphasis on defenses against aerodynamic penetrators at low altitudes.
By 1988, our best estimate projects the deployment in the western USSR
of about 900 lookdown/shootdown fighters of several different types
for area defense, and nearly 300 sites with low-­altitude SA–X–10 SAMs
having point defense capabilities.
—The top right-­hand graph shows that, as Soviet lookdown/
shootdown fighters increase in numbers in the middle and late 1980s,
the improving Soviet air defense warning and control systems would
have the technical potential to direct them to the vicinity of low-­altitude
bombers in an area growing from about 15 percent to about 35 percent
of the western USSR. In the middle and late 1980s, the potential to vec-
tor fighters against cruise missiles at very low altitudes would exist in
about 20 percent of this area. Much of the potential coverage is concen-
trated in the northwestern and Baltic approaches to Moscow and other
major centers, and we expect this concentration to continue.
—The bottom left-­hand graph shows the potential area in which
improved SAM systems will have the technical potential to direct their
missiles against low-­altitude targets. The graph shows that the area of
the western USSR afforded SAM coverage against low-­altitude bomb-
ers is projected to grow from very little at present to about 25 percent
in 1988, and against cruise missiles at very low altitudes from none at
present to roughly 15 percent. These areas are much smaller than the
roughly 45 percent of the western USSR now afforded coverage against
high-­altitude aircraft by point-­defense SA–2 and SA–3 SAMs, but could
include a number of high-­value economic and military assets. It should
be noted that the total area of future SAM coverage could be less than
shown here, depending on the degree to which the Soviets deploy
SAMs with overlapping coverage.
—The bottom right-­hand graph illustrates our estimate of the off-
shore defense capabilities the Soviets would acquire by deploying an
AWACS to cover overwater approaches in order to detect US bombers
and ALCM carriers and direct interceptors to their vicinity. By the late
1980s, the Soviets will probably have the potential to maintain contin-
uous forward defense coverage some 1,000 to 1,500 kilometers from
Soviet borders along all overwater approach routes to the western
USSR, for periods of up to about three days during a crisis or follow-
ing Soviet counterforce attacks against the United States. There would,
however, be gaps in the potential coverage against cruise missiles once
they were launched.
20. These graphs do not measure the probability that Soviet weap-
ons would destroy penetrators, nor do they measure the overall effec-
tiveness of the air defense system under operational conditions. We are
unable to quantify the attrition which Soviet air defenses would be able
to inflict on US low-­altitude aircraft and cruise missiles, in large part
because of uncertainties about key technical characteristics of future
systems. Further, the actual attrition achieved would be influenced by
other factors not measured or shown on the graphs, such as the man-
ner and depth of defense deployments and the number of strategically
important installations included in defended areas. Nor have we been
able to quantify important operational factors and interactions [2 lines

not declassified] Accordingly, there is a divergent view in the Intelligence
Community which holds that graphs showing the gross area of theoret-
ical coverage of air defense systems, particularly when standing alone,
can be misleading as indicators of trends in Soviet air defense potential.
Because such graphs cannot incorporate the more important deploy-
ment and operational considerations noted above, this view concludes
that the graphs are not useful.11
21. The estimates that follow represent our best judgments about
the nominal capabilities of Soviet air defenses against the several ele-
ments of the programed US aerodynamic force, without taking opera-
tional factors into account.
—In general, we estimate that at least through the early 1980s,
improved Soviet air defense systems will not be available in numbers
large enough to markedly improve defense against bombers and cruise
missiles at low altitudes.
—In the middle and late 1980s, Soviet air defenses will probably
have reduced the USSR’s vulnerability to US defense avoidance tactics.
Undegraded, the defenses would have the nominal potential to inflict
considerably higher attrition against an attack by US bombers of cur-
rent types. We believe that these defenses, however, will probably have
little or no effective capability against SRAMs carried by bombers.
—It is especially difficult to estimate the likely capabilities of Soviet
air defenses against cruise missiles in the middle and late 1980s. We
believe that in the mid-1980s the USSR could have a gradually increas-
ing nominal capability to defend some key areas against currently pro-
gramed US cruise missiles. Nevertheless, throughout the next decade,
because of technical and numerical deficiencies, the USSR’s nominal
capability to defend against a large force of US cruise missiles will
probably remain low.
—While we cannot quantify the effects of [2 lines not declassified]
it is likely that these factors would weigh heavily against the overall
effectiveness of Soviet air defenses. Thus we believe that the actual
performance of the defenses against combined attacks involving large
numbers of US bombers, SRAMs, and cruise missiles will remain low
during the period of this Estimate.
22. Antisubmarine Warfare. Soviet forces with ASW capabilities are
not now an effective counter to US SSBNs. The USSR is attempting,
however, to overcome its deficiencies in ASW. Major R&D programs
include the development of improved sensors for submarine detec-
tion. The number of nuclear-­powered attack submarines having ASW
capabilities which are relatively good by Soviet standards will prob-
or as many as 100 if a number of Y-­class SSBNs are converted to SSNs.
There is tentative evidence suggesting a trend toward quieter SSNs.
11 The holders of this view are the Senior Intelligence Officers of each of the military
services. [Footnote is in the original.]

New types of surface ships and long-­range patrol aircraft with some-
what improved capabilities for ASW are likely. The critical problems
confronting the USSR in ASW, however, are limitations in sensors and
data processing.
—Foreseeable improvements will likely give the USSR better tech-
nical capabilities to detect, track, and attack SSBNs that are operating
near the USSR, are in confined waters, or are transiting choke points
such as straits.
—Judging by what we know of Soviet R&D programs and our
understanding of ASW research in the United States, we believe the
Soviets have little prospect over the next 10 years of developing sys-
tems capable of detecting and covertly tracking US submarines in
broad ocean areas.
—With larger numbers of ASW-­capable forces and improved ASW
sensors, the Soviets would have somewhat better capabilities for overt
tracking of US submarines as they leave port or transit through choke
points. Considering the likely limitations in Soviet forces, the counter-
measures available to US forces, and the general complexity of the
problem, we do not believe that, during the next 10 years, the Soviets
will be able to conduct sustained overt tracking of US SSBNs on patrol.
—In the 1980s, moreover, longer range SLBMs will triple the ocean
area within which US SSBNs will be able to operate and remain within
missile range of targets in the USSR.
—We therefore believe that, throughout the period of this Estimate,
virtually all US SSBNs on patrol would be able to launch their missiles.
Major Factors Influencing Future Soviet Policy
23. As the Soviets now view their strategic position, they probably
consider their strategic capabilities to be the equal of those of the United
States and superior to those of their other adversaries. They almost cer-
tainly have increased confidence that these forces effectively buttress
the USSR’s superpower position, and that they contribute to the Soviet
aim of shifting the total world correlation of forces in the USSR’s favor.
The Soviet leaders do not want nuclear war—­they believe it would be
a disaster. In our judgment, however, their ideology and their political
and military objectives combine to motivate them to compete with the
United States in the global arena and to try to isolate it from its allies.
From their perspective, powerful strategic capabilities offer foreign pol-
icy advantages, and superior capabilities to fight and survive a nuclear
war constitute the best deterrent as well as the best preparation for the
contingency of nuclear war should it occur.
24. The Soviets are approaching the end of an ICBM/SLBM
deployment cycle and the beginning of a new Five-Year Plan. In the
relatively near term, they face mounting economic problems and lead-
ership transition. They are aware that the United States and NATO are
considering several important military program options which are as
yet undecided. The Soviets want to conclude a SALT II agreement limit-
ing some aspects of the arms competition, for reasons which we believe

include increasing their prestige as a superpower equal to the United
States and reducing the prospects of increased US defense efforts.
25. Thus the Soviets could be reaching a major decision point, at
which they might contemplate reductions in the growth of resources
committed to strategic programs as part of an effort to reduce the
defense burden they carry. Total military expenditures, which absorb
an estimated 11 to 13 percent of the Soviet gross national product, will
come under close scrutiny because the USSR’s economic growth rate
is expected to decline in the 1980s because of manpower, energy, and
productivity problems.12 Procurement and operation of strategic forces
account for roughly one-­fifth of total defense spending. Strategic pro-
grams also absorb a large but unknown portion of the additional one-­
fourth of total defense spending which is allocated to R&D.
26. As the Soviets evaluate possible ways of reducing the burden
of defense programs, they would seek alternatives which offered sig-
nificant returns to the economy without jeopardizing their military
posture. Prospective SALT II limitations on strategic offensive forces
would not by themselves significantly affect defense spending. The
resources devoted to development, production, and deployment of
these forces, moreover, tend to be highly specialized and not readily
transferable to such critical civilian programs as energy. Reduction in
strategic force manpower would be of marginal value because these
forces are less manpower intensive than other elements of the armed
forces. In addition, the Soviets already have committed large capital
resources for strategic programs which will extend into the 1980s. The
Soviets probably view some of these commitments as consolidating
and reinforcing recent strategic gains, and some as offering the pros-
pect of overcoming current deficiencies. In sum, we believe that even if
overall military spending were to be curbed, strategic programs would
suffer least.
27. A number of countervailing factors lead us to conclude that,
despite economic difficulties, the Soviets will continue their long-­term
strategic force improvement programs. Chief among them are the
following:
—In the Soviet view, even better strategic capabilities would
enhance deterrence still further and foster strategic stability through
Soviet advantage. The Soviets almost certainly make generous assump-
tions about potential US and NATO capabilities, and are also concerned
about China and its prospective modernization. They can anticipate
that in the mid-1980s and after, US programs now in the planning
stages could erode the USSR’s earlier gains.
Trends and Prospects, August 1978. [Footnote is in the original.]

—The Soviets almost certainly do not have full confidence in the
countersilo capabilities they will possess in the early 1980s, in part
because success would depend on execution of complex and inherently
uncertain targeting tactics. We believe they will seek to develop and
deploy new or modified ICBMs with accuracies sufficient to permit
them to employ simplified targeting tactics to attack US ICBM silos,
thereby increasing Soviet confidence in the probability of successful
attack. We also believe they will concentrate heavily on attempts to
overcome the USSR’s weaknesses in low-­altitude air defense and in
ASW capabilities against SSBNs, and will continue R&D on improved
ABM systems.
—Momentum is imparted to Soviet strategic programs by the
USSR’s large, permanent military R&D establishments, the military
services, and the military industries. In R&D especially, the Soviets will
strive to match or surpass the United States in selected advanced tech-
nologies having strategic application, and at a minimum to avoid fall-
ing behind technologically.
—The possibility, however remote, that intercontinental nuclear
war might actually occur will continue to support Soviet efforts to
improve the USSR’s strategic posture. The Soviets still express con-
cerns about the US capability to conduct a surprise intercontinental
attack, even though they believe the likelihood of such an attack is
low for the foreseeable future. They are evidently also doubtful about
whether escalation to intercontinental warfare can be avoided once the
nuclear threshold has been crossed in theater warfare. In evaluating
their chances of surviving a nuclear war, the Soviets are likely to remain
uncertain about the degree to which their active and passive measures
would protect their economy and population, and about their ability to
conduct sustained military operations.
—In general, in their planning for the future, the Soviets are likely
to be seeking ways to increase the options available to the leader-
ship in crisis or conflict, to control nuclear escalation in the event of
a NATO-Warsaw Pact theater conflict, and to improve the endurance
of the nation and its forces so that in the unlikely event of interconti-
nental war the USSR could emerge in a better position than that of its
adversaries.
Other Considerations
28. Effects of SALT II Limitations. We have examined the effects of
a prospective SALT II agreement on Soviet intercontinental offensive
forces. As the preceding analysis shows, we expect Soviet strategic
capabilities to improve steadily under SALT II limitations.
—In the forces we have projected under SALT II, Soviet delivery
vehicles of types limited by the agreement are some 15 to 30 percent
fewer than we would expect in the middle and late 1980s in the absence
of such limitations. Total online weapons projected for Soviet intercon-
tinental forces are several thousand fewer, but SALT limitations would
not prevent the USSR from matching or surpassing the United States in
this index, at least for a few years in the early 1980s.
—SALT II limitations would not reduce the threat to US ICBM silos
and other intercontinental forces and bases. However, both prelaunch
and residual Soviet lethal area and hard-­target potentials are somewhat

less in our SALT II projection than we believe they would be if Soviet
programs were unconstrained.
—SALT II limitations would not prevent the development and
deployment of a broad spectrum of improved weapons, but it would
foreclose some Soviet options—­such as deploying follow-­on systems
as add-­ons rather than replacements, building more than one wholly
new ICBM, and taking full advantage of the USSR’s large ICBM throw
weight by pressing fractionation still further.
—One effect of SALT II would be to reduce some US uncertainties
about the future size and composition of those Soviet forces which were
limited, though many critical uncertainties are independent of SALT.
29. Likely Soviet Hedges. Some Soviet developmental activities prob-
ably represent hedges against possible future US threats, deterrents to
US withdrawal from arms control agreements, and efforts to give the
Soviet leaders options—­including options to break out of arms con-
trol agreements themselves—­which could be exercised if they came to
judge that the situation warranted it. These include:
—An R&D program in antiballistic missiles could give the Sovi-
ets the option to deploy widespread ABM defenses, but probably not
before the early 1980s or later. The ABM system now under develop-
ment could probably be deployed at some 25 urban target areas some
five years after a decision to begin such deployment, or in as little as a
year if the Soviets stockpiled components and trained troops covertly
for several years beforehand. [2 lines not declassified] We have no reason
to believe, however, that the USSR would abrogate the ABM Treaty in
circumstances approximating those of the present US-Soviet political
and strategic relationship.
—A mobile ICBM program could give the Soviets the option to
deploy ICBMs with better survivability should their fixed silos be
threatened. A mobile ICBM system has been developed. Its production
and deployment are evidently now in abeyance, but R&D on a modi-
fied or follow-­on missile continues.
—A long-­range air-­launched cruise missile program may represent
another hedge against potential vulnerability of Soviet ICBM silos or
an attempt to demonstrate the USSR’s capability to compete with the
United States in systems of this type. We assume that the Soviets will
deploy at least some such missiles under SALT II, on existing aircraft
beginning in the early 1980s or on an aircraft specifically designed to
carry them somewhat later. A small cruise missile similar in size and
capability to the US Tomahawk could probably be ready for flight-­
testing in the mid-1980s.
30. Soviet Civil Defense Program. We have acquired no new evi-
dence during the past year that alters any of our principal conclusions
about the scope, objectives, pace, and effectiveness of the Soviet civil
defense program. Soviet civil defenses remain capable of protecting
most leaders, a crisis work force, and some of the urban population in
blast-­resistant shelters. The critical decision for protecting most urban
dwellers, however, is and will remain whether to order evacuation in a

crisis. With no evacuation, prompt casualties could be on the order of
100 million, whereas with about a week for urban evacuation and other
preparations, prompt casualties could probably be reduced to the low
tens of millions. The civil defense program is not capable of preventing
the destruction of much of the USSR’s industrial capacity and its most
valued material accomplishments, and it is not proceeding in a way
which seems likely to achieve a significant reduction in the vulnerabil-
ity of the Soviet economy.
31. The Soviet leaders view their civil defense program as integral
to the USSR’s military strategy and strategic posture. They almost cer-
tainly believe their present civil defenses would improve their ability
to conduct military operations and would enhance the USSR’s chances
of surviving a nuclear war. Given the many uncertainties attendant to a
nuclear exchange, however, they cannot have confidence in the degree
of protection that would actually be afforded. We do not believe that
their present civil defenses would embolden Soviet leaders deliberately
to expose the USSR to a higher risk of nuclear war. We have no firm
basis for judging the degree to which civil defense preparations will
affect Soviet perceptions of the future strategic balance.
32. There is a divergent view in the Intelligence Community which
holds that the USSR’s civil defenses, in conjunction with its other strate-
gic capabilities, provide the Soviet leadership with a significant advan-
tage in the event of a nuclear war. In this view, the Soviet civil defense
program—­through its potential for influencing political perceptions,
providing leverage for coercion during a crisis, affecting nuclear
exchange outcomes, and contributing to postwar recovery—­impacts
on the reality of the strategic balance and on perceptions of the balance
in the USSR and elsewhere.13
33. [less than one line not declassified] The foregoing evaluations
assume SALT II conditions and adherence to the ABM Treaty. They
reflect our best estimates of likely Soviet programs. The results, how-
ever, are sensitive to a number of uncertainties about the size, structure,
and capabilities of Soviet forces and their supporting elements. In addi-
tion, [2 lines not declassified]
—Soviet concealment programs are becoming more sophisticated,
centrally directed, and better enforced. [3 lines not declassified]
—In the area of Soviet weapon characteristics, Soviet security mea-
sures in many cases prevent us from learning enough about the pro-
spective capabilities of systems in R&D to determine the threat until
after the systems have reached the flight-­test stage or its equivalent.
Uncertainty sometimes persists even after a system is deployed. [3 lines
not declassified] These factors, along with the breadth of Soviet military
13 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the
Senior Intelligence Officers of each of the military services. [Footnote is in the original.]

R&D, lead to the danger of delay in determining the performance of
improved Soviet strategic systems and imprecise or belated identifica-
tion of advanced or novel systems. With respect to ASW R&D, [2 lines
not declassified] we believe we can learn enough about Soviet progress
to identify major new developments before they reach operational
deployment.
—The military capabilities of US and Soviet strategic forces are
highly dependent on their prospective performance under actual oper-
ational conditions. US intelligence, however, confronts serious gaps in
information and analysis about Soviet force performance, and cannot
by itself judge the net effects of interaction between the forces of the
United States and the USSR in the event of crisis or conflict.
112.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Director of the Federal
Preparedness Agency (Bray)1
Washington, January 26, 1979
SUBJECT
Program Review (U)
The President has directed that you undertake a major review
of your agency’s programs and make recommendations to the Spe-
cial Coordination Committee for appropriate improvements and
changes. (C)
All Federal agencies involved in continuity of government pro-
grams are directed to cooperate fully in expediting this review. (U)
An ad hoc group, chaired by the NSC staff and including repre-
sentatives from OMB, OSTP, the Office of the Special Assistant to the
President for Administration, and you will coordinate the review. The
ad hoc group will approve the review’s terms of reference and follow
its progress. (U)
The review should include the following areas:
—Protection of national leadership. Recommend improvements in the
procedures and methods for ensuring effective Presidential succession
NSC–41 [1]. Confidential. Copies were sent to Vance; Brown; McIntyre; Jones; Turner;
Press; Burdyl Tirana, Director of the Defense Civil Preparedness Agency; Marvin Bea-
man, Director of the White House Military Office; and Dinneen.

in a crisis as well as protection and re-­constitution of the Congress and
the Judiciary. (C)
—Continuity of essential functions of the Federal Government. Identify
those functions of government which are essential in an emergency and
recommend improvements which enhance their continuity through a
crisis to eventual national recovery. (C)
—Protection of state and local government. Make recommendations
for enhancing the continuity of state and local government and for
activities appropriate for each level in supporting overall continuity
and national recovery. (C)
—Emergency telecommunications. Review the adequacy of commu-
nication to support Presidential succession, protection of national lead-
ership and essential functions of government and resource allocations
for mobilization and recovery. (C)
—Resource allocation, mobilization, and recovery. Examine present
plans for carrying out these activities. Make recommendations for
changes in policy, process, and organization to enhance the conduct of
these activities. (C)
The results of the continuity of government program review should
be submitted to the SCC for consideration and recommendation to the
President by September 30, 1979. The ad hoc group will determine an
appropriate time for submitting the results of the resource and mobili-
zation parts of the review. (C)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
113.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, January 27, 1979
SUBJECT
M–X Survivable Basing (U)
Given the broad range of political, military and arms control impli-
cations that the M–X basing mode decision will have, the President
will be interested in having an NSC meeting in early April to review
your recommendation as well as the analysis upon which it is based. I
thought it would be useful, therefore, to describe the sorts of informa-
tion that we would like you to forward as a basis for this meeting. (S)
I believe the President would like to see a side-­by-­side comparison
of four options: the air-­mobile option that you have recently asked the
Air Force to develop; the MPS option they are also working on; the
off-­road mobile option we have discussed on previous occasions; and
finally, on the possibility that none of the above options seems accept-
able, an option that combines whatever improvements can be made to
the silo-­based ICBM force and significant new efforts to improve the
bomber and SLBM forces. (S)
The side-­by-­side comparison we have in mind should evaluate the
various options according to all the standard criteria—­costs, technical
risk, IOC, survivability, etc. It should take particular care to answer the
following specific questions:
—How do the basing schemes differ in their abilities to support
the flexibility, endurance, and targeting capabilities required to defeat
possible Soviet objectives in a nuclear war? How do they differ in their
ability to serve as a basis for rapid expansion of our strategic forces,
should such a need arise?
—Within the likely constraints of SALT, what are the most effec-
tive Soviet options for reducing the survivability of each new basing
scheme? In the face of such Soviet responses, what would be our most
effective options for maintaining the overall survivability of our stra-
tegic forces? What are the economic and other costs of such responses
and counter-­responses? (S)
—Assuming that our adoption of each basing scheme leads the
Soviets either to deploy a similar scheme or to deploy the scheme that
is most cost-­effective for them, in what ways would the existence of this
new Soviet system make it easier for the Soviets to break out from SALT
and upset the strategic balance? (S)
—In what ways might the adoption of each basing scheme lead to
difficulties for each side in determining the strategic forces capabilities
of the other side, or in verifying arms control provisions of the kind
embodied in SALT II or possible future agreements?2 (S)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 Below this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “We will need this by March 15.”

114.	 Report Prepared in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Manpower, Reserve Affairs, and Logistics1
Washington, January 30, 1979
[Omitted here is the title page, the forward, and the table of
contents.]
SECTION I—INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
A. (C) Background
In November 1975, the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower
and Reserve Affairs) began a study that resulted in a report in April
1976 to Congress on U.S. Conventional Reinforcements for NATO.2
The study effort continued into a broader review of mobilization and
deployment planning. Concern about this area was greatly reinforced
by an Army exercise, MOBEX–76. In response, besides undertaking
some immediate actions, the Secretary of Defense called for extensive
testing of the full mobilization process.
In this context, exercise NIFTY NUGGET–78 was designed and
scheduled by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. It was to: (1) determine the
adequacy of plans, systems and procedures for full mobilization, (2)
examine limitations and shortfalls in manpower and logistics through
the period of initial deployments, (3) fully exercise the mobilization
and deployment responsibilities (without actual call-­up or movement
of units) of the Military Departments, the Office of the Secretary of
Defense, the transportation operating agencies (Military Airlift Com-
mand, Military Sealift Command, and the Military Traffic Management
Command), the Organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and participat-
ing Federal departments and agencies, and (4) assess the effectiveness
of deployment planning.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff, to fully exercise the support provided
through the civilian Federal agencies and the coordination needed to
gain that support, encouraged and helped in the design of a compan-
ion civil sector exercise REX–78. REX and NIFTY NUGGET were held
ing their play into November.
the title page, the report, entitled “A Review of Military Mobilization Plans,” was pre-
pared for the House Committee on Armed Services. For more on NIFTY NUGGET, see
Document 94.
on U.S. Conventional Reinforcements for NATO. (Washington: Government Printing Office,
June 1976)

As planning for NIFTY NUGGET progressed, its potential value in
identifying serious deficiencies and energizing remedial work became
apparent. Three things were done to make the exercise of more value:
—A complementary exercise, PETITE NUGGET, was designed
and held prior to NIFTY NUGGET to examine the premobilization
assumptions of the latter exercise. Less an exercise than a discussion,
PETITE NUGGET was nevertheless situation oriented and it forced
the players to make what in reality would be very difficult decisions.
PETITE NUGGET shed light on our lack of preparation for such deci-
sion making.
—A decision was made to involve senior level civilian personnel
in NIFTY NUGGET. Heretofore, Joint Staff exercises had used exercise
control groups or a few, action level OSD staff members to represent
the Secretary of Defense and his staff. As a result, crucial decisions that
must be made by civilian authorities were assumed away. For NIFTY
NUGGET the Under Secretary of Defense (Policy), Stanley R. Resor,
acted as the Secretary, and Richard Danzig, DASD for Program Devel-
opment (MRA&L), acted as Deputy Secretary of Defense. Many Deputy
Assistant Secretaries of Defense participated. The Military Departments
established a similar policy. This level of participation was unprece-
dented, and led to an extremely rich harvest of insights.
—An evaluation of DoD performance and OSD management pre-
paredness was commissioned. Although each Military Department and
the Organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff had designed its own eval-
uation, it was believed that much would be gained by specific focus
on policy, planning and procedures at the OSD level. A former Assis-
tant Secretary of Defense (M&RA), William K. Brehm, assisted by two
recently retired general officers and a small staff, undertook this dif-
ficult task. Now almost complete, that evaluation is reflected in this
report.
B. (C) An Assessment of Capability
The two exercises, PETITE and NIFTY NUGGET, tested thousands
of functions and relationships under extreme conditions. Many passed
with flying colors. However, the exercises also underscored important
respects in which the DoD can and ought to improve its capacity to
mobilize and move forces rapidly to reinforce our NATO Allies. The
exercises bred a conviction that more attention should be given now to
management of the systems that would mobilize, augment and deploy
national resources.
Planning for mobilization needs to be improved. The current plan
is an assembly of old and unconnected Presidential emergency orders,
policies, regulations and procedures. Each covers a single aspect of the
process but not all aspects are addressed. With little warning, mobili-
zation execution would have to be decentralized; but plans need to be
improved if the process is to proceed without major blockages. More
must also be done to plan for a graduated build-­up. We can profit

from further study of how to augment the deterrent value of our forces
during periods of rising tension.
Mobilization and deploying resources do not meet the demand under
the most stringent conditions. Under a NIFTY NUGGET scenario the
Army cannot meet its demand for trained manpower without reallo-
cating personnel from later deploying units to those deploying early.
At present, under this scenario, more Defense strategic lift assets are
needed, and our existing prepositioned stockpiles of equipment and
ammunition are in many cases significantly short.
Deployment transportation planning needs to be better integrated,
made more detailed, and made more flexible.
War planning was found wanting to a lesser degree. Yet, the exer-
cises revealed that the simultaneous execution of war plans in differ-
ent geographic areas could not be effective because each used common
forces and strategic lift assets.
Federal civil agencies were often unaware of and/or unprepared
to support defense needs. Substantial work needs to be done in this
respect.
[Omitted here is the remainder of the report.]
115.	 National Intelligence Estimate1
Washington, February 1, 1979
Soviet Military Capabilities To Project Power
and Influence in Distant Areas
[Omitted here is a cover sheet, preface, and table of contents.]
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Objectives
1. Soviet leaders continue to view the Third World as fertile ground
for the expansion of Soviet political, military, and economic influ-
ence through an assertive and opportunistic policy. They see political
restriction not declassified]. The following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparation of the estimate: the Central Intelligence Agency, the intelligence organiza-
tions of the Departments of State, Energy, and Defense, and the National Security Agency,
with the participation of the intelligence organizations of the Departments of the Army,
Navy, and Air Force.

conflict involving the use of military force or conducted in its shadow
as the main propellant of fundamental changes in the Third World.
They believe that military power will remain the cornerstone of Soviet
policy. Their primary objectives in aligning themselves selectively with
states and insurgent movements in Third World conflicts are to assert
the USSR’s legitimacy as ideological vanguard of world “national lib-
eration” movements, to secure a major role in Third World affairs, to
affect the outcome of regional conflicts in favor of Soviet interests, and
to neutralize Western and Chinese political and military influence. The
Soviet leadership has no illusions, however, about the difficulties of
attaining these objectives.
2. While broad political objectives are paramount, the Soviets pur-
sue specific military objectives as well. These include acquisition of
overflight clearances and access to facilities abroad for supporting mili-
tary operations of Soviet as well as friendly forces, especially emergency
air and sea lifts of military equipment and supplies to Third World
states and insurgent forces. Overseas facilities also can ease the logis-
tic problems of operating naval forces at great distances from Soviet
waters. The Soviets deploy military forces in distant areas to show the
flag, to maintain a military presence that can be augmented relatively
quickly in time of crisis, and to monitor and, if necessary, counter the
operations of Western naval forces.
3. Objectives of a lower order in Soviet policy in the Third World
are to promote trade, to secure access to certain raw materials and
foods, and to be capable of restricting Western access to these materials.
Moscow’s efforts to foster both military and economic dependence in
individual Third World countries go hand in hand, as the major recip-
ients of Soviet arms in 1978 also account for almost half of the USSR’s
nonmilitary trade with the Third World. Soviet economic aid has not
always resulted in a commensurate level of influence, nor do the Sovi-
ets expect economic interests alone to buy much influence.
Policy Appraisal
4. The Soviets have undoubtedly gained from the expansion of their
military activity in the Third World. Soviet policymakers are probably
persuaded that they have generally been on the right track, and their
most recent ventures in Angola and Ethiopia have surely reinforced
that conviction. Soviet political influence has grown in some countries
at the expense of the West and China. Events in Angola and Ethiopia
have enhanced the USSR’s image as a great power capable of project-
ing military force far from its shores. Military assistance to Africa and
the Middle East has demonstrated the value of Soviet support, espe-
cially under emergency conditions. Moscow also has benefited from
the international perception that the military balance has changed, to

the detriment of the West, and from the seeming US reluctance to use
military force to counter the expansion of Soviet and Cuban presence
in the Third World.
5. Soviet military involvement in Third World conflicts has evolved
from military assistance programs, to occasional use of Soviet forces
in defensive roles, to the extensive use of Cuban combat forces. The
Cuban intervention in Angola and especially Ethiopia has probably
strengthened Soviet confidence in the feasibility and effectiveness of
this strategy, enhanced its appeal among political and military lead-
ers in both Moscow and Havana, and encouraged them to press this
strategy. Soviet and Cuban leaders probably will believe that, as long
as such actions do not portray them as invaders and do not threaten
the West’s allies or its sources of vital raw materials, the risk of Western
military involvement and escalation to a wider conflict will be slight.
6. The interdependent relationship between the USSR and Cuba
is complex, and both sides would probably find it difficult to deter-
mine at this stage who has gained more from their joint military ven-
tures. The Cubans have worked closely with the Soviets, and Cuban
involvement in the Third World has served Soviet policy. The foremost
advantage in using Cubans or other friendly forces is the reduction in
visibility of Soviet involvement in Third World conflicts. It also allows
Moscow to exert influence in circumstances where Soviet forces would
be unwelcome.
7. Calculation of the risks in applying military force remains a
central feature of Soviet policy. The Angolan and Ethiopian ventures,
though dramatic in scale and noteworthy in their use of Cuban forces,
did not entail major risks for the Kremlin, but reflected Moscow’s
assessment of African reactions, of political restraints on the United
States, and the availability of Cuban forces. Though the initial role of
the Soviets in Cuban military operations in Angola is not known, we
assume that the strategy and tactics employed were coordinated with
them. In Ethiopia, Moscow’s role was clearly more dominant from the
outset.
8. In the few instances where the Soviets have introduced their
own military forces into conflicts in the Third World, they did so to
assist friendly countries and to inhibit possible Western military ini-
tiatives. In these cases, however, they have exercised a policy which
strictly limits the role of Soviet forces while at the same time accepting
measured risks of escalation.
—Their pilots and air defense units have engaged in combat, but to
date have not operated outside friendly territory.
—Soviet naval forces have established or augmented a presence in
the regions of conflict but have not engaged in combat.

—Airborne units have been placed on alert in a manner possibly
designed to bring pressure on the belligerents as well as the United
States.
These activities illustrate Soviet appreciation for the utility of a
show of force and of implicit and explicit threats as a means of achiev-
ing policy goals.
Instrumentalities
9. Arms transfers are by far the most widely employed of the mili-
tary means available to the Soviets for projecting influence in the Third
World. The Soviets have more than tripled the current dollar amount
of agreements and deliveries of military assistance to Third World
countries over the last five years. Where the bulk of a recipient’s mili-
tary forces become equipped with Soviet weapons, dependence on the
USSR for advisers, spare parts, and newer equipment grows and in
time becomes a potential means of influencing the recipient’s policies.
In practice, Moscow’s efforts to exploit such dependence for this pur-
pose have had both successes and failures.
10. Third World nations continue to be lured by Soviet offers of
modern military equipment not usually available from other suppliers,
by long-­term credits at low interest rates, often by lower prices, by pay-
ment (until recently) in local rather than hard currency, and by quick
delivery. Moscow is laying greater stress on the commercial consider-
ations of its arms sales to earn hard currency. Given these factors, the
market for Soviet arms remains fertile, and the trend in sales is upward.
11. Through military training, advisory, and assistance programs
the Soviets attempt to create a base of enduring influence by fostering
extensive ties with Third World military personnel. Since 1955, some
42,000 have been trained in the USSR. About 9,500 Soviet military
advisers and technicians are currently stationed in Third World coun-
tries. In recent years, suspicions of some Third World leaders about the
motives behind Soviet military assistance programs have grown and
led to increasing reluctance by some to allow large numbers of Soviets
into their countries. Nevertheless, the number of Soviet military advis-
ers abroad has steadily increased.
12. Emergency resupply of high-­priority military items by air and
sea is the most widely publicized form of Soviet combat support to
Third World states. In this regard, the USSR’s ability to provide large
quantities of arms in a relatively short time is a major advantage. This
service carries little risk for the USSR because few Soviet personnel are
involved, they are not combatants, the deliveries are generally made
to areas remote from the fighting, and other countries are reluctant to
oppose such operations militarily. In addition, such resupply opera-
tions do not necessarily commit the Soviets to deeper involvement.

13. A step higher on the ladder of involvement and risk is the
assignment of Soviet advisory personnel to Third World combat units.
Since 1967, when Soviet pilots flew combat missions against rebels in
North Yemen, Soviet personnel have seen actual combat in at least three
Third World countries—Egypt, Syria, and Iraq—­and have played a
direct combat advisory role in two others—Angola and Ethiopia.
14. The USSR supports a number of insurgent movements in the
Third World, but the type and extent of this assistance vary. It is usually
channeled through third parties because insurgents normally do not
operate where Moscow can provide direct aid and because the Soviets
may want to play down or conceal their role. By leaving the degree
of their support ambiguous, the Soviets gain freedom for political
maneuvering.
15. East European states have provided a wide variety of military
equipment and experts to Third World nations and insurgent move-
ments, often in close cooperation with the USSR. While in most cases
this support has furthered Soviet objectives, the East Europeans have
had their own political and economic motives. The East European gov-
ernments have not committed combat troops in the Third World and
would be reluctant to do so.
16. Naval surface ships and submarines are the principal Soviet
military forces deployed in distance areas and are supplemented by
periodic deployments of naval aircraft. Although Soviet concerns over
potential strategic threats from Western carrier-­launched airstrikes and
submarine-­launched ballistic missiles remain prominent in Soviet dis-
tant operations, the Navy continues to perform important missions
related to the projection of power and influence in the Third World,
primarily by maintaining forces in regions of Soviet interest which can
be augmented relatively quickly in times of crisis.
17. We have no evidence of Soviet contingency plans to exert politi-
cal or economic pressure on the United States or its allies through inter-
diction of sea lines of communication in the absence of a NATO-Warsaw
Pact war. The Soviets probably believe that such an operation would
lead to war with NATO.
18. In the principal areas of their normal deployments in distant
areas, Soviet diesel submarines and naval ships have access to a number
of ports for crew rest, replenishment, maintenance, and in some cases
major overhaul. Moscow is seeking additional access, but the only good
prospects in the near term are in Angola, Ethiopia, and South Yemen.
Staging facilities for Soviet naval reconnaissance aircraft are currently
limited to Cuba and Angola, but Ethiopia and South Yemen probably
will grant access for this purpose. Hanoi is unlikely to grant the Soviets
any formal base rights in either Vietnam or Kampuchea but there are
circumstances in which it might permit Soviet access to air or naval

facilities. The recent Chinese incursion into Vietnam may induce Hanoi
to permit a Soviet military presence at least as long as the threat exists.
Intervention Capabilities
19. The Soviets have significant forces capable of intervention in
distant areas and have introduced forces into combat situations in dis-
tant areas in the past. We believe that Soviet leaders in the future would
be willing under certain circumstances to use forces for this purpose.
Elements of all Soviet conventional forces—­ground, air, and naval—­
are potential resources for use in situations that call for intervention.
The deployment of a large segment of Soviet forces in distant areas is
constrained not only by the practical difficulties of moving large forces
over long distances but by the requirement, as Moscow sees it, to retain
the bulk of these forces in the USSR and Eastern Europe in readiness
for their primary mission of waging war with NATO or China. On the
other hand, these factors would not restrict the deployment of smaller
units.
20. Where Cuban or other friendly forces are not available for use
in the Third World or are deemed unsuitable, Moscow would have the
option of using its own ground forces. Although Soviet air, naval, and
air defense forces have been involved in conflicts in the Middle East,
Angola, and Ethiopia, Soviet ground combat forces have not. Grow-
ing Soviet self-­confidence in projecting power and in the USSR’s role
as a global power will diminish whatever Soviet reluctance may have
existed in the past to employ ground forces outside the Warsaw Pact.
At the same time, there are limited situations in which allied forces
would not be preferable from a Soviet point of view; Afghanistan is one
where the provision of limited Soviet ground forces in a hurry might
well be undertaken. Nevertheless, the Soviet leadership would proba-
bly view the use of ground combat units, even in modest numbers, as
a significant escalation of Soviet involvement. The major constraints
would be concern over the likelihood of Western or regional counter-
action and the impact on Third World perceptions of Soviet policy. We
believe, therefore, that Moscow would employ ground combat units
only where, and to the degree, it considered such action essential to
preserve vital Soviet interests in the region.
21. Over the next 10 years the Soviets will continue to make modest
improvements in amphibious lift, logistic support ships, naval tactical
air support, gunfire support, and airlift. Such improvements, when
added to current naval, airborne, naval infantry, and command and
control resources, will result in an increased ability to deploy forces in
distant areas and to come to the assistance of any ally. For example, the
Soviets might introduce an airborne or naval infantry unit at the invi-
tation of a government, particularly if Moscow believed there was little
danger of Western reaction and that the intensity of combat would be

low or the presence of an armed Soviet contingent would be sufficient
to accomplish Moscow’s objectives. Indeed, a single Soviet airborne
division is larger than the armies of many Third World states.
22. We believe, however, that the Soviets are unlikely to invade
a Third World country. They have never mounted an airborne assault
or amphibious assault operation in a distant area. Nevertheless, Soviet
forces have long been capable of undertaking such an operation against
the light opposition which could be expected in most areas, and the
above-­projected improvements will expand this capability. But, over
the next decade the Soviets will still not have built the forces capable
of transporting, landing, and sustaining a large joint assault operation
against substantial opposition in the Third World.
Outlook
23. Policy. Although a change in the makeup of the top Soviet lead-
ership is highly probable in the next five years and virtually certain in
the next 10, we do not believe that Soviet policies or long-­term objec-
tives toward the Third World will change substantially for this reason
alone. We do not foresee the present or any likely future Soviet leader-
ship altering these objectives to secure short-­term economic or political
benefits from the West. Although future Soviet leaders will attach vary-
ing degrees of importance to detente relations with the United States
and other Western powers, we believe it unlikely that Soviet leaders
will be any more dissuaded from pursuing opportunities in the Third
World in the future than in the recent past by concern over adverse
effects on detente. Indeed, Soviet leaders will probably continue to cal-
culate that major issues like the strategic arms limitation talks will be
largely unaffected and that costs in less critical areas of US-Soviet rela-
tions will be bearable.
24. Regional Prospects. We believe the Soviets will persist in a
steady course of creating and exploiting opportunities in distant areas,
utilizing wherever possible their comparative advantages in military
instruments of influence. They will continue to regard military means—­
principally arms sales, military assistance, and support of insurgent
movements—­as the most feasible way of bringing about the changes
they seek in the political structure of the Third World.
25. In Latin America, opportunities for expanding Soviet influ-
ence through military means are less favorable than in other regions
of the Third World, with the exception of the continuing Soviet role
in Cuba. Although Moscow has designated Latin America as an arena
for Soviet-US competition and has made some economic and diplo-
matic inroads, prospects are still limited. There will undoubtedly be
incidents of unrest and turmoil that should lend themselves to exploita-
tion, but Soviet efforts will be hampered by prevalent anti-Communist

sentiments in Latin America and by the USSR’s inability to provide
the kinds of nonmilitary assistance Latin Americans need. Most Latin
American governments are wary of Soviet overtures and concerned as
much about Soviet expansionism as about US regional influence.
26. In Cuba, there are signs that the Soviets are continuing to
strengthen their influence on the island as well as to upgrade Cuba’s
military capabilities. There are differing views, however, on the extent
to which the Soviet military presence on the island will grow:
—According to one view2 both the Soviets and the Cubans are
aware of US sensitivities concerning the permanent basing of nontech-
nical or nonadvisory Soviet military personnel in Cuba and, for this
reason, Moscow would be unlikely to station any combat or reconnais-
sance unit there permanently because it would exacerbate US relations
with both the USSR and Cuba and further endanger Cuba’s position in
the nonaligned movement.
—Another view3 can be summarized as follows: The Soviets con-
tinue to view Cuba as a means to expand Soviet influence in the West-
ern Hemisphere and to test US reactions to increased Soviet military
use of Cuba. Although the Soviets retreated from their attempt to place
offensive weapons on the island in 1962 and to use Cienfuegos harbor
to support nuclear-­powered submarines in 1970, they continue to use
Cuba in a variety of ways to support their objectives. The Soviets will
probably expand their military use of Cuba. The most likely way would
be to extend the frequency or length of their current naval ship or naval
air reconnaissance deployments until their presence there becomes
permanent; this would not require additional support facilities. The
last naval deployment in 1978 lasted more than 90 days, the longest
period overall involving a Soviet Navy task group in Caribbean waters
since 1973. The Soviets are carrying out other military activities in Cuba
[1 line not declassified] and there are indications that small elements of
Soviet ground forces are on the island, although the nature of their
activity is uncertain. (Possible explanations range from demonstrations
or testing of Soviet equipment and tactics or training of local advisory
and security personnel, to specialized training of Soviet tactical units.)
Moscow is also significantly upgrading Cuba’s military capabilities by
supplying its forces with equipment and by providing military advis-
ers and instructors to train Cuban forces. And, for the first time, the
Soviets have given Cuba an F-­class submarine and MIG–23 Flogger air
defense and ground attack aircraft, the latter with a range sufficient
to reach the southeastern United States and the Panama Canal. Soviet
pilots, already in Cuba, occasionally fly these aircraft, probably to main-
tain proficiency; this flight activity could be expanded in the future to
include other roles.
2 The holders of this view are the Central Intelligence Agency; the Director, Bureau
of Intelligence and Research, Department of State; and the Director, National Security
Agency. [Footnote is in the original.]
3 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the
Senior Intelligence Officers of each of the military services. [Footnote is in the original.]

27. In South Asia, the Soviet outlook is somewhat brighter than in
Latin America. The Soviets are expanding their role in Afghanistan and
are maintaining close relations with India. India’s current government,
however, is not as well disposed toward the Soviets as its predecessor
and has begun seeking to make Indian foreign policy more genuinely
nonaligned by improving relations with both China and the West and
by reducing its dependence on the USSR for arms aid.
28. In Southeast Asia, Soviet support to Vietnam—­and the Friend-
ship Treaty of November 1978—­gave Hanoi significant external back-
ing for its invasion of Kampuchea in early 1979. Nonetheless, Hanoi
remains fiercely independent, and Soviet influence in the region will
remain largely dependent on Hanoi’s sufferance.
29. In the Middle East, opportunities to expand Soviet influence
will depend, at least in the near term, mainly on the outcome of the
Arab-Israeli peace negotiations and the evolution of events in Iran.
Over the long term, underlying antagonisms toward, and deepening
suspicions of, Moscow’s motives will qualify Soviet prospects. Soviet
opportunities could greatly improve, however, if peace negotiations in
the Middle East fail, raising the likelihood of renewed hostilities. As
a result of the instability in Iran, the Soviets undoubtedly anticipate
significant changes there and in the conservative regimes of the Persian
Gulf area that will lead to opportunities for new Soviet ties with the oil-­
producing states and to further reduction of Western influence.
30. The best opportunities for the USSR will lie in Africa, where
political instability is commonplace and where conditions that promote
subversion and insurgencies will remain rife.
31. Preservation of Influence. This will remain the overriding prob-
lem in Soviet efforts to project power and influence in the Third World
through military means. Even where Soviet influence is strongest, it is
vulnerable to unpredictable changes in the local political leadership or
in its attitudes. Nationalist-­minded states will continue to resent the
arrogant behavior and thinly veiled prejudice often displayed by Soviet
representatives. Many Third World leaders will remain suspicious of
Soviet motives and probably would be reluctant clients of the USSR.
Those who do accept Soviet assistance can be expected to react against
instances of exploitative military agreements, poor-­quality assistance
and training, and interference in internal affairs.
32. To preserve Soviet influence in a country where, for example,
dependence on Soviet military support has diminished or expulsion of
Soviet personnel is threatened, Moscow has essentially three alterna-
tives beyond the continuation of present policies:
—Use friendly outside forces more extensively to carry out
­Moscow’s policies.

—Seek to acquire through Soviet advisers sufficient control of the
military and internal security forces to prevent the leaders of the client
state from taking actions inimical to Soviet interests.
—Garrison Soviet troops in the client state, at its invitation, osten-
sibly to protect the state against some external threat but in reality to
preserve in power a government that is friendly and beholden to Mos-
cow and that will enforce policies in line with Soviet interests.
33. The last alternative would have unforeseeable ramifications
for Soviet foreign relations, but it is nonetheless an option that con-
ceivably could attract serious consideration by Soviet decisionmakers.
The deployment of Soviet forces for this purpose, however, would be
a drastic departure from the policy Moscow has followed in the Third
World.
34. Despite Soviet difficulties in preserving political influence in
most Third World countries, Moscow will have ample opportunities
to play a major role. Soviet policy in the Third World feeds on political
turbulence, military conflict, and civil strife. During the next 10 years
these disruptions are likely to recur, especially in Africa and the Middle
East, and the major role the Soviets have effectively played—­a source
of arms and military assistance and a protector of clients—­will remain
relevant to the needs of many countries.
[Omitted here is the body of the NIE and six annexes.]
116.	 Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom)
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 27, 1979
SUBJECT
The Targeting Study: Desired Outcomes
I want to make a few points for you to keep in mind at the SCC on
the Targeting Study. There is a real danger that the mix of antithetical
theologies will paralyze our efforts to move our defense establishment
from a “1914” posture (i.e., one big war plan which cannot support any
conceivable war aims, an irreversible war plan, no plans for economic
and other civil mobilization, and a misplaced belief that the war will be
short) to a posture that allows our military power to be more politically
useful. The following outcomes, achieved not at this SCC but at least by
the end of the series of SCC which Victor has scheduled, would accom-
plish a major favorable change. (S)
I. A general targeting policy of “flexibility”. This does not mean break-
ing the SIOP up into small pieces. It means a targeting capability in
addition to the SIOP. It means the capability to identify and locate a
target after the conflict starts, to fire a nuclear strike which destroys the
target with as little undersired collateral damage as possible, and to
make a post-­strike assessment which accurately reports the damaged
achieved. It also means the capability to coordinate strategic nuclear
fires with other military operations by land, naval, and air forces. (TS)
II. Divest ourselves of the illusion that time urgent “hard target kill”
(HTK) capability in large amounts is “destabilizing.” There are many tar-
gets other than ICBMs for HTK. For example, destroying enemy C3I,
attacking conventional forces of the second echelon and strategic
reserve, neutralizing attacks on flanks or outside a theater of war. For
any targeting problem where limiting collateral damage is desirable,
HTK becomes attractive. We need all the HTK we can get. (S)
III. Task Defense and the JCS to develop a counter-C3I doctrine. This
aspect of our targeting is highly underdeveloped. It will take several
years of work. (S)
IV. Create a mechanism for more and continuous interaction between the
political leadership and military planners. You will receive a lot of pressure
to create special working groups, putting State and others in the military
planning loop. Brown and the JCS will balk. State is not the “political
leadership.” The Secretary of State was not elected and has no statutory
authority to give “political guidance.” Political guidance means Presi-
dential guidance. We already have a highly effective system for IVORY
ITEM exercises. The answer to the “mechanism” problem is to develop
it as an excursion within the IVORY ITEM group. David asked me last
fall to work up some LNO scenarios for this purpose. I have been in
touch with the J–3, the shop that develops such exercises, and they have
been working on scenarios for several months. Let’s keep things in the
IVORY ITEM context. Harold Brown will support you on this.
V. The C3I problem must be faced not only in Defense but also in FEMA.
This outcome is beyond the targeting study, but it is crucial for the
“flexible” approach to targeting. Keep it in mind as a separate problem
for SCCs but integral to targeting capabilities. (S)
Some Caveats. We cannot achieve all these outcomes in one SCC
meeting, or even four or five, but we can avoid decisions that block their
eventual achievement. Let me cite an example of counter-­productive
decisions. (S)

The first of the nine principles of war is the OBJECTIVE: DESTROY
THE ENEMY ARMY OR ITS ABILITY TO FIGHT. When Napoleon
took Moscow and ceased chasing the Russian Army, he violated that
principle. He lost. When we target 70 percent of economic recovery
capability, we have little idea of the impact on Soviet forces. It can’t be
large. Most of our SIOP criteria are analogous to Napoleon’s objective:
Moscow. When you speak of targeting Russians, this does not necessar-
ily kill Soviet military forces. In general, population per se is a wasteful
target. Breaking the SIOP into small pieces may also fail to kill Soviet
forces, especially theater forces. An SCC outcome that merely replaces
old SIOP criteria (e.g., 70 percent of economic recovery) with new SIOP
criteria (e.g. 60 percent of all Great Russians and 50 percent of Ukra-
nians) is a paralyzing, non-­change decision. An effective decision will call
for flexibility in targeting in support of other military operations, which
are tailored to particular war aims as they are developed for a partic-
ular future situation. It will move us away from the dangerous “1914”
syndrome.
117.	 Note From President Carter to Secretary of Defense Brown
and the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 3, 1979
To Harold, Zbig
a) What is status of the assessment of truck mounted mobile
launchers for ICBM? Who is doing this analysis?
b) What is status of negotiation with SU re prior notice of ICBM
test launches? What type of tests is included?
J.C.
to Brown under an April 3 covering memorandum, in which he noted that his staff and
Brown’s staff should “coordinate a prompt reply to the President’s questions.” (Ibid.)

118.	 Minutes of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Strategic Forces Employment Policy (U)
PARTICIPANTS
place in the White House Situation Room. Brackets are in the original. The Summary of
Conclusions is ibid.
State
Cyrus Vance
Secretary
Defense
Harold Brown
Secretary
ACDA
Spurgeon Keeny
Deputy Director
JCS
General David Jones
Chairman
White House
Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
CIA
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Director
NSC
Victor Utgoff
Detailed Minutes
Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting by suggesting that we discuss
how to proceed. He said that the ultimate goal of the process would
probably be an NSC meeting with the President, and perhaps a new PD
on Strategic Targeting Policy, or at least an update—­some parts of the
current PD need an update.2 (S)
Dr. Brzezinski also noted that there are a large number of import-
ant political questions raised by this study;3 in particular, what we say
about employment policy to our Allies and to our public. He recom-
mended Harold state the purpose of the study, summarize its main
results and discuss what it is and what it isn’t. (S)
Secretary Brown noted that what we say about deterrence and war
fighting are particularly important. He then began his introduction of
the study. He noted that in his mind the principal purpose of being
prepared to handle various war fighting scenarios is the effect such
capabilities have on deterrence. He noted, however, that the report
does not propose that we move from deterrence to a war fighting

capability. He noted that some Soviet writers and strategists seem to
recognize a difference in potential nuclear war outcomes. He said that
we must take such things into account when we consider how to deter
the Soviets. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that what we deter them from doing is a cen-
tral issue. (U)
Secretary Brown responded by noting that one of the things we are
trying to deter them from is attempting political intimidation of the US
or its Allies. (C)
Secretary Brown continued his summary by noting that the study
does not say that the Soviets are right in believing that nuclear war can
be won in any meaningful sense, and it doesn’t say that we should shift
from targeting the Soviet urban industrial base to targeting Soviet mili-
tary forces. He noted that most of our SIOP weapons have always been
targeted on Soviet military forces. (TS)
Secretary Vance questioned Harold’s statement that the study was
not proposing to shift from economic to military targets. (S)
Secretary Brown and General Jones noted that the changes proposed
by the study probably won’t change the target list much at all. (S)
Mr Keeny disputed this by saying that shifting our emphasis from
urban industrial to military targets is a central theme in the study. He
argued that the study notes that we don’t understand how to prolong
Soviet recovery from a nuclear attack, and thus that we should place
more emphasis on military targets. (TS)
[Spurgeon is wrong on this point—­he is mixed up on two issues:
The study says that we don’t understand how to prolong Soviet recov-
ery and thus should drop prolonging recovery as an objective of our
targeting and shift our industrial targeting back toward two broad sets
of targets—­war supporting industry, and, as the ultimate deterrent, the
broad urban industrial base that would support the post-­war power of
the Soviet Union. Within military targeting, the study proposes a more
flexible building block approach to the SIOP, plus the development of
a capability to target Soviet conventional forces even after they have
begun moving away from their peacetime locations. While implemen-
tation of the study’s recommendations may lead to some shifts in the
fraction of our weapons going to military as opposed to non-­military
targets, it does not appear that this shift will be significant.] (TS)
Secretary Brown responded by saying that Mr. Keeny was making
too big an issue of how the study’s recommendations might change
the percentage of our weapons allocated to military as opposed to
non-­military targets. Secretary Brown noted that the study recom-
mends placing more emphasis on being able to hit moving targets, C3
and leadership. He noted that while the ability to do these things was

important, he still thought that if a nuclear war ever got started, it was
very likely to quickly become an all out war. (TS)
Secretary Vance asked how many weapons might be shifted from
urban industrial to military targets if the study’s recommendations
were adopted. (S)
Secretary Brown answered that only a small percentage change
would occur because we have always emphasized targeting military
forces in the SIOP. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski asked Secretary Brown to elaborate on Mr. Keeny’s
point. He noted the proposal to change how we target industry and
asked what war supporting industry really is. (S)
Secretary Brown attempted to go back to his original line of argu-
ment by noting that if in the course of a war between the US and the
Soviet Union, we did not destroy Soviet general purpose forces, they
might use these forces to capture the European industrial base and use
it to aid in their own recovery. He said that this sort of possibility moti-
vates his interest in being able to destroy moving Soviet general pur-
pose forces. He argued that being able to destroy such forces can serve
as additional deterrent to nuclear war, but questioned how we could
convey the deterrent message to the Soviets. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski answered by noting that if we display sufficient flex-
ibility to do this sort of thing, the Soviets will get the message. (S)
Mr. Keeny then argued that the study says that the Soviets may
be more deterred from starting a nuclear war if we shift our targeting
more toward military forces. (S)
Secretary Brown responded by saying that the study does not say
that. It proposes to improve our capabilities to target military forces,
and that such improvements would be an additional deterrent to the
Soviets. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski then rescued the discussion by asking Harold to
return to his summary of the study. (U)
Secretary Brown continued by saying that the study does not sug-
gest that we abandon economic or city targeting. He noted that the ulti-
mate deterrent will continue to be the comprehensive targeting of the
urban industrial base. Finally, he argued that the main point is that the
study is not urging a big change in targeting policy. (S)
Secretary Brown then began to summarize some of the additional
follow-­on efforts being made within DOD. He cited a list of studies
on criteria for targeting various categories of targets such as nuclear
threat targets, other military targets, C3I, Soviet leadership, etc. He
mentioned work underway to improve the flexibility of the SIOP by
structuring building block options that could be combined to suit
evolving circumstances in a nuclear war. He mentioned several efforts

to restructure some of the selected attack options that were defined
several years ago. (S)
He noted that DOD is now developing a launch under attack
option. He said that 71 percent of the Minuteman force is now targeted
against low collateral damage military targets in the SIOP, but that we
currently have no way to withhold the remaining 29 percent. (S)
He said that DOD is looking at limited nuclear option attacks to
damage and disrupt Soviet forces on the Chinese frontier. He noted that
DOD is also developing plans to substitute regional nuclear options for
SIOP attacks on China. (TS)
He commented on efforts being made to improve the targeting
data base. He cited efforts being made to improve the crisis manage-
ment process, in particular by structuring exercises that would include
senior officials in planning non-SIOP options. He noted that several
efforts are underway to improve our C3 capabilities. He said that first
priority must go to achieving improved survivability for our C3 in the
initial stages of a war and, after we have achieved this, we should pur-
sue measures to improve long-­term endurance of both C3 and forces.
He noted that both the Air Force and the Navy are carrying out studies
on connectivity of their C3 networks. Finally, he noted that DOD is con-
structing some additional nuclear options against Soviet conventional
forces in Eastern Europe. He raised the question of how we might go
about telling our NATO Allies about these efforts. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski commented that this was a long list of efforts and
that it, along with the other issues in the study, constituted a very long
list of items for the group to discuss. He suggested that we should
structure the discussion by framing the major issues as follows: (1)
what are the requirements of stable deterrence at different levels? (2)
what are the requirements of stable crisis bargaining? and (3) what are
the requirements of effective war management? He noted that we must
move beyond planning for nuclear force employment as if all the forces
would be employed in a single spasmodic attack. (TS)
Secretary Brown agreed with this last point, but said that it is impor­
tant to have our planning for all out nuclear war well in hand because
an all out spasm war is the most likely possibility, given the unlikely
possibility of nuclear war in the first place. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski responded by noting that the very likelihood of all
out nuclear war is increased if all out spasm war is the only kind of
nuclear war we can fight. He then asked Secretary Vance if the three
questions he had posed constituted a reasonable framework for further
discussion. (S)
Secretary Vance responded by noting that the first question was
fine, but asked what was meant by the second. (U)

Dr. Brzezinski responded by noting that our requirements for C3I
and civil defense could only be understood if we discussed the roles
they would play in crisis bargaining scenarios. (S)
Secretary Brown agreed that while we should relate targeting to
these issues, the targeting study is not cast in these terms. He noted
that the question at hand was what should be the thrust of our targeting
Mr. Keeny then said that many things in the study are very diffi-
cult to discuss because the study presents little information on what we
would have to buy if we accept its recommendations. (C)
Secretary Brown noted that the first question is what to do with
what we have. (U)
Mr. Keeny rebutted by saying that our employment policy has
implications for our acquisition policy. (U)
Secretary Brown noted that we have traditionally separated employ-
ment from acquisition by discussing employment in terms of what
should be done with the available forces. Acquisition was then dis-
cussed separately in terms of the degree to which the agreed employ-
ment objectives were met. (C)
Mr. Keeny then commented that we must understand the declar-
atory policy issue before we proceed with the study’s recommenda-
Dr. Brzezinski responded by stating what we should first decide
what we need, and then establish how we should package or explain
Mr. Aaron proposed a middle course, specifically that we talk about
targeting issues, but then test our resulting ideas against Dr. Brzezinski’s
questions. (C)
He went on to make the point that stability at one level can be
the enemy of deterrence at another level. For example, overall stra-
tegic superiority may create a very stable situation with respect to
deterring Soviet military initiatives, but be very destabilizing in the
degree to which it encourage Soviet efforts to improve and expand
their forces. (S)
He also noted his concern about the impact of our discussion of
these issues on our own and our Allies’ confidence. He suggested that
many who discuss these issues give us less than proper credit for our
real capabilities. (U)
Secretary Vance noted that he shares this concern. (U)
Secretary Brown commented that Mr. Aaron’s last point had more
to do with the adequacy to our strategic posture than the targeting

Mr. Aaron then made the point that we must focus on how certain
types of preparations to fight nuclear war might actually undermine
deterrence. (C)
General Jones said that he sees the basic thrust of of the study as a
push for much more flexibility and in the future for more endurance,
not only for our forces but for our C3I systems. He noted that there were
a number of narrower issues that we can and should get on with. He
cited the issue of how we should target China as an example. He said
that we can make some useful decisions without solving all the broad
problems. (TS)
Admiral Turner said he thinks of the study in terms of three ques-
tions: how does our targeting policy affect (1) Soviet diplomacy; (2)
Soviet deterrence; and (3) Soviet war fighting? (C)
Dr. Brzezinski said that he agreed with Mr. Aaron’s suggestion that
we should focus on some of the more important issues and then test
them against the larger framework he had proposed. As a first issue, he
proposed discussion of whether or not China should be removed from
the SIOP. As a second issue, he proposed a discussion of the problems
involved in targeting population/leadership/C3 and the idea of target-
ing to achieve regionalization of the Soviet Union. (TS)
General Jones suggested that the population targeting issue be
dropped because population targeting is illegal under international
agreements to which the US is a party. (S)
There were several comments to the effect that retaliation for
attacks that killed civilian population was not illegal. Secretary Brown
noted that while our current efforts to minimize collateral damage
to population bias our targeting away from residential areas, strikes
against industry may cause many fatalities. (S)
Secretary Brown then noted there is a real issue here—­do we want
to be able to hit an evacuated Soviet population? (TS)
Admiral Turner asked what the group believes really deters the
Soviets most. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski responded that it is the threat to the Soviet popula-
tion, and Secretary Vance agreed. (S)
Secretary Brown expressed some skepticism, and also noted that
the population fatality calculations that are done currently reflect only
fatalities due to prompt nuclear effects, and thus might be quite low. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski reiterated his belief that Soviet leadership is con-
cerned about the survival of its population, and noted that it is appro-
priate to discuss the population issue in terms of the importance of
assuring that there are no significant asymmetries in the population
losses that might be suffered by the two sides. (TS)

As a third issue, Dr. Brzezinski proposed discussion of economic
targeting, and in particular, whether we should continue to have as an
objective the prolongation of Soviet recovery, or should instead tar-
get the Soviet economy in terms of war sustaining industry and the
broad urban industrial base upon which Soviet post-­war power would
depend. (TS)
Secretary Brown noted that this may not be an important issue
because whichever policy we choose for economic targeting will prob-
ably lead to pretty much the same targets. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski then asked how we should deal with the issue of
hard-­target kill—­specifically the ability to destroy Soviet silos, shel-
tered leadership and targets of this type. (TS)
Secretary Brown noted that this is primarily an acquisition issue. (U)
Mr. Aaron responded by saying that it is important to discuss it,
nonetheless, because many people think of targeting in terms of this
Secretary Brown noted that a major reason to want hard-­target kill
capabilities is to eliminate Soviet capabilities to reload and reuse their
missile silos. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski then stated that the fourth issue would be a discus-
sion of the need for prompt hard-­target kill capability. (S)
Secretary Vance then suggested that the SCC discuss how our tar-
geting policy impacts on European interests. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski argued that this issue should be taken up later. (U)
General Jones said that some new SAOs are being constructed for
targeting conventional forces in Eastern Europe, and that these target-
ing plans might be well received by our NATO Allies. (TS)
Mr. Aaron said this is probably not true of all of our European
Allies and the issue of whether, when and how to discuss these new
SAOs with our Allies should be thought through carefully. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski then suggested that the fifth and sixth issues for dis-
cussion should be the launch-­under-­attack question, and the impact of
our targeting plans upon our Allies. (TS)
Mr. Aaron suggested that after the issues Dr. Brzezinski had sug-
gested had been dealt with, the SCC should discuss our declaratory
and acquisition policies. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski then suggested Harold Brown should be prepared to
open the discussion in the next meeting on the first two or three issues,
and that background papers drawing on the study should be prepared
on all the issues. (U)

Secretary Vance noted that these papers would be very sensitive
and suggested that they be distributed to the principals through the
ALPHA channel. (S)
General Jones then commented that the discussion had missed two
important points, specifically, that we should pursue greater flexibility
and endurance in our strategic targeting and our force posture. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski responded by saying that he had assumed this was
understood by all. (U)
Mr. Aaron noted that it is the purposes of flexibility that must be
discussed by the SCC. (C)
Secretary Brown reacted by saying that in his view flexibility was
not the central theme for discussion—­that achievement of greater flex-
ibility in the SIOP was simply something he believed the President
would expect DOD to be pursuing. (S)
[Two issues are being raised up here—­flexibility achieved within
the SIOP by means of the building block approach which is well within
Harold’s charter to do. However, the other type of flexibility, the kind
required to attack Soviet forces on the move, does raise issues that
should be discussed within the NSC process.] (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski commented that it may require more than one addi-
tional meeting to discuss all these issues and that in future meetings,
the principals could each bring one additional person. (U)
Secretary Brown also proposed that the group receive briefings he
had recently gotten on four subjects: the SIOP, the RISOP, C3 connectiv-
ity, and the MX. He said that these briefings could be heard in a total of
approximately two hours. At this point, Dr. Brzezinski adjourned the
meeting. (C)

119.	 Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Program Analysis and Evaluation (Murray) to
Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, April 9, 1979
SUBJECT
PRC on the Consolidated Guidance
In a note to Charles on March 20th, you asked that I chair a work-
ing group in preparation for a PRC on the CG.2 The group—­consisting
of Les Gelb, Randy Jayne, Dan Murphy, Walt Slocombe, Bill Smith, and
Vic Utgoff—­met for the first time on March 30th to hear suggestions
for the PRC meeting agenda. Those suggestions are summarized in
this memo. To the extent that you approve them, the working group
will turn next to the preparation of suitable back-­up material for the
principals.
Fortunately, all members of the working group agree on the princi-
pal issue for discussion at the PRC meeting: the adequacy to the needs
of national security of the forces and capabilities assumed in the CG.3
That is an issue that the CG was never really intended to address.
Though adequacy is in no small way dependent on funding, the CG
does not determine the fiscal guidance—­it merely reports it. And since
the CG is intended primarily to guide the preparation of the Service
POMs, we labor to assure that its forces and capabilities are at least
consistent with that (exogenously determined) fiscal guidance. But
whether that funding—­and the forces and capabilities that flow from
it—­is adequate to the needs of national security is quite another matter,
and one the working group agrees is the biggest loose end of all con-
cerning the CG.
Though no great surprise, the most consistent charge from the Ser-
vices and Chiefs in their comments on the CG was one of inadequacy
to the needs of national security. Our response to the effect that the CG
was never intended to define “how much is enough”, though correct,
stamped notation on the first page indicates that Brown saw the memorandum. In the
upper right corner of the memorandum, Brown wrote: “4/10, RM II, Good, see my notes.
HB.”
3 In the right margin next to this sentence, Brown wrote: “and is the Financial Guid-
ance enough to fund it.”

begs the question. While the PRC alone cannot resolve the issue, it’s
hard for us to imagine anything of higher priority for the agenda. In
fact, discussions of lesser issues in the CG could well be idle so long as
that basic issue remains unresolved.
A suggested agenda based around that central issue (and fleshed
out below):
1. The Needs of National Security
A. The Basic PD–18 Criterion
B. Strategic Forces
C. NATO
D. Non-NATO
2. Affordability of Current Programs
A. Navy
B. Air Force
C. Army
3. Alternatives
As for 1A, PD–18 states that “the United States will maintain an
overall balance of military power between the United States and its
allies on the one hand and the Soviet Union and its allies on the other
PRC might want to address our performance in that regard during the
intervening year and a half, and we can supply some background mate-
rial to illuminate the issue. But it might also want to reconsider the
policy itself, since it states only that the balance shall get no worse, but
does not explicitly address the balance itself, or the possible need for a
worldwide perception of a positive (rather than merely non-­negative)
first derivative of the balance function over time.5
As for 1B, we can furnish the principals with a great variety of
both static and dynamic indicators of the strategic balance, both now
and in the future, and with all sorts of alternative assumptions as to
both US and Soviet programs. While all that is essential background
material, the larger issue has to do less with our own mathematical
calculations of that balance than with how others perceive it. Essen-
tial equivalence—­which PD–18 adopts as a central policy—­is largely, if
not entirely, perceptual.6 The group believes that an evaluation of that
perception and its likely trend for the future is a most important issue
5 In the right margin next to this sentence, Brown drew a vertical line and wrote: “I
agree—­this is the most important issue—­even if PRC can’t resolve it.”
6 In the right margin, Brown drew an arrow pointing to this sentence and wrote
“largely, but not entirely.”

for the PRC. Subsidiary issues such as MX basing, targeting policy, etc.,
no matter how important in their own right, should not displace an
evaluation of the adequacy of our programs to carry out the policy of
essential equivalence.
As for IC, our announced policy is to have “the capability, in con-
junction with (our) allies, to stop a Warsaw Pact attack with minimum
loss of territory and ultimately to restore prewar boundaries.” The anal-
yses in the CG give little if any reason for confidence in our ability to
carry out that policy. However, at least as important an issue is whether
the force balances we calculate are adequate to deter a Pact attack, quite
apart from any consideration of restoring prewar boundaries. The
judgement of the PRC on that issue would be important.7
A possible additional issue for consideration in connection with
NATO is the allocation of forces to the flanks as distinct from the Cen-
tral Front. We could lay out the opposing forces as an aid in making
a judgement of this issue (which is of great importance to the Navy).
However, we must guard against loading down the principals with
so many subsidiary issues that they never arrive at the all-­important
central judgement as to adequacy in the aggregate. Much depends, of
course, on how much time you believe will be available.8
1D on the agenda is a particularly difficult issue—­whether our
forces are adequate to handle non-NATO contingencies. We have rea-
sonable confidence in our estimates of the military balance for Korea,
but not for areas such as the Persian Gulf, where our analyses still have
a ways to go, and where our understanding of the issues is nowhere
near as developed as it is in our more traditional areas of interest. Yet,
the issue cannot be ignored, and I would suggest that we do the best we
can. One special point worthy of consideration by the PRC is the CG’s
assumption—­based on our estimated capability—­that we will not have
to cope with a mobilization or war in Europe sooner than 45 days after
we start a deployment to the Persian Gulf.9 We can calculate the cost of
being able to cope with greater degrees of simultaneity, but adequacy is
a matter for PRC consideration.
Part 2 of the agenda deals with the general subject of affordability—­
whether the current programs will “fit” within the likely fiscal
7 Brown drew a vertical line and put a check mark in the right margin next to this
and the preceding sentence.
8 Brown wrote “This is one issue we ought to include” in the right margin next to
this paragraph.
9 Brown drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this sentence and wrote:
“worth asking for judgments.”

guidance.10 As you know, the CG addressed that issue directly in the
case of tactical air and the case of amphibious assault forces. Since that
time, we have seen some preliminary work by the OpNav staff on the
affordability of the Navy as a whole, the results of which imply perhaps
an even more serious problem than we understood. (Tom Hayward
tells me he will be glad to make this analysis available to us, and enthu-
siastically endorses the idea of having it on the PRC agenda.) PA&E has
continued to work on the affordability of USAF tactical air, and should
be able to have something worthwhile by way of background material
before the PRC. I am less confident in the case of the Army, but it does
seem to me that the general problem of affordability—­even with a real
3% annual growth—­is liable to be serious, and that we may be faced
with a declining force structure. If the analyses now being worked out
substantiate that concern, there is no question in my mind but that the
PRC principals should be made aware of it, and that it should be dis-
cussed in the context of adequacy.11
The final part of the agenda would deal with alternatives, which
seem to be:
• If necessary, alter the fiscal guidance to match the policies and
objectives, or
• If necessary, alter the policies and objectives to match the fiscal
guidance, or
• Try to influence our Allies’ actions (which would include the
issue of our shared commitment to an annual 3% real growth in defense
expenditures), or
• Some combination of the above, or
• Decide that the current situation is satisfactory, and do nothing.
While the group agrees that some rough indication of the quan-
titative aspects of these alternatives is important, there should be no
attempt to turn this PRC meeting into a budget-­setting exercise.12
Rather, the emphasis should be on reaching a judgement as to the gen-
eral adequacy of the forces and capabilities implied by the CG and,
10 In the right margin next to this sentence, Brown wrote: “Should perhaps put
another way: 1) are present pgms sufficient 2) can we afford present pgms within fiscal
guidance.”
11 In the right margin, Brown drew an arrow pointing to the end of this paragraph
and wrote: “I’d like to approach this differently: 1) what can we buy within present FG?
2) how well does that meet needs of national security, 3) with added funding increments,
what added forces can be procured/maintained, 4) how do these add to security.”
12 Brown underlined the words “there should be no attempt to turn this PRC meet-
ing into a budget-­setting exercise,” drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this
sentence, and wrote “very important.”

should they appear inadequate, a further judgment as to which alter-
natives should be pursued in more detail.
If you will give us your reaction to these suggestions, or others of
your own, we’ll get busy on the back-­up material. (Vic Utgoff tells me
that Zbig would like a cut at this suggested agenda.)13
Russell Murray, 2nd
Assistant Secretary of Defense
Program Analysts and Evaluation
13 Brown drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this paragraph and wrote
“OK—­invite Vic to show it to Zbig with my comments.” In an April 11 memorandum
from Utgoff to Brzezinski, Utgoff endorsed Murray’s agenda, noting that it was “rea-
sonable provided the Working Group can develop good background information, and
provided we can control it well enough to make it a respectable examination of the issues
rather than simply an attempt to high pressure the White House into a larger DOD bud-
get.” Bartholomew underlined the words “an attempt to high pressure the White House
into a larger DOD budget,” wrote “*” next to this phrase, and wrote at the bottom of
the memorandum: “ZB: Murray’s memo is very good, but Harold’s comments on it
are even better. His notes on page 3 on how the discussion of force and fiscal adequacy
should be structured are right on—­and the best way to head off the pressure Vic notes
(* above) and to avoid putting the President in (too much of) a box. (Even though I think
we should be spending more.) Reg.” Brzezinski indicated his approval of the agenda set
out in ­Murray’s memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,

120.	 Memorandum From Charles Stebbins of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 10, 1979
SUBJECT
The President as Commander-­in-Chief (U)
I have listed some substantive and cosmetic actions at the Tab that
the President could take to enhance the public’s perception of him as
Commander-­in-Chief of the Armed Forces, and to reverse what I sense
to be a growing alienation of the military community from him. (C/S)
Certainly, the President’s decisions on Vietnam amnesty, B–1,
Defense veto, military pay cap, etc., have been controversial, and he
faces some similarly difficult decisions in the near future (SALT, CTB,
M–X, the military retirement system, etc.); but I do not believe that the
inevitable consequences of such decisions need be a lessened leader-
ship image and an alienated military community. (C/S)
Rather, I believe that the perception of the President as Commander-­
in-Chief can be improved perhaps substantially by our making his
already considerable contacts and involvements with the military more
visible to the public, and by increasing their number and scope. (C/S)
I also believe that the President can reverse the alienation process
by being sensitive to the special psychological needs of the military
community in making its members feel that as their Commander, the
President regards them with “special” affection and not just as another
category of “federal government employees.” Very simply, these
people—­who endure the hardships of life in missile silos, submarines
and remote locations away from families—­believe they are indeed
“special” and that their peacetime sacrifices deserve public recognition
and appreciation no less than their wartime sacrifices. I feel that some
additional and carefully considered bows in this direction by the Presi-
dent could produce dramatic results. (C/S)
dential; Sensitive. Sent for information. Brzezinski wrote “good, ZB” in the upper right
corner of the memorandum.

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council2
Washington, undated
SUGGESTED PRESIDENTIAL ACTIONS
• Deliver a major, nationwide address on the importance of the
Armed Forces and of their special relationship with the President. Put
Vietnam behind us by eliminating the “second-­class citizen” stigma
that has been attached to the military since that conflict. Recognize the
wartime and peacetime sacrifices of the military community, with a
special bow to the families of the KIAs/MIAs (who are still regarded
with considerable reverence in the military community). Recognize
also the special demands placed on the Services as a result of our more
complex two-­tracked approach to national security—­arms plus arms
control. (Suggest: Memorial Day, Armed Forces Day, Veterans Day, or
Vietnam Veterans Week.)
• Continue the above theme in every subsequent major address
(where feasible), including State of the Union message.
• Deliver a major, nationwide address on SALT TWO, explaining:
the hard choices that were made and why they were the right ones;
that we are committed to essential equivalence; and that JCS advice
played a prominent role in making these choices. Announce the M–X
decision or expand on it. (Suggest: the AF Academy Commencement
Ceremony.)
• Announce “quality of life” decisions (e.g., the military retirement
policy, Ethics law, pay caps, selective service decisions, etc.) at the open-
ing of press conferences or in other fora with nationwide audiences. If
the decision will be unpopular in the military community, announce it
as the Commander-­in-Chief expecting his subordinates to rally to the
decision.
• When traveling, attempt to visit an important military installa-
tion enroute or near the destination, with appropriate pomp and pub-
licity. Where possible, inspect facilities and talk to enlisted personnel.
Attend important missile, aircraft or ship launchings (or significant
tests).
• After the fact, publicize any direct Presidential involvement in
military exercises or crises (e.g. Yemen), to demonstrate a readiness and
determination to take actions as Commander-­in-Chief when necessary.
2 Confidential; Sensitive.

• Meet with the JCS perhaps once a year away from the White
House to discuss their view of the state of the world. Invite the JCS to
important state dinners, and dine with the JCS, the CINCs and their
wives once each year. Meet the JCS and their Operations Deputies in
the Pentagon nerve center (the “Tank”) perhaps once a year, focusing
on readiness and leadership instead of programs and management—­
which absorb the bulk of the JCS/Presidential discussions. Announce
and publicize each meeting with the JCS—­wherever held and on what-
ever subject.
•Host a Q and A session with the senior enlisted members of the
Services (each Service has one member so designated) to hear the views
of the people at the bottom of the pyramid.
• Improve liaison between the President and the Services/JCS in
administrative, morale and welfare matters, by appointing a senior mil-
itary office to serve as Deputy Military Assistant to the President. (in
Marty Beaman’s office).
• Attend Service Academy football games and one of their com-
mencement exercises each year.
• Establish a Presidential-­level program to reward military
achievement or excellence, akin to the Medal of Freedom program.
121.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 10, 1979
SUBJECT
Ground Mobile M-X (U)
Harold has responded (Tab A) to your questions of last week
regarding the study of ground mobile basing systems for an M–X mis-
sile.2 In reading the memo you might note the following points:
First, the road mobile system that the study team seems to favor
carries an “M–X” missile that is about the size of the Minuteman III
missile. While its more energetic fuel allows it to throw more RVs over
of the memorandum.
2 See Document 117.

a longer range than Minuteman III, it has about half the throw weight
of the larger M–X variants that the Air Force wants. (S)
Second, the memo gives no indication that DOD is giving the issue
of strategic surprise more than superficial treatment. For example, in
order to deny us strategic warning the Soviets might have to leave
themselves so much more vulnerable to our retaliatory strike as to more
than offset the extra counterforce effectiveness they might gain. I will
ask Harold to look into this issue carefully. (S)

Tab A

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter3
Washington, April 7, 1979
SUBJECT
Ground Missile M–X (U)
(U) You asked for a status report on Ground Mobile M–X. We have
had a team restudying this problem the past few months in parallel
with our study of Air Mobile M–X. Both studies were under the direc-
tion of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering.
The Ground Mobile team consisted of senior personnel from the Air
Force Office of System Analysis and two contractors (Boeing and Mar-
tin). All of them have had extensive experience in missiles and their
basing systems (the Air Force team leader was the same officer who led
our design team on GLCM basing). Their study is essentially finished
and will be ready for review, along with the Air Mobile report, in a
week or two.
(U) The study has considered two different types of ground mobile
systems—­road mobile and off-­road mobile. Preliminary findings on
each of these follow:
Road Mobile:
(S) The missile would be carried on a Transporter Erector Launcher
(TEL) which would weigh (including the missile) about 200,000 pounds
(limited by the load-­carrying capability of the interstate system). [3 lines
not declassified]
3 Secret. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the memorandum.

(S) The system would be based in the southern part of the U.S.
where weather problems would be minimal. Each of the bases would
have security appropriate for the protection of nuclear weapons on
day-­to-­day alert. The TELs would be kept in the open at known loca-
tions to facilitate verification. On the receipt of strategic warning, the
TELs would go out on public roads at maximum speed until they were
so widely dispersed that they could not be successfully barraged.
(S) The baseline system would have 250 TELs and missiles and
dollars) which is about $5B less than MPS. Annual O&S costs would be
For a postulated attack of 70% of the Soviet ICBM RVs (the same
threat we used for MPS and Air Mobile calculation),
a) None of the systems survive a surprise attack, even with a full 30
minutes of tactical warning;
b) With 1 hour of “strategic” warning, none survive;
c) 50% of the systems survive an attack for which we have 4 hours
of strategic warning;
d) 80% of the systems (1000 RVs) survive an attack for which we
have 6 hours of strategic warning.
(S) To achieve a degree of survivability against a surprise attack
it is necessary to maintain some percentage of the systems dispersed
on the highways. The difficulty with peacetime dispersal is the public
interface problems created by moving nuclear missiles about on public
highways and the possibility of an accident. We will continue to exam-
ine the legal and environmental aspects of such a peacetime dispersal.
Off-Road Mobile:
(S) In the off-­road mobile concept, the missile achieves its surviv-
ability by being moved about on its TEL at frequent intervals. To avoid
public interface problems, its movement during peacetime is limited
to Defense Department bases in the southwest (Yuma Bomber Range,
Nellis Air Base, e.g.). Because of the possibility of barraging this limited
area, the TEL would have to be very hard [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] and therefore very heavy (on the order of 1,000,000 pounds), and
expensive. If confined to DOD land, such a system would be able to
provide the equivalent of 1,000 to 2,000 independent aim-­points for
Soviet 1 MT warheads.
(U) Further consideration and detail will be included in my pre-
sentation of ICBM rebasing options to you following a PRC on the sub-
ject later this month.
Harold Brown

122.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, April 10, 1979
SUBJECT
Strategic Warning (U)
Both the truck and the air mobile basing schemes you are now
studying are dependent to some degree on strategic warning. Thus, it
seems important that our debate on the basing mode be supported by a
better understanding of the strategic warning issue. (S)
In thinking about this issue, the following questions seem relevant:
—Can improvements of our strategic warning capabilities signifi-
cantly reduce our worries about surprise attack? Are there significant
motivations to make such improvements independent of the basing
mode chosen for the M–X? (S)
—In plausible nuclear attack scenarios, can the Soviets deny us
strategic warning only by leaving extra vulnerabilities to our retalia-
tory attack that would more than offset the increased effectiveness of
their initial attack? (S)
—In assessing the public interface issue—­what has been our expe-
rience concerning public reaction to military convoys in the US, or in
Europe—­especially movements of nuclear missile systems such as
Honest John, Pershing? (S)
—What can be done to minimize the political repercussions of dis-
persing the ground or air mobile systems? Can practical arrangements
be made that will (1) give the authority to disperse to an official who
can be insulated from the political repercussions of such decisions, and
(2) guarantee him immediate access to all the potential strategic warn-
ing information? (S)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
123.	 Memorandum From Victor Utgoff, William Odom, and
Fritz Ermarth of the National Security Council Staff to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, April 24, 1979
SUBJECT
Targeting Study SCC
Tomorrow’s SCC is largely an education for State and ACDA. It
involves Defense briefings on SIOP, RISOP, and C3I vulnerabilities. You
should seek the following objectives in the meeting:
—Greater awareness that we can no longer ride out an attack and
then retaliate in a coordinated fashion. More explicitly, the land-­based
ICBM vulnerability problem has its analogy in NCA vulnerability. Both
need a new basing mode.
—Greater awareness that the 1960s assured destruction doctrine
—Greater awareness of what the Soviets can do to us as a result of
our present capabilities to only fight a spasm war.
These three objectives illustrate the importance of your three con-
ceptual questions in the last SCC: (1) what does it take to deter today?
(2) to maintain crisis bargaining stability? (3) to manage the battle if
deterrence fails?
The following additional comments will prepare you for the sepa-
rate briefings.
The SIOP Briefing
This is standard information, nothing you have not seen before. A
critical point is hidden in the category “political leadership.” The SIOP
purports to provide a selective attack on the leadership which might
be understood as a counter-C3I attack. In fact, it is based on target data
that omits hundreds of leadership bunkers and C3I facilities because we
have not located them.
for action.

The RISOP
This is fairly standard information which you saw at SAC last sum-
mer.2 The key point for you is what it shows about our C3I vulnerability.
JCS Connectivity Study
This is the study that General Ellis has hounded Odom and Hugh
Carter about. The recommendations should be viewed as SAC’s wish
list. Some are ridiculous, e.g. putting the helicopter near the White
House (South Lawn or on top of the OEOB were the SAC sugges-
tions!!). SAC wants to believe that the President can escape under any
Soviet attack. It is not possible in the SLBM scenario, but SAC will not
admit that. Instead, they claim the White House (i.e. Hugh Carter)
is preventing a solution. Some of the suggestions have already been
implemented. Listen to them and do not respond.
The Navy Connectivity Study
This briefing shows a number of SSBN connectivity problems not
fully spelled out to you before. Listen for the information, but treat the
conclusions and recommendations as a major problem area to be kept in
mind as further SCC deliberations occur. You may want to underscore
the obsession in this briefing and the JCS (SAC) study with a spasm
response. Enduring C3I is only briefly dealt with in the end of the Navy
study when concern over transattack and post-­attack C3I management
arises. In a word, the studies do not give us effective recommendations
on how to ride out an attack and respond intelligently later on. Nor do
they deal with “battle management” of escalation control in a nuclear
campaign.

124.	 Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Strategic Forces Employment Policy
PARTICIPANTS
place in the White House Situation Room. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the
memorandum. No minutes of the meeting were found.
State
Cyrus Vance
Leslie Gelb
Director for Politico-­Military
Affairs
OSD
Charles Duncan
Deputy Secretary
Admiral Daniel Murphy
Deputy Under Secretary for
Policy
ACDA
George Seignious
Spurgeon Keeny
Deputy Director
JCS
General David Jones
Lt General William Smith
Assistant to the Chairman
General Richard Ellis
Commander in Chief, SAC
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Howard Stoertz
NIO for Strategic Policy
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
NSC
Victor Utgoff
Fritz Ermarth
Summary of Conclusions
An SCC meeting was held for the purpose of hearing some brief-
ings by the JCS that DOD sees as important background for the SCC’s
continuing discussion of strategic forces employment policy. (S)
The first brief described the latest major revision of the SIOP. It
described the targeting guidance under which the SIOP is prepared,
the numbers and types of targets that are included in the national tar-
get base and are thus candidates for attack, the numbers of weapons
applied to the targets under each attack option, and the consequences
of execution under different conditions. (TS)
The most important points made in this brief were that (1) under
the best of conditions we can destroy [percentage not declassified] of the
Soviet nuclear threat targets, (2) in their most vulnerable posture, the
Soviets would lose [percentage not declassified] of their population, and

(3) Soviet civil defense can hold these fatalities under the worst of our
currently planned attacks to about [percentage not declassified]. (TS)
The second brief described the results of the latest RISOP analysis
in which Studies, Analysis and Gaming Agency analysts apply Soviet
strategic forces in hypothetical strikes against the US. The objectives
assumed for the Soviet Union are to defeat “enemy nuclear capabili-
ties,” eliminate the US as a major global power, facilitate Soviet recov-
ery and reconstruction, improve the (postwar) correlation of forces, and
be prepared to fight the PRC. (TS)
The first “Soviet” attack option considered involved a preemptive
attack with both sides on fully generated alert and with counterforce
being the dominant objective. The attack employs over [number not
declassified] warheads and holds over [number not declassified] warheads
in reserve. It places a high priority on destroying the US C3 system in
order to disrupt our retaliatory attack. It results in severe damage to
[percentage not declassified] the US missile silos, destruction of [percentage
not declassified] of the manufacturing value added of the assumed US
industrial target base, and fatality levels of approximately [percentage
not declassified] for the US and [percentage not declassified] for our Euro-
pean Allies. (TS)
The second “Soviet” attack option considered was a bolt-­from-­
the-­blue attack again emphasizing destruction of “enemy” nuclear
forces. The Soviets attack [number not declassified] hours into a major
Soviet exercise. Some [number not declassified] fewer weapons are avail-
able as a consequence of not being on a full alert. However, the damage
expectancies achieved in the attack are nearly as high as in the first
option. (TS)
In closing, the briefer emphasized two points—­first, while their
attack plans could not guarantee the destruction of the alert bomber
force or the C3 network connecting the NCA to the SLBM force, it might
achieve very significant results against these systems if the US response
to attack warning was at all delayed or confused. Second, US casualties
would be significantly higher than for the Soviets, particularly if the
Soviets have had time to evacuate their cities. (TS)
The third brief presented the results of a recent JCS examination of
the Soviets ability to destroy the connectivity of the C3 system running
from our tactical warning and attack assessment systems to the NCA
and on out to our strategic forces. (TS)
The study was based on the Soviet nuclear attack constructed by
the RISOP analysts. The study showed that within [less than 1 line not
declassified] of the start of the attack, the Soviets could expect that all
of the major nodes (White House, Crown helo, NMCCS, etc.) of the
current C3 system except for SAC’s Airborne National Command Post
and the Post Attack Command and Control System would be gone. (TS)

The study also looked at a number of possible changes to the C3
system including deployment of mobile ground stations, improving
the Crown helo and moving it closer to the White House, and rebasing
NEACP further from the coast. [2 lines not declassified] (TS)
The final brief concentrated on the connectivity of the airborne
national command post aircraft to the SSBN force. It showed that suc-
cessful receipt and transmission of an EAM through this portion of the
C3 network is very uncertain. The brief also showed that a number of
fairly straightforward and inexpensive improvements can be made that
will significantly improve this situation. (TS)
There was some discussion of the briefs but no specific conclusions
were drawn. The discussion included the following points:
General Jones pointed out the disparity in fatalities and silo destruc-
tion capabilities estimated for the US and the Soviet Union in the first
two briefs. He also pointed out the large number of strategic reserves the
Soviets have left over after they have fulfilled what we think might be
their reasonable strategic attack objectives. He expressed concern that
the importance of moving the NEACP aircraft inland from Andrews
and making the suggested improvements for the Crown helicopter
would not be fully appreciated. Finally, he noted that while the SALT II
limits bound the Soviet threat, the difficulties illustrated in these briefs
would still exist at force levels well below the SALT II limits. (TS)
Secretary Duncan noted that General Jones’ last point illustrates the
importance of achieving deep reductions in SALT III. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski illustrated the value of the three question framework
he presented in the last meeting by commenting that (1) the briefs make
the weaknesses in our ability to manage a nuclear war quite clear, (2)
Soviet knowledge of this fact would weaken our position to bargain
over our respective interests in a nuclear crisis, and (3) this in turn
would lead to a weakening of deterrence. (TS)
Secretary Vance asked a number of questions about the assumptions
underlying the analysis presented in the four briefs. He questioned the
expected destruction of the Crown helo in particular, and the implica-
tion that the current system would only allow about [1 line not declassi-
George Seignious asked how the corresponding situation might look
from the Soviets’ point of view. He was told that while this question
had not been analyzed in any detail, Soviet geographical advantages
and the attention they have paid to making their C3 hard and redun-
dant should lead to a better result for them. (TS)

125.	 Minutes of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Strategic Forces Employment Policy
PARTICIPANTS
place in the White House Situation Room. Brzezinski forwarded the Summary of Con-
clusions of this meeting, along with the Summary of Conclusions of the April 25 meeting
(see Document 124) under cover of a May 1 memorandum to Carter, who wrote: “Insist
on DOD & others maintaining secrecy—J.” (Ibid.)
2 Not found.
State
Warren Christopher
Deputy Secretary
David Gompert
Deputy Director for Politico-­
Military Affairs
JCS
General David Jones
Lt General William Smith
Assistant to the Chairman
ACDA
George Seignious
Spurgen Keeny
Deputy Director
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
OSD
Harold Brown
Admiral Daniel Murphy
Deputy Under Secretary for
Policy
Walter Slocombe
Secretary for International
­Security Affairs
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Howard Stoertz
NIO for Strategic Policy
NSC
Victor Utgoff
Fritz Ermarth
Detailed Minutes
Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting with a reminder on where we
are headed. He cited the five topics to be discussed today, and said
that Harold Brown will summarize the backup papers2 that have been
prepared in order to start the discussion of each topic. He noted that we
will have another SCC meeting to discuss the remaining topics and will
then have an NSC meeting with the President to discuss the SCC’s rec-
ommendations with respect to strategic forces employment policy. He
noted that the end objective of the entire process would be a new PD.
He then recalled the three questions he had posed in the first SCC
meeting on this overall issue—­what are the requirements of (1) effec-
tive nuclear war management for defined political purposes, (2) crisis

bargaining stability, and (3) stable deterrence at different levels.3 He
suggested that to avoid getting bogged down, we should discuss the
various issues in these terms. He noted that the message he got from
the previous day’s briefs was that there are many weaknesses in our
C3 system that imply a very poor capability to manage a nuclear war
today. He noted that these weaknesses imply a weak bargaining posi-
tion for us in a crisis, and this in turn implies a weakening of deter-
rence. Thus, the three questions are related.
Admiral Turner questioned whether the connection between war
management, crisis stability and deterrence stability was one that
existed in reality or we created ourselves.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that while one could think of this problem in
many ways, the connection between war management, bargaining in a
crisis and deterrence exists, and the Soviets must realize that. He also
said that moreover they may have an incentive in a crisis to exploit this
connection.
Mr. Aaron observed that a bounding case was presented by the abil-
ity of one side to completely defeat or destroy the forces of the other.
In this situation we would be unable to bargain successfully in a crisis
and the Soviets would not be deterred. At this sort of extreme the con-
nection must exist. Short of this extremes, we must weigh the tradeoffs
involved in improving war management capabilities and how such
improvements will affect crisis management and deterrent stability.
Secretary Brown observed that weighing the role of war manage-
ment capabilities is a matter of judgment and that he personally places
little stock in many controlled war scenarios. He did feel, however, that
large asymmetries in enduring war management capability could affect
crisis bargaining and conflict outcomes. In any case, the side that per-
ceived itself inferior in this respect would be extremely nervous in a
crisis.
Dr. Brzezinski commented that in democratic societies such ner-
vousness would spill out into the public with obvious political effects.
The discussion then turned to the first agenda item: China in the
SIOP.
Secretary Brown summarized the DOD point paper noting that at
present there are [4 lines not declassified] Secretary Brown judged that
the current US/Soviet strategic balance argued that SIOP weapons now
allocated to China would be better used against Soviet targets, but he
asked whether the military gain from such a shift, should it become
public, would be worth the possible political problems created.
Dr. Brzezinski asked about the security of such information.
3 See Document 118.

General Seignious asked whether such information had ever leaked,
and who knew now whether or not China was in the SIOP.
Dr. Brzezinski questioned whether this was a change of great mag-
nitude and asked what it would take to accomplish it.
Secretary Brown commented that taking China out of the SIOP
could be accomplished quite simply in the preparation of the next SIOP
revision. Approximately a hundred people would have significant
knowledge of the change effected, but many more could be aware that
a change had taken place.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if we must say that China had been taken out
of the SIOP.
Secretary Brown answered we could ask for an RNO against China
and simply retarget the current SIOP weapons used against China. He
noted that this would be useful, but that if it came out it would still
raise political problems. For example, as in the matter of arms transfers,
would not removal of China from the SIOP per se imply some change in
our “even handedness” toward Moscow and Peking?
Dr. Brzezinski favored making the move and proposed a further
question—­should Cuba be in the SIOP?
General Jones pointed out that at present [2 lines not declassified]
Dr. Brzezinski responded by noting that Cuba’s absence from the
“black book” would require someone to remind the National Command
Authority that military targets in Cuba might have to be attacked; for
example, general purpose forces with possible strategic implications.
Secretary Brown said we could put a Cuban option in the black book
simply by inserting a page.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether China and Cuba could be treated in a
like manner, [less than 1 line not declassified]
General Jones observed that China is in any case covered by [less
than 1 line not declassified] attack options [less than 1 line not declassified]
Secretary Brown proposed to structure a decision paper for the Pres-
ident in which the option for attacking China would be changed [1 line
not declassified] and the current SIOP weapons targeted against China
would be retargeted against the Soviet Union.
Deputy Secretary Christopher questioned the assumption made in
the background paper that removing China from the SIOP, if it became
public, would not have a lasting effect on US/Soviet relations.
Secretary Brown noted his agreement with Christopher and that
he had not repeated this statement in his summary of the paper. He
observed further that if the Soviets became upset over major US exer-
cises, one should expect them to be disturbed over a change of China’s
status in our strategic targeting.

Dr. Brzezinski thought it absurd that Soviet peacetime sensitivities
should be allowed to influence our deliberations on war plans toward
the Soviet Union in this way. He believed that we, like the Soviets,
should shape war plans for maximum military effect.
Secretary Brown then noted that treating China and Cuba in an
equivalent manner undermines any arguments that this change in
targeting plans implies that we are forming some sort of alliance with
China.
Secretary Brown noted that we could simply take [2 lines not
declassified]
Mr. Aaron asked whether the systems thus directed against China
would be as capable and survivable as those currently used.
Secretary Brown responded that the change would in the main
mean retargeting some bomber weapons.
Deputy Secretary Christopher asked how China’s current status in
the SIOP had come about, noting that China had only recently begun to
acquire ICBMs; why should we reduce China’s status in the SIOP now,
and why had we put China in the SIOP in the first place?
Secretary Brown replied while China had been weaker in the past,
US/China relations had also been more hostile.
Deputy Secretary Christopher asked the group to imagine the public
reaction should some reduction of strategic targeting against China be
revealed.
Dr. Brzezinski commented that the strategic balance between the
US and USSR was shifting unfavorably and we should alter our war
plans to make the best of the situation. Should this leak and upset the
Soviets, too bad.
Secretary Brown observed that the question was not whether to
make a sensible move in targeting plans, but how to explain the change
if it had to be explained.
Dr. Brzezinski thought we should design the best plans and then
worry about how to explain them if need be.
Secretary Brown repeated that it looked like the best approach
would be to put most of the [less than 1 line not declassified] SIOP weap-
ons now targeted on China against Soviet targets while covering China
targets [less than 1 line not declassified]
General Smith asserted it would still be appropriate to [1 line not
declassified]
Dr. Brzezinski called for a decision paper to lay out a plan and its
possible political implications for the President.
The discussion then turned to the second agenda item: asymme-
tries in population fatalities and leadership targeting.

Secretary Brown summarized the DOD point paper on population
targeting by noting the great uncertainties that would exist in the event
the population were dispersed, and how those uncertainties about
the real location of the Soviet population could cause gross misalloca-
tions of weapons. He noted that DOD had studies underway to reduce
uncertainties as to population location specifically, on how and at what
times it might be targetable, but these studies are not yet complete.
Dr. Brzezinski asked how the logic of targeting Soviet population
would be affected by the presence or the absence of US population
dispersal.
Admiral Murphy noted that DOD studies were not looking at US
population dispersal.
Secretary Brown commented that question here was how to target
Soviet population in the presence of uncertainty as to where it would
be located.
Dr. Brzezinski said that our approach to targeting Soviet population
should be influenced by any asymmetries in the vulnerability of the
respective populations.
Secretary Brown noted that the not yet existing FEMA was now cus-
todian of the US side of the problem, but that DOD would have to do
the evaluation looking at both sides.
Mr. Slocombe promised to report back with a schedule and an out-
line for a study of relative population vulnerabilities and their relation
to targeting.
Spurgeon Keeny reminded the group that much data was available
from earlier Civil Defense studies.
Mr. Slocombe pointed out that those studies contain artificial
assumptions about the actual locations of Soviet evacuated population.
Secretary Brown called attention to a recent Soviet Civil Defense
CPX that revealed some information on CD planning for Petropav-
lovsk. He noted that some 16% of the population covered by that paper
exercise had been expected to become casualties.
Dr. Brzezinski reaffirmed the need for an outline and a target date
for a study of this issue.
Secretary Brown then introduced the discussion of targeting lead-
ership: Our basic problem is we don’t know how the Soviet leadership
would function and where in fact it would be in a war. We now tar-
get their peacetime locations and known bunkers, but they have many
bunkers (all of which we can’t be sure we know about) and elaborate
hardened communications. This is one reason, he said, why accurate
missile warheads are useful. He observed that the US leadership struc-
ture appeared much more vulnerable in this respect and our problem
here was mainly to fix our vulnerabilities.

Admiral Turner questioned whether the Soviet leadership was
really a lot less vulnerable than the US.
Secretary Brown judged that the US leadership was substantially
more vulnerable; it would not have the kind of hardened C3 the Soviets
have. He also noted that we rely much more heavily on airborne assets.
Mr. Stoertz observed that we are continually discovering new
aspects of Soviet leadership protection, and noted that the Soviets are
giving increased attention to mobile, especially airborne, facilities.
David Aaron asked if we are primarily discovering new facilities
or rather newly discovering facilities that had existed for some time.
Stoertz answered—­mostly the latter.
General Jones commented that from a war management point of
view, a key issue for US targeting against Soviet leadership was how
the Soviets arranged for the devolution of top authority down the chain
of command.
Admiral Turner repeated his judgment that leadership and C3
would probably prove highly fragile in both countries.
Secretary Brown agreed and observed that we needed more study to
determine how to fix our vulnerabilities and exploit those of the Soviet
Union.
Director Seignious commented that attack timing was crucial; Soviet
SLBMs could reach US leadership targets very quickly.
Secretary Brown noted that US ICBMs could reach Soviet targets in
[less than 1 line not declassified]
Director Seignious repeated that the difference between SLBM flight
times to US leadership targets and ICBM flight times to Soviet leader-
ship targets could be extremely important.
Secretary Brown commented that it was most important to reduce
our vulnerabilities in this respect and to develop counter-C3-­leadership
targeting options against the Soviet Union.
Dr. Brzezinski asked what Presidential decisions were involved here:
a separate leadership targeting package? Budgets for C3 improvements?
Mr. Aaron asked what are the implications of targeting Soviet lead-
ership and C3 assets. Would it be wise to destroy Soviet ability to with-
hold and control strategic forces from the center?
Secretary Brown responded that this depended on how one viewed
various conflict scenarios which he thought intrinsically implausible,
for example, would an initial Soviet attack leave a large Soviet reserve
force? A US counter-C3 strike could reduce Soviet ability to use that
reserve efficiently.
Mr. Aaron commented that the value of such strikes depends on
whether you believe strikes by withheld Soviet forces would simply
become automatic if the Soviets’ top leadership disappeared.

Mr. Slocombe commented that one could make distinctions between
military C3 and national political leadership.
Dr. Brzezinski observed that a crisis or conflict bargaining advan-
tage could go to the side whose leadership and C3 system could endure
over time. This might give the Soviets incentives to protract a conflict
scenario.
Mr. Aaron observed that our vulnerabilities sprang from failures to
pay sufficient attention to this problem in the past, but asked whether
we would not be in rather good shape if we succeeded in getting our
leadership and C3 assets airborne.
Secretary Brown responded that a protracted conflict with strategic
strikes over time would tax the endurance of our airborne assets.
Dr. Brzezinski expressed doubt as to whether an airborne US lead-
ership could maintain political control during a war.
General Jones noted that current plans contain leadership target-
ing options which can be used or withheld. The question is whether
the intended targets will actually contain the Soviets leaders when the
weapons arrive.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether the current options for targeting lead-
ership and C3 are adequate.
General Jones said that the options need improvements but that the
kinds of improvements needed aren’t really political issues.
Secretary Brown observed that our ability to successfully attack
Soviet leadership and related C3 appears to require very early strikes
in a conflict.
General Jones noted that many strategic war games and exchange
analyses were very misleading because they did not take into account
the affects on each side of strikes on its C3. This is particularly impor­
tant in assessing retaliatory capabilities.
Secretary Brown noted that DOD is moving forward on these issues.
Regionalization was then discussed.
Secretary Brown observed that we had acquired only the poorest
insight into the political aspects of this issue. We simply would not
know what effects various approaches to targeting would have on the
unity of the Soviet State. Would they fly apart or rally round the flag?
If we spared certain regions in the hopes they would split off from cen-
tral Soviet authority and they failed to do so, would we not in effect
spare Soviet resources for continuing and recovering from the conflict?
Would disclosure of a “regionalization strategy” cause the Soviets to
tighten peacetime control in the provinces? Secretary Brown summed
up by noting that the matter remained somewhat academic until we get
a better handle on how such a strategy could be implemented.

Dr. Brzezinski commented that we should forget the political effects
for the time being and first look at how in practice one could implement
a targeting strategy that inflicts higher levels of damage on the great
Russians, and creates fears that the Soviet Union would dissolve.
Mr. Aaron recommended that a special look should be taken
at strikes by theater forces against Eastern Europe in the light of the
potential of those countries to break away from Soviet authority. He
also noted that we should examine counter declaratory strategy too.
Dr. Brzezinski observed that strategic war is still political and that
we had to exploit any possible advantages since our margins of strate-
gic strength had narrowed. More discriminating targeting may be of
considerable value.
Secretary Brown observed that however one approached “regional-
ization,” it seemed to imply the capabilities for very discriminating use
of our weapons.
Targeting industry was then discussed.
Secretary Brown began by noting that he believes that there would
be little practical distinction between targeting economic recovery
resources and a general urban industrial target set.
Mr. Slocombe said that war supporting industry should be a war
option and would be narrower that the current package for attacking
Soviet industry. He went on to explain that out of some [less than one
line not declassified] economic facilities, DOD had attempted to identify
[less than one line not declassified] key installations that would be directly
supportive of a general war effort, [4 lines not declassified]
Secretary Brown observed that such a war supporting industry
attack would cause far fewer fatalities than a general urban industrial
attack. Fatalities could be reduced further by evacuation on the Soviet
side and by careful targeting by the US.
Deputy Secretary Christopher asked if population would be targeted.
Secretary Brown answered that targeting population would not
be the objective. Secretary Brown went on to say that war supporting
industry could be distinguished from general economic targets, the lat-
ter would be included in the general urban industrial target set.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that one could attack war supporting industry
along with strategic and general purpose force targets.
General Smith asked how war supporting industry would be
defined.
Secretary Brown replied that our target data base has such a category.
Dr. Brzezinski commented that attacks on war supporting industry
might make sense in a limited but sustained conflict not involving gen-
eral strikes against each other’s economic targets.

Secretary Brown observed that we were then talking about two dis-
tinguishable target sets: (a) war-­supporting industry, a relatively small
set which could be attacked with or without special efforts to reduce col-
lateral fatalities, and (b) an urban industrial or general economic target
set, very large and practically indistinguishable from what is targeted
under the criterion of suppressing economic recovery, which could be
withheld to counter coercion and perhaps terminate the conflict.
Dr. Brzezinski observed that while the utility of discretely targeting
war supporting industry might not easily be measured, it was likely to
be positive.
Mr. Aaron thought it would nevertheless be useful to attempt to
measure the potential effects of such a targeting package including the
expected levels of collateral fatalities and the potential effect on the
Soviets capability to wage war.
Secretary Brown noted that collateral fatalities from targeting war
supporting industry could be quite low.
Mr. Slocombe observed that such targeting might involve 10–15 mil-
lion fatalities if no care were taken to avoid them.
Warren Christopher asked if we are simply discussing possibilities
or proposing to recommend some specific action.
Secretary Brown proposed that a war supporting industry package
for inclusion the SIOP be prepared for Presidential decision.
Dr. Brzezinski said that this should be developed along with mea-
sures of the utility of such a targeting option.
Secretary Brown observed that the utility of targeting war sup-
porting industry would be scenario dependent, for example, whether
Soviet general purpose forces were engaged and could be degraded by
the loss to those industries.
Mr. Slocombe then noted that, setting aside war supporting indus-
try, the practical difference between targeting against recovery and gen-
eral urban industrial targets could not be usefully measured.
Dr. Brzezinski observed that the distinction was not too useful for
deterrence.
Mr. Keeny concluded on this agenda topic with the observation that
the threat to urban industrial targets overall was most important for
deterrence.
The discussion then turned to the topic of hard-­target capability.
Secretary Brown observed that over the years US planners had
worried a great deal about the potentially adverse implications for
arms control and stability of US threats to Soviet silo-­based forces. The
­Soviets on the other hand showed no signs of reciprocating this concern
at all. He noted that in our own programs the accuracy improvements

that enhanced our capability to attack hard targets came fairly naturally
and at low cost with improving technology. Our ICBMs had improved
steadily in accuracy, SLBMs were coming along behind them. The basic
questions remain: what advantages would we derive from improved
hard-­target capabilities? And how destabilizing might they be?
Secretary Brown observed that, should the Soviets not believe their
silos to be threatened, they derive a large cost saving because they can
retain their present capability in silos for about a third of what it would
cost them to buy and operate an equivalent capability in a mobile
mode. On the other hand, they probably already believe that Mark 12A,
and Trident will constitute effective hard target threats to which they
will have to react somehow. It would appear that we are debating with
ourselves about the stability issue aspects and hard target capabilities.
Secretary Brown commented that the President’s latest speech con-
taining remarks about the large fraction of Soviet capability in poten-
tially vulnerable silos may have misconstrued the issue. With ¾’s of
their capability in silos, should they double that capability, they would
have 7/8’s of their vastly increased total capability in potentially vul-
nerable silos, but the invulnerable portion of their forces would remain
the same in absolute size. He wondered which side would worry most
about such a situation and speculated that we would.
Deputy Secretary Christopher commented that stability remained the
central issue.
Secretary Brown put the question as to whether two hair trigger
capabilities were more dangerous than one, if our increasing vulnera-
bilities made us more likely to preempt, and stated that he didn’t think
so.
Director Seignious noted that the Congress showed a lot of concern
about the dangers of US hard target capability.
Secretary Brown commented that the vulnerability of our ICBM
force could in a crisis increase our incentives to go first [2 lines not
declassified] or effecting concentrated attack on Soviet SS–18s.
Mr. Slocombe added that targeting all our Mark 12A warheads on
the SS–18 force would be quite effective and a strong incentive for our
preempting.
Mr. Aaron asked Stan Turner whether the Soviets showed any sign
of sensitivity to our debates about stability.
Director Turner replied that the Soviets seemed quite unconcerned
about stability in a two-­sided sense. They appear to believe in war-­
fighting for meaningful military objectives, were concerned about the
size of their residual force after an exchange, and seemed unconcerned
that such a pursuit of an improved sense of security for themselves
produces insecurity for their opponent.

Director Seignious asked whether any Soviets perceive any mean-
ingful advantage to be gained from any form of nuclear conflict.
Secretary Brown replied that some Soviet military believe war
should be fought to win and try to plan accordingly.
Mr. Stoertz observed that in Soviet eyes, this does not mean that
they would commit willful aggression, but rather that beleaguered
capitalist states would precipitate a war in which they might want to
preempt.
Secretary Brown voiced the opinion that concern about destabiliz-
ing implications of US hard target capability was probably misplaced,
but that this was nonetheless a matter of concern on the Hill. Some peo-
ple in Congress suggest that we should make M–X inaccurate to pre-
serve crisis stability and to leave the Soviet Union more confident of the
survivability of their strategic forces. He voiced the fear, however, that
such Soviet confidence coexisting with a Soviet ability to threaten US
forces could lead to adventuresome Soviet actions. And we, being on
the low end of this asymmetry, might be either deterred from respond-
ing to Soviet challenges or compelled to preempt with our vulnerable
strategic forces.
Mr. Aaron commented that this situation was a recipe for
miscalculations.
Secretary Brown commented that if we had effective hard target
capabilities, it would be appropriate to target them against silos.
Mr. Aaron asked whether we couldn’t get hard target capabilities in
SLBMs, preferably because they are invulnerable.
Secretary Brown responded that while SLBMs can in time become
accurate enough to kill silos, C3 problems may not allow them to be
launched quickly enough.
Mr. Utgoff noted that good communications to SSBN’s close to the
U.S. were possible and that this is one of the reasons that a long range
SLBM was important.
Dr. Brzezinski asked how was this an issue for the President, what
must he decide?
Secretary Brown responded that we are going to have some improve-
ment in hard target capabilities if we modernize our forces. ICBMs are
going to be more accurate, and SLBMs will follow close behind. The
key issue is that we need less vulnerable quick response hard target
capabilities.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if one could say that we need an improved
hard target kill capability because the Soviets have closed the gap in
overall strategic forces capabilities?
Mr. Aaron asked whether we could achieve the needed hard target
capabilities with cruise missiles.

Secretary Brown expressed doubts on the basis that the Soviets
could possibly reload their silos faster than cruise missiles could arrive.
He argued that the Soviets might be able to reload their silos in as little
as 12 hours.
Mr. Stoertz disputed this point by observing that it would take a
couple of days for the Soviets to reload silos during a conflict.
Mr. Aaron disagreed with Harold’s opinion that the stability
aspects of US hard target capability had become moot. He observed
that the respective vulnerabilities of the two sides’ forces would be a
much more important variable in determining whether a crisis led to
war than the other aspects of employment policy so far debated. He
called for a much better paper that treated the stability issues, the need
for quick as opposed to slow hard target capability and the merits of
SLBMs vs ICBMs as potential hard target weapons.
Dr. Brzezinski asked that the next SCC on targeting return to the
question of hard target capability and that in the meantime a care-
ful paper be written on this issue. This paper should be organized in
terms of the 3 questions he had originally posed and should consider
the impact of the changing strategic balance. The next SCC would also
take up the remaining agenda items as well as the questions of target-
ing moving general purpose forces and the size and role of the secure
reserve force.
Deputy Secretary Christopher endorsed David Aaron’s observations
on the importance of the hard target issue and recommended that
DOD’s paper be done on an interagency basis.
Director Seignious questioned whether the President should be
obliged to deal personally with the hard target stability issue at all
before SALT II is ratified.
Secretary Brown commented that the President must make a deci-
sion on M–X and therefore its implications for hard target capability
cannot be avoided.
Director Seignious repeated the fact that Presidential decisions on
this specific issue of hard target capability prior to SALT II ratification
would be dangerous.
Mr. Aaron repeated his call for a thorough examination of the stra-
tegic risks and advantages of improved hard target capability.
Dr. Brzezinski called for DOD to lead in the preparation of the
appropriate paper and to have an interagency group review the paper
to insure that all the important points of view are considered. At this
point, the meeting was adjourned.

126.	 Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 26, 1979
SUBJECT
The President’s M–X Basing Decision (U)
My present understanding is that the DOD will offer the Presi-
dent two options which it regards as acceptable: MPS and “Enhanced
DIAD”. The latter may be called “Variant TRIAD” or some such, but
it amounts to the same thing: foregoing any rebased ICBM and put-
ting the strategic force modernization effort into the sea-­based and air-­
breathing force elements. (TS)
The DOD will recommend rejecting several alternatives as unac-
ceptable: All air-­mobile combinations will be rejected because the 200
missile force is vastly too expensive, while smaller forces sized to a
reasonable budget have much too little capability for the still very
large outlay required. The truck/land mobile option boils down, evi-
dently, to the road mobile version. I’m not sure how the argument will
be made, but would expect it to be rejected because a) it depends on
strategic warning when the threat of strategic surprise is too high for
comfort, and b) the missile must be small (i.e., 4–5 RVs) to fit on a
road-­mobile truck. Off-­road mobile truck, which could physically be
designed to carry a larger missile (10 RVs), is probably out because it
is just too big and destructive to operate off government land, even in
crisis. (TS)
As I say, these are informed expectations, not firm advanced notice
of what is coming. Harold Brown and Bill Perry will probably put their
own spin on the recommendations and the analysis of each option.
Moreover, the plan calls for them to make their recommendations only
after the PRC has reacted to the full set of options. Hence, some cheap
in silos, might be presented as “barely acceptable” under pressure and
over the bitter opposition of the professionals. (TS)
Thinking through the politics of this decision is important not only
because the President wants to come through it politically and wants it
to help SALT, but the credibility of the decision is itself important to the
national security, allied confidence, Soviet respect, etc. (TS)
Whatever his leaning, the President ought to give the most seri-
ous consideration to involving the Congressional leadership through
consultation prior to the decision. (I know of no such effort so far by
the White House.) Of course, Congress has been kept abreast of the
proceedings inside DOD through OSD and Air Force channels. My
impression is that this has softened opposition to MPS a great deal
and perhaps even created some pressure for it, but these reports come
from biased Air Force sources. In any case, the President has a right to a
clear view of Congressional sentiment before he makes his decision. He
would profit from such consultations. They could take off some of the
political heat and make the final choice go down more easily, especially
in relation to SALT ratification, by sharing the responsibility a bit. (TS)
I see four possible scenarios: one good, one marginal, and two
disasters. They are influenced by my own judgment as to what is
required for strategic security, and by my sense of the political setting.
1. Good Scenario: MPS
The President decides for the MPS option. He declares that we
definitely need a new ICBM for essential equivalence, survivability,
endurance, and flexibility. He notes that this is the most cost effective of
the serious alternatives and probably half as costly as the equivalent air
mobile option. He reports that his doubts about the verification prob-
lem have been largely laid to rest: We can make our MPS verifiable.
With the same cooperation, a like Soviet system would also be verifi-
able.2 Moreover, mobile alternatives the Soviets are likely to prefer and
which cannot be simply denied the Soviets, i.e., truck, are likely to be
even harder to verify. Only were we able to ban all kinds of land-­mobile
deployment modes—­which is unrealistic—­can we avoid the kinds of
verification challenges requiring cooperation as in MPS. (TS)
Should the Soviets not be cooperative on verification modalities
for MPS, or whatever mobile ICBM mode they choose, or should they
otherwise give us serious concern about a breakout threat of more RVs
to swamp our MPS target array in the later 1980s, then we would have
to consider enlarging the number of shelter/aim points and building
an ABM defense overlay (which could be very efficient because it could
preferentially defend only full holes while the Soviets would have to
attack all of them as though they were full and defended). (TS)
MPS basing would leave us the path of reducing land-­based ICBMs
in the future, first those in silos, and then those in mobile deployments.
A major virtue of the MPS systems is that the number of missiles in
it can be reduced without allowing the enemy to “gang up” on and
2 Brzezinski underlined the word “cooperation” and drew a vertical line in the left
margin next to this sentence.

thereby reduce the survivability of the remainder. The air and truck
alternatives do not have this feature. (TS)
This scenario would draw fire from the Left, which doesn’t care
about the basing much but wants to kill M–X (and will probably try to
kill Trident 2, at least as a hard target weapon, if M–X is cancelled). The
Right, of course wants to see M–X go forward and, even more perhaps,
to victimize the President if it doesn’t; it cares less about the basing
mode. As things stand now, this scenario would be a measurable, but
not overwhelming, net plus for SALT ratification. The anti-SALT votes
will not be changed; but their persuasiveness with the moderates will
be lessened. The President will look like a man who can stand tall on
defense, even over his own earlier feelings. There is no question that
this perception would be good for SALT. He would have to comfort
himself in a way that avoided the appearance of being pushed by the
Pentagon into supporting M–X because of SALT. This would make him
look vacillating to all and especially untrustworthy to pro-­defense sen-
timent. (TS)
2. Marginal Scenario: Augmented DYAD.
In this scenario, the President would say he was, in essence, choos-
ing to rebase ICBMs in what all agree to be the single most survivable
basing mode, in SSBNs. Trident 2 would be our new ICBM and would
be accelerated to, say, 1986.3 We would also speed up development
of a) a cruise missile carrier,4 b) a follow-­on ALCM, and c) a possible
advanced penetrator aircraft for the very late 1980s.5 We would also
stress improvements to C3I, basing, and transwar support to assure that
the SSBN and air-­breathing legs would be surviving, enduring, flexible,
and inherently diversified. We would also keep most of the Minutemen
in their silos for synergistic protection of aircraft, limited operations,
and possible launch-­on-­warning. (TS)
The trouble with this scenario is that the headline would be “Car-
ter Cancels M–X”. Many critics would contend that a combination of
Soviet missile programs, Soviet hard bargaining at SALT, and disdain
for US strategic power in the Administration had basically run the US
out of the ICBM business while the Soviets remained comfortably in
their silos.6 (TS)
accelerated—[illegible]” at the bottom of the page.
4 Brzezinski underlined the words “a) a cruise” and wrote “2) ALCM carrier” at the
bottom of the page.
5 Brzezinski underlined the word “late” and wrote “3) [illegible]” at the bottom of
the page.
6 Brzezinski drew a vertical line and wrote “some mix?” in the left margin next to
this paragraph.

Therefore, in addition to explaining what he would do to make the
DYAD assuredly survivable, the President would have to explain what
he was also doing to make the Soviets strategically uncomfortable in
their silos. He would have to stress that the Trident 2 would definitely
be a hard-­target killer with his full support, both to meet warfighting
objectives and to force the Soviets to worry about stability and ICBM
reductions. In short, the President would have to stress not only that he
is paying the “survivability tax” that the Soviets had imposed on us,
but he is going to impose that tax on the Soviets in return. He might
also hint that because of increased US reliance on SSBNs we would
increase our submerged ASW capability and thereby give ourselves
options to imperil Soviet SSBNs in some situations. (TS)
To borrow from boxing, this scenario involves fast footwork (evad-
ing the Soviet counter-­silo threat) and counter-­punching (purposely
making Soviet silos vulnerable—­you could also do that with MPS but
it would not have to be emphasized politically). The major flaw in it is
that the President would readily sign up for the fast footwork, but not
believe in the necessity for counterpunching. And even if he said the
right things, as the author of the statement that one SSBN can destroy
all Soviet large and medium cities, he would not be believed. Politically,
you have to start from a very credible stance on strategic issues to make
this scenario viable. (TS)
I, for one, do believe that the DYAD scenario can be made to work
politically and strategically, at home, with allies, and with the Sovi-
ets.7 But it requires a determination to follow through on the counter-­
punching elements (hard target kill and ASW), a tough campaign for
future reductions in ICBMs, and a competitive thrust to our strategic
behavior that I do not believe this Administration is up to. Therefore,
I strongly recommend that this scenario not be adopted.8 It would
draw tremendous fire from the Right and still face opposition to needed
improvements from the Left. But I describe it to lay out the minimum
essential conditions for making it work plausibly.
3. Disaster: DYAD without “Counterpunching”
The President is likely to face a political disaster, for SALT and his
reelection prospects, if he opts for the DYAD and tries to sell it in terms
of cost effectiveness, ease of verification, and avoidance of the strate-
gic challenge to the Soviets represented by M–X in MPS. If he fails to
stress and follow through on the counterpunching themes of the DYAD
option, it will look like strategic appeasement. (TS)
7 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence.
8 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence.

4. Disaster: Air-­mobile or Hybrids Thereof
The President may choose the air mobile concept over Harold’s
objections or after persuading Harold to agree that it is a very poor
third, but acceptable, choice. Much of the defense technical establish-
ment, including the Air Force, is very likely to be hard against him.
The budgeteers will shudder at the cost implications. And everyone
will really doubt whether the President intends to follow through. This
will look like an interim effort to make it seem like M–X is going for-
ward, while avoiding selection of MPS. Some in the defense commu-
nity might be willing to go along because they would believe that a new
Administration would review the issue. In the meantime, we would at
least keep moving on M–X. But these sentiments would clearly be the
opposite of the strategic consensus that we need. (TS)
An equally bad variant on this disaster would occur if the Pres-
ident selected truck mobile. Over the long term, trucks are a sensible
option to continue to explore, perhaps as a later 1980s adjunct to DYAD
or MPS. But they are anything but an answer to the Minuteman surviv-
ability problem now, politically or strategically.9 (TS)
Therefore, the real options are MPS or DYAD, the latter accompa-
nied by a very tough strategic line that will be extremely difficult to
adopt or make convincing. (TS)
You should understand that the above judgments are informed by
a fairly conventional appreciation of the technical and strategic argu-
ments as DOD seems likely to present them, on one hand, and a very
subjective view of what the political situation warrants, on the other.
We know that the Congress wants urgently and SALT requires urgently
a firm decision on ICBM basing. But I worry that our understanding of
Congressional sentiment on a) how vital M–X per se is, and b) on the
basing choices is not sufficiently firm to plot one of the two workable
scenarios in political terms. (TS)
Suggesting now that the President is leaning against M–X and for
DYAD (which he implied in his New York speech)10 has grave risks.
The press is already onto this. What we should do is get a better sense
of Congressional views on the basing options now, knowing that they
won’t become firm until the President has begun consultations and
made a decision.11 (TS)
9 Brzezinski underlined the word “now,” drew a vertical line and wrote “Why? The
others are later” in the left margin next to this sentence.
11 Ermarth wrote a postscript at the bottom of the page: “Zbig, These are my own
thoughts. Once DOD comes over with its 30 April report, I’m happy to work this problem
jointly with Vic et al. F.”

127.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 30, 1979
SUBJECT
CNA–78 (U)
A. (TS) The Comprehensive Net Assessment, 1978, is a much
needed review of the elements of our competition with the Soviet
Union.2 However, I believe that in many ways it paints too optimis-
tic a picture of our current position. In particular, your assessment of
world attitudes, although correct as of today, does not consider ade-
quately the relation among the dislike, the respect, and the fear with
which the USSR is regarded. Is it better to be feared or loved (or rather,
not disliked)? “The Prince” gave one answer. Another comparison that
is inadequately addressed, I think, is the respective vulnerability of
the US and the USSR to economic and political forces over which we
may have little control. In a number of areas we, perhaps more than the
Soviet Union, face serious risks that could significantly alter the cur-
rent balance. I would like to note some of these for your consideration.
Further, in keeping with the format of your assessment, I would like
to comment on the military balance, where I would again take some
exception to the picture you present; in some cases it seems too optimis-
tic, in others perhaps too pessimistic.
(S) The most important changes in the non-­military aspects, of our
world position vis-­a-­vis the USSR, have been (not necessarily in order
of importance):
1. The President’s stress on human rights, which has been instru-
mental in improving our image throughout the world.
2. Our increasing energy vulnerability, coupled with the recent
upheavals in Iran and Soviet penetration of Afghanistan and the Red
Sea area.
3. The achievement of an Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty, reaffirming
the US role as the only major power who can talk effectively to most if
not all of the significant Middle East players.
4. The widening PRC door to the West, including the Sino-Japa-
nese treaty, and a major (though tactical and perhaps temporary) PRC
attempt to play “the American card.”
Eyes Only. Sent via Alpha Channel. A copy was sent to Vance.
2 See Document 95.

5. Continuing US-Soviet competition in Africa, with the Soviets
setting the pace, increasing their influence and also African apprehen-
sions about them.
6. Continued and perhaps increasing strains in the Warsaw Pact
alliance.
7. FRG reexamination of its policies toward Eastern Europe and
the USSR, prompted both by internal politics and perhaps a perceived
change in the balance of external factors.
8. Continued turmoil in Southeast Asia and increased Soviet influ-
ence there.
9. Aborted US efforts to establish normal relations with Cuba, and
the increasing violent opposition to repressive regimes in Central and
South America.
10. The growth of Euro-­communism and terrorism, with increased
general political instability from Portugal to Turkey.
B. (S) Although the President’s personal involvement and moral
leadership have given the US again an image of decency and fairness
in world affairs, we cannot count on friendships alone to preserve US
interests. In areas where changes have occurred, even to our benefit,
there remain serious risks. My review of the above list suggests to me
we live in a less benign world than we did two years ago, and that we
face increased chances for major political and economic setbacks. The
question is how nations now friendly to us will behave if faced with
internal upheaval or external threats backed by Soviet power. As but
one example, we have more friends in Africa today than two years ago,
but the Soviets and their Cuban allies are more of a military force in
that area because of their successful operations in Ethiopia and their
demonstrated willingness to intervene militarily in their interest. Thus,
I do not believe that any estimate of the numbers of our friends in the
world, as provided in your assessment, is a reliable measure of our
influence—­especially as in that table Botswana, Belgium and Brazil are
counted equally.
1. (TS) Of central concern is our continuing vulnerability to inter-
ruption (political or military) of oil from the Persian Gulf. In spite of the
Administration’s intensive efforts to produce a coherent energy pro-
gram with Congress, we cannot foresee independence from Gulf oil for
more than a decade—­perhaps much longer than that. Our Allies will
remain dependent through the turn of the century. Should that oil flow
be cut off, the western alliance would have few alternatives but to try
to reopen the Gulf by military force or to accommodate politically in
whatever way was demanded to restore the flow. The prospects of suc-
cessful use of military force to this end are at best uncertain. Continued
loss of Gulf oil would not only destroy western economies, it would
threaten fragmentation of the alliance itself. I believe that this situation
poses a most grave risk to us, one which has increased dramatically in
the past two years, and with no counterpart that the Soviets face.

(S) There is the additional economic threat posed by even the cur-
rent oil situation. Our and our allies’ economies are vulnerable to major
oil price increases—­say of a factor of two or more in real dollars. In
the long run such a price rise would create alternative energy sources;
in the short run it would be disastrous. We now pay $45 billion to for-
eign nations to import oil—­roughly one third our Defense budget. That
number will surely increase this year with adverse effects on our bal-
ance of payments and further stimulation of inflation. So long as these
trends continue, our own economic health lies in the hands of others.
The Soviet Union’s energy problems are not of this magnitude, nor so
susceptible of manipulation by others.
2. (S) Oil is not our only strategic import. We must likewise import
cobalt, chrome, and a variety of other materials which may be subject to
cut-­off or arbitrarily increased prices. We will be increasingly dependent
on world trade in the coming years. Again, though the Soviet empire is
not at times self-­sufficient in agricultural commodities, it remains so in
raw materials. And it can accommodate, albeit painfully, to agricultural
deficit by shifting its ratio of consumption of meat to cereal.
3. (C) I am convinced that, as your assessment notes, we will con-
tinue to maintain and expand our world trade and political leadership
in international affairs. The appeal of western concern for the individ-
ual citizen and his economic welfare remains in stark contrast to Soviet
oppression. Yet it is this very contrast that, in my view, continues to
pose problems for the Soviets—­problems they may choose to solve
internationally by subversion or force, their own or surrogates’. Thus,
it is in part because of our political and economic appeal, and their lack
of it, that we may face increased risk of the use of military force from
the Soviets.
4. (C) In a different way, our international economic competition
with the USSR is affected strongly by the Soviet concentration on mil-
itary research and development. The opportunity cost of this concen-
tration is a deprived non-­defense industry which cannot compete in
the worldwide commercial market. Soviet technology might instead be
used to improve production of commercial aircraft, autos, trucks and
oil, and to develop a petro-­chemical industry—­but it is not. We and
our Allies, in contrast, exploit our technology in non-­defense indus-
tries to develop and sustain a clear competitive advantage vis-­a-­vis the
Soviets in world markets. In the past two years, we have maintained
this advantage, with concomitant international, economic and political
benefits. For example, China’s interest in normalized relations with us
has been driven in part by US technical superiority. This coupling of
our commercial leadership with a free, political tradition is, in my view,
our strongest international asset. Thus, I would be loath to trade to the
Soviets our technical lead in any area for short-­term or unsure political

accommodations. In this regard I differ with some of the suggestions in
your assessment.
C. (TS) On the general military balance, I believe your assessment
may be in some places too stark (on strategic forces) and in others too
optimistic (general purpose forces).
1. I concur that after certain worst-­case Soviet attacks on our stra-
tegic forces, and our retaliation on theirs, we would have about 10 per-
cent less deliverable warheads than the Soviets would (1982 estimate),
and far less megatonnage. On the other hand, I believe such estimates
must be viewed in light of the assumptions involved, recognizing that
a scenario approach is only one consideration:
a. Such a “military” attack on the US would involve the detona-
tion of 2000 or more megaton-­sized warheads on US soil. The resulting
fatalities, direct and from fallout, would probably exceed in a few days
time the losses in Europe in World War II. I think it unlikely that we
would try to “ride out” such an attack, or respond as calculated. Still
less could the Soviets count on our doing so.
b. Even if we chose to wait, we would have about 3000 remain-
ing deliverable strategic nuclear warheads, after we struck at residual
Soviet strategic forces. Thus, it is not clear what the Soviets could gain
by the initial attack.
c. For safety we make calculations assuming fully generated Soviet
forces with US forces on day-­to-­day alert. If either a preceding period
of tension is assumed or some strategic warning, enough US forces are
generated to alter the residual warhead balance in our favor.
d. We could alter the bomber alert rate in the 1980’s, albeit at some
cost, to rectify perceived imbalance, and can in other ways, if we choose,
add modest numbers of warheads by 1985.
e. By the mid-­to-­late 1980’s with the advent of TRIDENT and M–X,
the calculations will become more favorable for us.
(TS) I do not wish to imply I am content with our strategic posi-
tion. Indeed, the trends are quite bad over the next five years. Deficien-
cies in our C3 survivability and endurance are particularly troubling.
And we cannot be other than greatly concerned about Soviet advan-
tages in many measures of strategic force capability—­and in TNF and
conventional forces as well—­in the early-­to-­mid 1980’s. A confident,
aggressive Soviet leadership is likely to have a relaxed attitude toward
precipitating crises, and in them. The potential for miscalculation and
catastrophe will be substantial. I therefore think we need to increase
our strategic force programs above what is now approved. Without
that, I foresee grave difficulties. But I do not feel that the nation is now
in peril because of the strategic balance or that we are now so perceived
by our friends and Allies.
2. (S) Conversely, I am concerned about your estimate that we have
begun to achieve a better balance in NATO. I certainly agree that the
LTDP is a great step forward, but it is as yet only promise. The actions

of both Congress and inflation on our FY 1980 budget are yet to be seen.
We have not yet achieved any major changes in our actual capabilities
in Europe. The Pact strength grows on the basis of its previously estab-
lished momentum. Soviet theater nuclear forces are being modernized
to the alarm of our Allies. In addition to strengthening our forces and
our lift, we must improve our C3, electronic warfare, and intelligence.
All of this will take time and money, which we have decided to provide
but whose results do not yet show. The US will need to exercise vigor-
ous leadership in NATO on the LTDP, and especially on theater nuclear
forces.
(S) Currently, the Soviet Union fields forces that would cost us
40 percent more than we are now spending annually, and is increasing
its expenditures by not less than three percent per year. In total, NATO
and the Warsaw Pact today spend about the same amounts on defense.
Unless we can match Pact expansion in the long term, we will slide
behind rapidly in military capabilities across the board. In five years,
certainly before ten years time, the military balance will in that case
have shifted adversely. But well before it does, it will cast before it a
political shadow. In any era of strategic nuclear parity (which is the
most favorable situation we are likely to have at any time in the 1980’s),
Soviet conventional capabilities will be more able to threaten our global
(what used to be called “strategic”) interests.
(S) Because of their larger military forces, and because many of the
areas for potential military action are near Soviet borders, the Soviets
hold some advantage over us in mounting limited intervention oper-
ations. Key areas of concern include the Mid-East, Persian Gulf, and
Korea. We are pressing development of quick reaction plans and capa-
bilities, but remain limited by our strategic lift.
3. (S) I must stress that planned funding will not by itself allow us
to maintain the precarious military balance that now exists, if the Sovi-
ets continue their trends of the past fifteen years. Our FY 1980 obliga-
tional authority, the best measure of our long term funding, increased
Our actual FY 1980 obligational authority may show little or no real
increases over FY 1979. Furthermore, if current inflation rates persist, the
preliminary budget targets for FY 1981 would allow for no real growth.
It is unlikely that we will be able to sustain even current force levels
should this no-­growth policy continue. At the same time, opportunities
exist (and will have to be exploited in any event) for greater Allied con-
tributions to military efforts, better cooperation with them to produce
greater effectiveness, and several areas of opportunity for exploitation
of technological breakthroughs. If we can exploit these various poten-
tial advantages while avoiding political dissolution in our alliances and
the perhaps even greater risk of an attitude, associated with some in the

new generation, that sees little to choose between democratic and dic-
tatorial values, we may be able to avoid a military-­political crisis that
would require a return to a defense share of GNP corresponding to that
will be able to hold to the present share. I will present a more detailed
analysis of some of these issues in the forthcoming PRC meeting on
Defense Consolidated Guidance.
4. (S) In the past two years, the Soviets have continued to stress
technology to improve significantly their military capabilities. Mili-
tary R&D in the Soviet Union is of high priority; the current level of
effort as measured in dollars approaches twice that of the US. They
are moving forward with an intensive and comprehensive program
of development—­and deployment—­of systems: strategic and tactical;
ground, air and naval; nuclear and non-­nuclear weapons. We are just
now seeing the results of this emphasis in systems being deployed or
in advanced testing:
a. Their new ICBM guidance systems (SS–18 and SS–19) will have
approximately the accuracy of Minuteman III.
b. Their new SLBM (SS–N–18) has a MIRV system (7 RVs) compa-
rable to TRIDENT I.
c. Their new fighter aircraft are being tested with a look-­down
shoot-­down radar/missile system capable of engaging four low-­
altitude aircraft simultaneously, similar to the AMRAAM system under
development by the US.
All of these are areas where we have enjoyed in the past a signifi-
cant military advantage because of our substantial technological lead.
(S) Additionally the Soviets are pushing very hard on military
technology not yet ready for systems applications. Perhaps the most
dramatic example of this is their high energy laser program, where their
R&D effort is equivalent to about $1 billion a year, compared to about
$200 million a year in the US (and that is our largest single technology
program). They appear to be moving to prototype weapons, whereas
we are still in the exploratory development phase.
(S) As a result of this emphasis on military R&D, the Soviets are
closing the quality gap in military systems. The momentum established
poses a real problem for the future military balance—­affecting the stra-
tegic balance in the early 80’s and the tactical balance in the late 80’s. In
addition, there will be an increasing risk during the 80’s of a real tech-
nological surprise—­a Sputnik-­like event in the military field leading to
both substantive military and perceptual political problems.
(S) On the other hand, the Soviet military R&D program is inef-
ficient. There is unnecessary duplication (e.g., 4–5 parallel new ICBM
programs). There appears to be no good way of stopping programs—­
even low payoff programs such as air defense—­once started in earnest.

They spend large amounts of effort on programs that have no obvious
payoff (e.g., titanium-­hull submarines, large surface effect vehicles, a
variety of peculiar aircraft). In addition, the Soviets obtain no real tech-
nological support from their Allies. We have Allies with a major tech-
nological base, and are developing ways to better share our military
R&D burdens.
(C) With continuing Soviet inefficiencies in R&D, with continued
emphasis on R&D in our defense program, and with improved cooper-
ation with our Allies, we can successfully compete with the Soviets in
military technology, despite their larger spending. However, no longer
will we have the large per-­vehicle superiority we now enjoy to make up
for numerical deficiencies.
5. (TS) In sum, unless we take additional measures soon, I see the
military balance shifting in the favor of the Soviet Union. In this regard,
I see that trend at a time when the economic and political risks we face
in the world are mounting. As the Soviets’ capacity to project military
power mounts, so apparently does their willingness to use military
forces to intervene on a global scale. Thus, I feel we are entering an
era where direct military confrontations between the US and the Soviet
Union will become more rather than less likely. Should that be true, it is
my firm belief that we must be prepared to meet the Soviets wherever
we must rapidly and with whatever military capabilities are necessary.
The first task of US forces must be to deter military action; they can
only do so when it is clear that they are capable of success in any ensu-
ing conflict. Today our military forces are marginal for such deterrence.
Tomorrow they may be inadequate.
(TS) In light of these problems, I believe a major review of US pol-
icies and forces and budgets should be undertaken by the National
Security Council, based on a further assessment of the risks we now
face, and the details we will present to the PRC on our programs. I
concur that PD–18 remains a valid framework for national strategy,3
but I believe the problems we now face demand more than the “certain
changes in emphasis” that your assessment recommends.4
Harold Brown
3 See Document 31.
4 At the bottom of the page, Brown handwrote a postscript: “Zbig—I believe there
should be an NSC meeting on this subject. HB.”

128.	 Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 1, 1979
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Net Assessment 1978 (CNA–78)
We believe CNA–782 is a useful effort to review overall East-West
trends and changes since the earlier PRM–10 exercise. The paper cor-
rectly confirms most of the broad lines of existing Administration pol-
icy in PD–18.3 It also identifies several important issues which deserve
and are receiving continuing attention, including:
—US clear-­cut non-­military advantages and the need to exploit
them fully in the on-­going competition with Moscow;
—­destabilizing Soviet military programs and the need to counter
them through military modernization and arms control;
—­the changing situation in the Persian Gulf (and oil prices) and
the need for an effective US strategy; and
—­the US–USSR–PRC relationship and the need to consider how
relations with China aid and damage our relations with Moscow.
We have some problems with the CNA methodology, which appears
to be based on zero-­sum assumptions. Scorecards of US/Soviet “gains”
and “losses” are inherently difficult to evaluate and the CNA criteria
seem unclear and incomplete; the study discerns two US defeats but it
is not apparent what they (or the gains) were. Moreover, “popularity”
is a questionable indicator of power. The focus on political and mili-
tary trends is potentially misleading without the perspective of existing
absolute balances.
We believe that the treatment of the substantive issues is far too
broad to allow any policy decisions to be made. Instead, we should
continue to use the SCC and PRC for high-­level decision-­making, as we
now are doing (for example) with MX, strategic targeting and numer-
ous regional issues.
Sensitive.
2 See Document 95.
3 See Document 31.

We have some specific concerns about the military, political-­
diplomatic and economic areas of the US/Soviet balance as assessed
by CNA–78.
Military Balance—CNA appraisals of strategic and power projec-
tion force trends are too somber, the positive NATO trends may be
somewhat overstated and theater nuclear forces are discussed only
eliptically.
—Strategic Forces. We agree that the Minuteman survivability
problem will be with us earlier than anticipated but the paper conveys
undue alarm.
• This year’s CG shows a substantial increase in US capability,
whether or not we deploy MX, and a US advantage over the Soviets
after 1986. If MX is not deployed, we will almost certainly advance the
Trident II and CMC IOCs and accelerate production of missiles, subma-
rines, CMCs and cruise missiles.
• The report does not address the survivability of each side’s
forces. For example, only 20% of our warheads, but 70% of theirs, are in
ICBMs. Both sides’ ICBMs can become vulnerable, placing the Soviets
in a worse situation.
• The statement that adverse strategic trends result from US pro-
gram trends is not sound. In fact, we are in the midst of a major strate-
gic forces modernization drive—­with ALCM, Trident SSBNs, Trident I
missiles and MK–12A all coming on line soon.
• The CNA recommendation for greater emphasis on limited
nuclear options (LNO) is a highly contentious one which would require
detailed interagency study.
• The paper does not consider the capability of US forces to meet
their basic deterrent tasks.
—European balance. As far as we can tell, the CNA judgments are
not based on any rigorous analysis of changes in NATO and Warsaw
Pact forces (e.g. ratio of Armored Division Equivalents or of tactical
aircraft). We agree that NATO has begun to improve the military situ-
ation but the CNA may be too optimistic given Western economic con-
straints. This year’s CG shows that no significant change in the balance
can yet be measured and that we need to pursue the LTDP and main-
tain our European emphasis through the 1980s to have an important
impact on the balance.
—Theater Nuclear Forces (TNF). CNA–78 expresses concern over
the evident political problems but does not analyze the complex mil-
itary issues involved and exaggerates the implications for Germany. It
also fails to note encouraging allied progress toward a dual moderniza-
tion/arms control strategy and the real possibility that these two policy
instruments may be able to resolve our TNF problem.
—Power Projection. The paper offers no evidence to support the
judgment that the trend has favored the Soviets during the last two

years. The Soviets have demonstrated their capacity to supply troubled
allies or friends but not to carry out these actions if opposed nor to
wage distant wars themselves. This remains an area of large overall US
advantage.
In sum, the document appears to downplay an emphasis on NATO
vis-­a-­vis strategic and power projection forces. We do not find the argu-
ments persuasive and strongly favor continuation of DOD’s current
European emphases as stated in PD–18.
Political/Diplomatic Balance
—Great power triangular relations are treated primarily in terms
of the costs and benefits of using our relations with Beijing either to
induce Soviet cooperation or to constrain Soviet expansion. We agree
that these two elements are important factors to be considered in our
relations with the Soviet Union and China but the discussion oversim-
plifies the range and significance of our relationships with both coun-
tries. There are prospective interests and activities we may wish to
consider vis-­a-­vis the Soviet Union which may have a minimal impact
on China, and a comparable set of relationships with China that may
neither work to constrain the Soviets nor induce their cooperation. Our
overall objective should be to strengthen and improve our relations
with both China and the Soviet Union in ways which enhance global
US security and influence.
—We believe more weight should be accorded to Europe and
Japan in the political/diplomatic balance. The strength of the industrial
democracies is a fundamental factor in our international position. This
is in contrast to the significant problems faced by the USSR in a poten-
tially unstable Eastern Europe.
—The paper’s speculation concerning a Soviet “German card” is
highly misleading and could lead to policy judgments and conclusions
which would be potentially destructive of US/FRG relations.
—US/Soviet competition in the Third World significantly com-
plicates our bilateral and overall East-West relations. As the CNA
­acknowledges, however, it is far from clear that the turbulence in the
Third World translates into durable Soviet gains. Perhaps because
of the time at which the CNA was written, it does not take account of
(a) the Egyptian-Israeli treaty;4 (b) the Baghdad Summit and shift of
State of Israel, which was signed by President Carter, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat,
and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin on the North Lawn of the White House on

conservative Arab governments;5 (c) the current anti-Soviet unrest in
Afghanistan;6 or (d) the shift in US policy from arms control to increased
military presence in the Indian Ocean/Persian Gulf area.7 These recent
events underscore the difficulty of drawing balances in a time of sig-
nificant and rapid political flux and the dubiousness of weighting all
countries the same.
—While we have an overall advantage in international political
and diplomatic standing compared with Moscow, the picture is far
more complex than that depicted in CNA–78. There was no pro-Soviet
trend in 1977 as the CNA states. On the other hand, we have clearly
had our share of problems and reversals in the last two years. In fact,
some of the policies which have improved our overall standing have at
least temporarily worsened our relations with some important govern-
ments. The balance between our global policies and some of our bilat-
eral objectives has on occasion been hard to maintain. It is difficult to
mesh these factors with the trends described in CNA–78 other than to
emphasize the complexity of the issues and the difficulties of defining
the world in terms of US-Soviet relations.
The CNA recommendations on specific countries and on covert
action are addressed more appropriately when we deal with specific
issues relating to US security presence in the Middle East and to our
relationships with Ethiopia and Afghanistan.
Economic/Technological Balance. CNA–78 states that the “trend
in technology remains strongly favorable to the Soviet Union” since
Soviet R&D expenditures as a percentage of GNP are higher than the
US. In real terms, however, the US has a major technological advantage
over the USSR which the Russians are most unlikely to overcome. This
technological advantage is still greater when comparing East and West
as a whole. Indeed, given the West’s technological base, the East may
well feel further behind the West, regardless of their relatively greater
R&D investment.
The paper also contends that the US should exploit its economic
and technological advantage as a lever to affect Soviet behavior. Such
or the Conference of Foreign Ministers from 18 Arab states and the PLO that convened
membership in that organization. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980. vol. IX, Arab-Israeli
sula, Documents 99–129.

leverage has proven difficult to apply (e.g. Jackson-Vanik Amend-
ment;8 oil drilling equipment). Support for “national liberation strug-
gles” remains a basic tenet of Soviet foreign policy, which Moscow is
unlikely to alter in order to obtain Western economic favors. Moreover,
US economic leverage is weakened by domestic political pressures from
US producers (especially farmers) and the clear unwillingness of our
OECD partners to adopt a common stance on this issue with Moscow.
Peter Tarnoff
Executive Secretary
denied most-­favored-­nation trade status to nations with non-­market economies that
restricted emigration.

129.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, May 1, 1979
SUBJECT
CNA–78 (U)
Your comments of April 30 are highly pertinent and helpful.2 As
you know, I share many of your concerns. Indeed, I feel strongly that
we need to take some decisions now if the negative trends, which could
so adversely affect our position in the early eighties, are to be averted.
I am glad that you approve the notion of an NSC meeting on the
subject, and I will proceed to schedule one.
To give it focus, and to make the discussion of Presidential import,
I intend to structure the agenda around the following three fundamen-
tal questions:
1. What are the requirements of stable deterrence, now and up to
the mid-­eighties?
2. What are the requirements of stable crisis bargaining, now and
up to the mid-­eighties?
3. What are the requirements of effective war management with
defined political purposes, now and up to the mid-­eighties?
I will ask my staff to coordinate with your staff and that of State in
the development of some appropriate issue papers, covering the three
questions indicated above.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Only. A copy was sent to Vance.
2 See Document 127.

130.	 Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
SUBJECT
M–X Basing
PARTICIPANTS
the White House Situation Room. No minutes of the meeting were found.
State
Warren Christopher
Deputy Secretary
David Gompert
Deputy Director for Politico-­
Military Affairs
JCS
General David Jones
Lt General William Smith
Assistant to the Chairman
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Howard Stoertz
NIO for Strategic Policy
OMB
Dr. John White
Deputy Director
Randy Jayne
Associate Director for National
Security and International Affairs
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
OSD
Harold Brown
Charles Duncan
Deputy Secretary
Dr. William Perry
Under Secretary, Research and
Engineering
Walter Slocombe
Principal Dep Asst Secretary of
Defense (ISA)
ACDA
George Seignious
Spurgeon Keeny
Deputy Director
Dr. Barry Blechman
Assistant Director, Weapons Eval-
uation and Control Bureau
OSTP
Dr. Frank Press
John Marcum
Staff Member
NSC
Dr. Victor Utgoff
Summary of Conclusions
Secretary Brown opened the meeting with a brief summary of some
of the issues underlying the basing question. Bill Perry then described
the context within which the question must be resolved, by reviewing
the latest intelligence estimates on Soviet strategic modernization pro-
grams, their impact on Minuteman survivability, and finally, the strate-
gic modernization programs we currently have underway. (S)

Dr. Perry then presented five possible modernization programs for
our ICBM force: (1) a baseline option with minimal modernization; (2)
an option adding MPS/M–X to the baseline for $32B in procurement
and operating costs thru FY 2000; (3) an option adding small missiles
putting Trident II missiles in submarines and 400 silos, and increasing
the baseline cruise missile carrier purchase by 100 at a total cost of $37B.
Dr. Perry then showed that Option 5 is the most cost effective in terms
of surviving EMT or RVs per dollar, Option 2 comes in second, Option 4
comes in third, and Option 3 is tied with Option 1 for last place because
its trucks can be destroyed on their bases in a day-­to-­day alert situation.
In discussing the options, the following points were made. (S)
Option 2 is the JCS strong and unanimous choice, though they sug-
gest adding a Trident II deployment program to it once MPS/M–X has
been developed. They argue that MPS can be expanded to deal with
increased threats, or defended by BMD, and can be verified with the
sort of cooperative measures that will be required if deep cuts are to be
achieved in SALT III. The JCS noted that the fractionation limits it con-
tains are the most valuable element of SALT II and that with unlimited
throw weight fractionation, MPS would have problems. (S)
OSD noted that Option 2 has a big SALT plus in that by making
the percentage survival of our missiles independent of the number we
own, it could make reductions easier; that the governors and legisla-
tures of the two states where it would be deployed support it—­though
outside opposition might build a case on environmental concerns any-
way; that losing its security would make MPS a disaster; that MPS has
good endurance though perhaps not against bombers; and that while
the breakout problem is not unique to MPS, this system draws attention
to the problem. (S)
State questioned whether MPS could survive in the absence of
SALT and was told we could expand MPS more cheaply than the Sovi-
ets could raise their RV numbers. OSTP argued that a race where the
Soviets build RVs and we build holes would be ludicrous, and that the
panel they have looking at the basing issue is concerned about the pos-
sibility of catastrophic breakdowns in deception. ACDA asked whether
the large number of aim points presented by MPS would reduce Soviet
incentives to agree to fractionation limits in SALT III. CIA suggested
that a variant of MPS using the Trident II missile should be examined—­
this change would allow us to go to a different mobile option if neces-
sary. Further, proceeding with Trident II would allow us to move our
hard-­target capability to sea. (S)
Mr. Aaron commented that we should test the MPS system against
larger threats than those possible under SALT II since it will expire

before the first MPS system is deployed; that while cooperative mea-
sures will be an improvement, MPS makes it essential that we get such
measures, and thus we may end up using our bargaining leverage to
achieve rules on paper rather than real reductions; that a security break-
down could occur for MPS without our knowing it, and that coopera-
tive measures could increase such concerns. OSD responded that SSBN
locations might also become known without our realizing it, and that
the cooperative measures developed for MPS could concentrate on the
missile production process rather than sampling existing missile loca-
Option 3 got little attention beyond the original comment that it
could be destroyed on its bases if attacked while in a day-­to-­day alert
posture. Mr. Aaron noted that such a system might appeal to the Soviet
mentality. OSD commented that it would probably work to our overall
net advantage if the Soviets were to adopt a mobile system—­the cost to
deploy and operate such systems is 2–3 times as great per EMT or RV
deployed as a silo-­based system, and the reduced payload the Soviets
might have to adopt would probably offset the uncertainties involved
in determining the capabilities of such a system. The JCS noted that,
without cooperative measures, a truck mobile system would pose
larger verification problems than MPS. (S)
Option 4 got even less attention—OSTP asked what might happen
if it made use of a common missile and was told that some savings
might result. (S)
The JCS argued that while Option 5 puts the Soviets at risk, which
they must be if we are, it is simply a postponement of the ICBM vul-
nerability problem. They also argued that adoption of Option 5 would
have a bad effect on SALT II ratification because it will raise some very
contentious issues, such as the advisability of putting new missiles in
silos, an idea that is strongly opposed on the Hill. Finally, they noted
that the background material presented for Option 5 underestimates
the severity of the problems associated with it. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that there is considerable political value in
deploying the largest missile allowed under SALT II and suggested that
a variant of Option 5 that deploys M–X in silos be examined. Mr. Aaron
noted that while Option 5 may not solve the ICBM vulnerability prob-
lem, it could eliminate the asymmetry in strike options that is devel-
oping, and that while the silo deployment portion of Option 5 might
decrease crisis stability to some extent, neither side could expect more
than limited success if it attempted a disarming first strike. (S)
OSD commented that the missile proposed under Option 5 for silo
deployment can be called an M–X if necessary, and that the Trident II
design they had in mind would have as much hard-­target capability
as the SS–19. They further noted that the silo deployment portion of

Option 5 would result in some reduced crisis stability, and that, for
another $5–10B a mobile deployment option could be included under
Option 5. State commented that the material presented suggested that
Option 5 might be best, and finally, OSTP asked that an examination be
made of the possibility of adding a mobile deployment to Option 5. (S)
Several additional points were made concerning SALT and the
stability of the strategic balance. Specifically, (1) Mr. Aaron asked if
the improvements in hard-­target capabilities proposed in the various
options would reduce Soviet incentives to agree to reasonable limits in
SALT III. He also noted that one of the problems with MPS is that the
shelters are not distinguishable from launchers, and asked if a variant
of MPS that gets around this problem could be found; (2) CIA noted
that while the backup papers2 for the meeting were very good, they did
not make clear which options lead to more stable strategic balances;
(3) JCS commented that going ahead with MPS would put the Sovi-
ets under the greatest pressure, and that we could adjust the relative
emphasis that we give to this strategic system to suit the situation. (S)
Finally, Mr. Aaron suggested that for the next meeting a paper be
prepared that takes a more careful look at the question of cooperative
measures, and compares the various risks inherent in proceeding with
versions of Options 2 and 5. (S)
2 Not found.

131.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 8, 1979
SUBJECT
PRC on M–X Basing (U)
A PRC meeting was held last Friday2 to review the M–X basing
decision. The meeting opened with a summary of the underlying
issues, a brief review of the main features of both sides’ ongoing stra-
tegic modernization programs, and the presentation of the five ICBM
modernization options that DOD has been studying: (1) a baseline
option with minimal modernization; (2) an option adding MPS/M–X
Trident II missiles in silos and submarines, and increasing the baseline
cruise missile carrier purchase by 100 at a total cost of $37B. (S)
After a short examination of the relative cost effectiveness of each
option (i.e., life cycle costs/surviving RV in a “bolt from the blue”
3 tied with 1 because truck mobiles cannot survive without strategic
warning, the discussion turned to a comparison of the qualitative char-
acteristics of each option. The following points were made:
Option 2 is the JCS strong and unanimous choice: it solves the U.S.
alert ICBM vulnerability problem but puts Soviet ICBMs at risk—­thus
providing leverage for SALT III reductions. They argue that MPS can be
expanded, or protected by ABM, if greater threats develop. (The ABM
Treaty would have to be modified or terminated.) The JCS argue it can
be verified using cooperative measures (e.g., on site inspection) which
the Chiefs argue will be needed to achieve deep cuts in SALT III (S)
Others pointed out (1) that MPS could make future SALT reduc-
tions easier by making the percentage survivability of this ICBM force
independent of the number of missiles it deploys, (2) that loss of secu-
rity, particularly if we were not aware of it, would make MPS a disaster,
(3) that the “breakout” problem of a Soviet MPS is not unique to MPS,
(4) that MPS should be examined against threats greater than those
allowed under SALT II because it won’t start deployment until 1986,
for Brzezinski. Carter wrote in the upper right corner: “Susan, SALT file. J.”

(5) that the large number of valuable MPS aim points and the powerful
first strike capability of M–X against Soviet ICBMs might reduce Soviet
incentives to extend the fractionation limits of SALT II beyond 1985
and into SALT III, (6) and finally, that getting cooperative measures in
SALT III needed to verify a Soviet MPS may consume U.S. bargaining
leverage that might otherwise be directed toward reductions. (S)
There was little discussion of Options 3 and 4 beyond the JCS com-
ment that without cooperative measures, Soviet truck mobiles would
be more difficult to verify than MPS. Harold Brown thought that on
balance U.S. security improved by a Soviet shift to truck mobile ICBMs
since there lesser capability would offset verification uncertainties. (S)
The JCS argued that while Option 5, with its improved hard-­target
capability, would put the Soviets at equal risk, and provide a large
number of surviving weapons, it did not solve the ICBM vulnerability
problem. They further argued that Option 5 would have an adverse
effect on SALT II ratification because it would raise some very conten-
tious issues such as the advisability of putting more capable missiles in
silos, which is strongly opposed on the Hill. Others noted that (1) given
the political value of deploying the largest missile possible under SALT
II, we should look at a variant of Option 5 putting M–X in silos, (2) that
while putting more capable missiles in silos might decrease crisis sta-
bility, neither side could have more than limited success in any attempt
at a disarming first strike, and (3) that variants of Option 5 substitut-
ing mobiles for silo deployments should be examined. Finally, several
principals noted that if a common missile were used for both Navy and
Air Force deployments, we could change deployment modes later if
necessary. (S)
In the next PRC meeting, which will take place next week, we
will include truck mobiles, (2) compare the various types of risks inher-
ent in proceeding with these options including the likely Soviet reac-
tion and the impact on SALT bargaining, and (3) look more deeply at
the question of cooperative measures. (S)

132.	 Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth and Victor Utgoff of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, May 10, 1979
SUBJECT
M-X Basing PRC (U)
There is a new contender in the field: Open trench/rail mobile!
Awaiting the full PRC, those gathered in the Sit Room on 9 May2 heard
Bill Perry preview what he had planned to present. He covered the
following:
1. Open Trench/Rail Mobile M–X Basing
and 100 on trains) has evolved into a distinct basing option for the M–X.
The concept is very like the hybrid trench, except that the trench and
appropriately spaced hardened shelters along the trench can be opened
to overhead inspection. Ease of verification results. Ability to move mis-
siles rapidly on the rails in the trench, even on tactical warning, makes
long-­lasting denial of location information less critical than in MPS. If
necessary simulators could be used to defeat close-­in sensors. (S)
In principle, this concept could be as survivable as MPS. Verifiabil-
ity on the US side is more easily achieved than in MPS, and is probably
easier on the Soviet side. On the other hand, impact on public use of
land and on the environment is probably more severe than with MPS.
This was one of the several factors that removed the open trench from
consideration over a year ago. (S)
In the discussion it was pointed out that costs and environmen-
tal impact might be reduced by laying the track between shelters at
ground level, but security and location secrecy might be made more
difficult. It was noted that our selection of this concept would not con-
strain the Soviets to it (this applies to any concept). Open trench might
be less susceptible to Soviet breakout within the basing system than
MPS would be. But it might, like MPS, give the Soviets an incentive to
proliferate RVs covertly, which they could deploy outside any multiple
shelter system. Clearly, if limiting force size is important for arms con-
trol and stability, we need controls on system production in SALT. (S)
2 No minutes of this meeting were found.

Davy Jones observed that, in the JCS view, open trench was next
best to MPS and clearly preferred over putting improved missiles into
2. Incremental Costs
The open trench concept would, as Perry described it, be very
roughly $3B more expensive than the baseline MPS concept. If the D–5
(fully common missile) were deployed in place of the M–X, in either
MPS or the new trench concept, it would cost yet an additional $1B
because a larger number of D–5 missiles would have to be deployed
to achieve the same level of surviving RVs as afforded by the M–X. On
the other hand, later procurement of the D–5 for Trident deployment
would be much cheaper. (S)
3. The Case for Trident II.
Perry also argued that, whatever is done about ICBM development
and basing, it makes sense to develop and deploy the Trident II missile.
Apart from the greater operating area and resultant increases in SSBN
security afforded by the Trident II’s range, its larger payload would
allow us to maintain the current SLBM RV levels with 6 fewer Trident
subs—­resulting in more than enough savings to pay for the larger
­missile. (S)
The Navy is clearly not enthusiastic about Trident II—­but some
elements of OSD clearly are. Queried on prospects for SLBMs becom-
ing accurate enough to be silo killers, Perry said he thought SLBM
[less than 1 line not declassified] could possibly be attained in 10 years.
This might or might not be sufficient to make the MK–12A a silo-­killer;
uncertainties about Soviet silo hardness deny confidence that this CEP
is sufficient. Perry was confident however that the D–5 missile can be
made accurate enough to be a good hard target killer when deployed
The attractions of the open trench concept are considerable. It
should be examined more carefully, particularly with respect to envi-
ronmental impact, before Harold makes his final recommendation. (S)

133.	 Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
M–X Basing
PARTICIPANTS
place in the White House Situation Room. Brackets, except those indicating material not
declassified, are in the original. The Summary of Conclusions of the meeting is ibid.
State
Cyrus Vance
David Newson
Under Secretary for Political
Affairs
David Gompert
Deputy Director for Politico-­
Military Affairs
JCS
General David Jones
Lt General William Smith
Assistant to the Chairman
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Dr. Robert Bowie
Director, National Foreign
­Assessment Center
Howard Stoertz
NIO for Strategic Programs
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
Hamilton Jordan
NSC
Dr. Victor Utgoff
Fritz Ermarth
OSD
Harold Brown
Charles Duncan
Deputy Secretary
Dr. William Perry
Under Secretary for Research and
Engineering
Walter Slocombe
Principal Dep Asst Secretary of
Defense (ISA)
ACDA
George Seignious
Spurgeon Keeny
Deputy Director
OSTP
Dr. Frank Press
John Marcum
OMB
Dr. John White
Deputy Director
Randy Jayne
Associate Director for National
Security and International Affairs
Detailed Minutes
Harold Brown opened the meeting proposing to go through the
the question of missile size.2 The first topic lead to a discussion of new
basing concepts.

Bill Perry began addressing the questions that had been posed
about the option variations, especially cost. To do Option 5 in silos with
a 100 mobile missile component as well as 300 improved missiles would
average $15B across the mobile modes—­leading to a rough total force
cost of $90B, compared to the $50B minimum modernization baseline
force.
Dr. Perry then briefly showed some calculations on the effective-
ness of different RV loadings vs. nominal soft and hard target sets. He
showed that [6 lines not declassified]
Howard Stoertz commented that some work DNA is now doing
suggests that Soviet silos may be harder than DOD is assuming. Harold
Brown responded that the CEPs being discussed would put the silos
inside the nuclear fireballs.
Dr. Perry then turned to an argument in favor of development of
the Trident II SLBM. He said it would be a good idea whatever we did
about ICBMs because its higher RV loading would permit a reduced
number of boats and consequently reduced procurement and operating
costs of $13B. This is because the Trident boat is already configured to
receive larger D–5 missiles and at least 12 Tridents will be under con-
tract before construction of a new class SSBN could begin.
Harold Brown observed that the Trident II issue is really a question
of when you do it. Dr. Perry noted that depending on the D–5 missile
develop a new and smaller follow-­on submarine.
Dr. Perry then turned to describing the open trench basing concept
involving 5000 miles of trench [1 line not declassified]
[2 lines not declassified] no one really knows how hard they are.
Cy Vance asked how long it took to move between shelters. Dr. Perry
answered that it would take about 3 minutes to get to the first neigh-
boring shelter and about 2 minutes for each succeeding shelter down
the line. Thus, in 30 minutes of ICBM flight time, location uncertainties
of about 30 shelters could be obtained. The missile would launch from
outside the shelter. Roofs over the trench and shelters would enhance
denial of location information but could be opened for verification. The
concept could be operated either with roofs opened most of the time
and closed for movement or with roofs closed most of the time and
open for inspection.
Currently, the main security issue being raised about this system
Perry said was the possibility of missile location reparting by implanted
close-­in sensors. One way to look at the system is as a grid of shel-
ters separated by a mile in all directions and connected by trenches
along one dimension. Tactical warning could allow the missile to move
once to a new shelter before elements of the track were destroyed. The

attacker might seek to pin down the missile force in its initial location
by blocking tracks and then seek to find and strike the real missiles.
However, this scenario is not very plausible, because given the warning
and destruction of the precursor SLBM attack the US would probably
be assumed ready to use its force before losing it.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if the heavy missile was being used in this con-
cept? Perry noted that this basing concept does not prescribe any par-
ticular missile size. As noted before, however, it would cost $1B more
up front to go with the smaller missile because more of them would be
required.
John White asked whether this concept might not cost a lot more
than MPS because of the excavation, track laying, etc.
Bill Perry answered that his analysis was rough but suggested a
Brown noted that DOD’s feeling for cost was based on a lot of study
and field experiments on the underground trench. The AF, it was noted,
had done extensive work on trench design that was directly applicable
to this concept.
Spurgeon Keeny asked why the rail connections had to be trenches.
Could they not be on the surface? He was told that this would be possi-
ble though it might raise additional security concerns.
Frank Press commented that this idea looks much better than MPS
on verification, worse on security, worse on environment, and better on
survivability. He observed that environmental impact would be severe
because of large land areas excluded from public access.
Harold Brown noted that this would depend on where the sys-
tem was located. It could be located in military reservations such as
bombing ranges from which the public was excluded anyway. Dr. Perry
noted that DOD had about 38,000 square miles of suitable land, the AF
about 14,000. Randy Jayne asked whether high water tables—­in some
locations—­had been taken into account. Dr. Perry said the AF had stud-
ied such matters extensively with respect to MPS and trenches. Gen
Jones noted that laying the track above ground would reduce environ-
mental impact if that proved to be the major problem. Harold Brown
said that continuous fences along the trench would be required to keep
the public away from nuclear devices.
Frank Press continued his comments observing that while a
launcher on its side might be easier to verify than a vertical launcher,
Soviet deployment of this concept would worry us. We would be con-
cerned about extra missiles lurking in or stored for introduction into
the system. Harold Brown asked whether this basing concept created a
problem in this respect or merely called attention to the threat of extra
Soviet missiles, a threat that already exists?

Frank Press continued by noting that like MPS, the open trench con-
cept gives the Soviets an incentive to fractionate. If they did so, they
could confront us once again with a vulnerable system. Harold Brown
asked why this should be? We could build more trenches to affect their
RVs. The question was what kind of a race we were interested in. He
noted that no matter what we do, the Soviets could build more RVs
anyway.
David Aaron observed that the Soviets could but don’t have to seek
to make our basic concept vulnerable through fractionation. He ques-
tioned their incentive to try to overcome this system where they will see
that their efforts can be readily thwarted.
Harold Brown asked whether Frank Press’ objection did not imply
that all shelters should have missiles in them instead of only 1 in 20
being full. Frank Press said his point was merely that the survivability
of the open trench like MPS was sensitive to a variable fully in the ene-
my’s hands, mainly RV levels. Harold Brown responded that we could
have more aimpoints, more missiles, and more RVs if Soviet RV levels
went up.
Gen Jones noted that Option 5 results in our producing some 18,000
weapons. He wondered if this would cause the Soviets to go for more
survivability or instead simply force further growth in their RV levels.
Harold Brown noted that the multiple aimpoint systems of any kind
separate survivability from force size.
Stan Turner commented that MAP systems encouraged fraction-
ation on the Soviet side. Option 5 would drive the Soviets to mobility
which [whereas?] Option 2 would drive them to fractionation. Harold
Brown responded by noted that fractionation (or EMT increases) can
be applied against submarines and aircraft as well as multiple shelters.
Our primary concern should be a survivable force—­preventing frac-
tionation (or EMT increases) is a subordinate aim.
David Aaron said if the Soviets want to try to imperil our forces
they can. If we go with an option along the lines of 2 we can roll effec-
tively, with Option 5 we cannot.
Stan Turner said Option 2 means a spiraling arms race in weapons,
whereas Option 5 means a race in mobility. [Adm. Turner is arguing
that Option 2 would cause the Soviets to proliferate RV’s in an attempt
to maintain the threat to our ICBM’s. Option 5 would present so large a
threat to fixed Soviet silos that they would be forced to go mobile] Har-
old Brown noted that, assuming Soviet dedication to counter-­military
capabilities, Option 5 could lead to heightened competition in ASW/
barrage technology. Stan Turner argued, but said that Soviet prospects
in ASW are much less certain than Soviet ability to fractionate mul-
tiple aimpoints. Harold Brown said that the Soviets cannot necessarily

fractionate enough to defeat MPS or open trench. The Soviets already
have many more RVs than we think they need for target coverage. The
multiple shelter concept proceeds on the assumption that aimpoints
can be proliferated more easily than RVs. Stan Turner noted that the
Soviets have shown a willingness to spend great amounts in trying to
reduce the effectiveness of our forces. Harold Brown said that if you con-
cede to the Soviets the ability and willingness to beat all survivability
approaches, life becomes very hard for us. They can work very hard
on ASW. Frank Press opened that the Soviets could not achieve much
in ASW in the 1980’s or even in 1990’s. Harold Brown said he was con-
cerned about the 1990’s but less so about the 1980’s. John White asked if
MPS and open trench reacted differently to fractionation. Harold Brown
said no. Dr. Perry noted that the Soviets could increase fractionation
levels by a factor of 4 by putting [less than one line not declassified] But
then they would need much better CEPs and we could put our shelters
closer together.
David Aaron noted 3 Soviet reasons to fractionation—1) they may
want to keep us vulnerable, 2) match our RV numbers, or 3) increase
their absolute numbers of RV’s surviving a counterforce nuclear
exchange.
Harold Brown observed that increasing the numbers of RV’s on silo
based missiles is not a cost effective way to add surviving RV’s given
very severe threats to the silos.
Cy Vance asked what constraints or cooperative measure we would
want in order to verify a Soviet “open trench” system. Harold Brown
said we would want them to open the system for observation some of
the time.
Frank Press noted that we might be worried about hidden missiles
deployed in such a system. We face the threat of secret silos and hid-
den missiles now. Further, for the Soviet offroad mobile is an attractive
option because of their large land areas—­and this system poses even
larger problems of verification. Stan Turner said we would want three
things to verify open trench on the Soviet side—­a choke point where
missiles were to be introduced into the deployment area, quick inspec-
tion, and production controls. Harold Brown said all connected trenches
would have to be inspectable at once.
Dr. Brzezinski asked what kind of production controls would be
desired? Stan Turner observed that something like the MPS special
assembly facilities near the point of system introduction might do.
Harold Brown asked how do we control a system like the SS–20,
or the evolution of the SS–20 into a SS–16? [less than one line not declas-
sified] Harold Brown said this trench system is easier to verify than
those Soviet systems. David Aaron said we don’t now impose con-
trols on missile numbers. Building secret silos would seem easier

than covertly introducing illegal missiles into a trench system. Harold
Brown said its fairly easy to imagine the construction of some extra
missile silos.
Stan Turner said with multiple aimpoint systems, you have an invi-
tation for excess missiles. Harold Brown replied that the breakout prob-
lem exists now.
Frank Press said security against close-­in sensors would be a real
problem for the open trench. Harold Brown asked how could a sensor
transmit without betraying itself. Frank Press said Vietnam gave us a lot
of experience with such sensors. The open trench system would require
decoys. Harold Brown said why decoys be needed if the missile could
move every 15 minutes. Frank Press asked if that was the plan. Har-
old Brown said it was if necessary. Frank Press said secret sensors could
betray determined location just before an attack. Harold Brown said that
would give us warning. Frank Press asked how we would know the
sensors had transmitted? Davey Jones said simulators to beat sensors
would figure in this concept. The simulators would be distinguishable
to NTM’s.
Harold Brown said the systems could operate like Metro. Something
would always be moving somewhere. A given missile could move 15
minutes, stop 15 minutes, or any combination. The enemy’s intelligence
cycle time could not be fast enough to beat such a system.
Frank Press said the tracks are soft. SLBMs could pin down the mis-
sile, and sensors could then see an ICBM attack to destroy our mis-
siles. Harold Brown doubted the practicality of such a scenario. Frank
Press said the scenario was no less delirious than many in the strategic
business. Harold Brown noted that a [less than one line not declassified]
roof would protect the trench from ejecta. Harold Brown said that open
trench concept had not been studied nearly as fully as had MPS, but
that he had heard no new arguments against it. He asked if Frank Press’
critique in effect said MPS was better than open trench. Frank Press said
perhaps yes for survivability, but no for verification.
Hamilton Jordan asked whether trench length could be reduced to
reduce environmental impact. Harold Brown said about 5,000 miles of
trench would be needed, but that it could be cut up almost any way you
want. Hamilton Jordan said, “that is a lot of trench.” Harold Brown said
military bases could accommodate it. Frank Press asked whether public
access would in fact be disrupted except for places where public access
is not now permitted such as bombing ranges. Hamilton Jordan asked:
isn’t total mileage the key variable in public impact. Harold Brown said
environmental impact can be reduced by laying track above ground.
Gen Jones commented broadly on the basing issue and then spoke
to the question of missile size: He said the Chiefs definitely want a sur-
vivable ICBM, the AF prefers MPS but would “be cooperative” with

something like the open trench if MPS is rejected. He noted that verifi-
cation difficulties would be very serious in SALT III no matter what our
basic concept because of system mobility.
Personally Gen Jones said he leans toward the trench. Regarding
missile commonality and size, he said we must understand that build-
ing a 110,000 lb. missile will mean designing it for the Trident. It will be
called the D–5, or Trident II; M-X will be regarded as cancelled. We may
attain a $3–4B saving from commonality, but the Chiefs regard this cost
saving as very dubious. The Chiefs believe that the common missile
will be another TFX. It will involve a delay of 6 months to a year, when
we’ve already delayed too much. It will yield a missile with less capa-
bility than permitted by SALT. Thus, we shall have a perception prob-
lem involving cancellation of M–X and delay of a new missile. Ergo,
the fully common missile is not a good idea. The Chiefs believe that if
commonality seems as important, a 150,000 lb. partly common missile
is the way to go—­two stages in common, a third stage to achieve an
M–X capable of carrying 10 MK–12As, and a best effort on common
components. The Chiefs would also propose going forward with a Tri-
dent II, but later than envisioned in Option 5.
Dr. Brzezinski asked how many RVs the 150,000 lb. missile would
carry in the absence of a fractionation level. Harold Brown said as many
as 20 MK–4s could be carried, but with that many RV releases there
was a problem of reliability and accuracy. Gen Jones said a 190,000 lb.
M–X would use all our head room under SALT and match the SS–19 in
throw weight—­a 150,000 lb. missile would have only 700 lbs. less throw
have 7200 lbs.
Stan Turner asked whether the 150,000 lb. missile could be mated
with an aircraft. Harold Brown said yes. Stan Turner asked about putting
it on a truck. Harold Brown answered only two stages would be used in
effect. The truck would be deploying the D–5.
George Seignious said that if one looked in the long term to negoti-
ations beyond 1985, it appeared there could be a race between RVs and
aimpoints, and arms control might end up trying to limit both weapons
and aimpoints. Stan Turner said the Soviets pursued forces that gave
them warfighting and reserve strategic capabilities.
Harold Brown said we could afford to, and some time ago did con-
cede to the Soviets over all strategic equality, but we could not accom-
modate their quest for warfighting advantages. If they wanted to strive
for those advantages, we would simply have to move to deny them.
David Aaron said if we can effectively restore force survivability in
the face of Soviet threats, then we may have a chance to negotiate the
forces downward. But we will never get them to agree to limitations if
we allow them to make their counter force achievements stick.

Harold Brown said we don’t want to be in the situation we have
faced during SALT II when we wanted the Soviets to reduce their mis-
sile threat to Minuteman, but had no leverage to achieve that goal.
134.	 Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
SUBJECT
Consolidated Guidance
PARTICIPANTS
House Situation Room. No minutes of the meeting were found. An undated memoran-
dum from Brzezinski to Carter summarizing the meeting is ibid.
2 Not further identified.
3 See Document 31.
State
Warren Christopher,
Deputy Secretary
JCS
General Bernard Rogers,
Acting Chairman, JCS
Admiral Stansfield Turner
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
OSD
Harold Brown
Charles Duncan,
Deputy Secretary
Russell Murray,
Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Program Analysis and Evaluation
OMB
John White,
Deputy Director
NSC
Victor Utgoff
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
DOD presented material2 showing that even if we were to buy the
forces currently programmed, we would not be able to meet the strat-
egy given in PD–18:—1) maintain an overall balance at least as favor-
able as that existing in August 1977; 2) maintain essential equivalence;
and 3) minimize NATO territory lost to any Warsaw Pact attack and
restore prewar boundaries.3 DOD also showed that due to higher than
anticipated inflation and widespread underpricing, purchasing the
forces programmed for the next five years would cost $40+B more than

would be available with real increases of 3 percent. In discussing this
material, the following points were made:
—The strategic forces balance is worse now than in 1977, and will
continue to get worse. Programs currently under discussion can begin
to improve the situation by the mid-’80s, however. No matter what pro-
gram decisions we make to modernize our strategic forces, in the early
’80s we are likely to be perceived as having less than essential equiv-
alence with the Soviets. We must find ways to improve such percep-
tions in order to ensure that we don’t face a “Cuba-­in-­reverse”—­from
which we might not recover. Improvements in C3I systems should be
emphasized.
—JCS said that Army computer studies show that NATO would
not be able to stop an all-­out WP attack (problems are particularly
severe in the NORTHAG area), much less restore prewar boundaries.
It was also noted that while NATO improvements being made by our
collective efforts to increase defense spending by 3 percent are achiev-
ing modest results, much larger increases are needed if we want to be
able to fulfil our NATO strategy anytime soon. Dr. Brzezinski said that
while declaring this strategy before we have the capability to carry it
out may seem unrealistic, the strategy is essential to maintaining Alli-
ance cohesion.
—State does not see any particular signs that our current defense
posture is inhibiting Allied support of the US. Our Allies are jittery
about the Soviet buildup, but less than they would be in the absence
of the improvements being made in NATO’s defense posture. Further,
the Allies probably can’t do more than the 3 percent they have already
promised.
—The Middle East/Persian Gulf situation presents difficult prob-
lems. The Soviets may doubt our ability to project significant military
power into the area—­and we clearly couldn’t if crises in NATO and the
ME/PG area were to begin simultaneously. Having a permanent pres-
ence in the ME/PG area may deter situations requiring considerably
larger forces. Given other countries’ stakes in continued access to the
region’s oil, we should not be expected to provide the forces required
to stabilize the region by ourselves, however.
—The Korean balance looks adverse from a military viewpoint,
but in the larger context of developing political relationships in the Far
East, this balance is not so bad as it might seem. (S)
There were several comments suggesting that some Western
advantages may not be fairly reflected by the armored division equiva-
lents measure used to assess the balance of forces in various areas. CIA
commented that the Soviets probably don’t believe the military balance
favors them as much as we think it does. (S)

In discussing the possibility of significant funding increases, there
seemed to be general agreement that the 5 percent real increase rate
that would be needed to meet the requirements of PD–18 by 1990 was
not politically feasible. In support of this point, OMB noted that the
year. OMB noted that in 1981, the federal tax burden will reach levels
in excess of 20 percent of the GNP—­which is unprecedented in peace-
time. This burden will lead to increased political pressures for a tax
reduction. OMB also noted that we are going to have to increase the
estimated inflation rates for the next few years that DOD is using in
planning its budget. Finally, considerable support was voiced for meet-
ing the 3 percent real increase in 1981. (S)
It was also noted that while there is a general consensus that mili-
tary spending should grow—­such support had its limits. The Congress
has cut out a number of defense programs the Administration has pro-
posed, and most domestic programs have not been allowed to grow in
real terms in the last several years. Thus, the political costs of getting
additional defense funds may be high. DOD noted that this suggests
that we should pay more attention to the fact that some defense pro-
grams can win Congressional support more easily than others. (S)
In view of the continuing problems in maintaining an adequate
overall military balance, and the likely constraints on increased DOD
funding, a suggestion was made that we take a particularly hard look
at issues such as the balance between combat and combat support, the
land-­based vs. sea-­based tactical airpower trade-­off, the need to main-
tain significant amounts of shipping dedicated to support of opposed
amphibious landings, the feasibility of increasing Allied ammunition
stocks, and the potential utility of some MAP programs in important
areas such as the Persian Gulf. (S)
Finally, it was generally agreed that some parts of our military
strategy are more important than others, and that priorities need to be
established. An NSC meeting will be held in the near future to discuss
the material DOD presented in this meeting, some closely related mate-
rial in the comprehensive Net Assessment, and the M–X basing deci-
sion. On the basis of the President’s reactions to that meeting, and a
future NSC meeting to discuss strategic targeting and C3I issues, PD–18
may be updated to establish more clearly the relative priorities of the
various elements of our overall military strategy. (S)

135.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 15, 1979
SUBJECT
U.S. Strategic Policy
During the coming months, several basic strategic issues will come
to you for decision. To prepare the best possible perspective and options
for your consideration, this month we will have had three PRC meet-
ings on M–X basing and a PRC to review the Consolidated Guidance.2
By the first week in June, I believe we will be ready for an NSC meeting
to look at these problems and other imminent strategic decisions in a
comprehensive manner. The subject of the proposed meeting will be
“U.S. Strategic Arms Policy and U.S.-Soviet Relations.”
I would propose to begin such a meeting with an overview, briefly
summarizing CNA–78 and the Consolidated Guidance and reviewing
the different perspectives of State and Defense. I would propose that
next we focus (in the context of the three basic strategic problems we
face: deterrence, crisis bargaining and war management) on the five
areas in which your decisions are required: M–X basing, TNF, C3I, tar-
getting and a new strategic document. I would propose to concentrate
particularly on M–X basing and TNF because it will be important to
have your preliminary decisions on these two issues prior to your
meeting with Schmidt and the U.S.–USSR Summit.
While we can arrange a follow-­up session on C3I, targetting and a
new strategic document, we need to consider the latter very carefully
because both the subject and the timing of its completion will be politi-
cally sensitive. Any attempt to create a new strategic document updat-
ing PD–18 and to provide the direction to American strategic policy
that NSC–683 did in the early 1950’s will have to be considered very
carefully and cautiously.4
upper right corner of the memorandum indicates that Carter saw it.
­Document 134.
3 See Foreign Relations, 1950, vol. I, National Security Affairs; Foreign Economic
­Policy, p. 234.
4 Carter wrote below this paragraph: “I’ll do this after you, Harold and Cy arrange
for confidentiality.”

RECOMMENDATION
That you approve a two-­hour NSC meeting on June 4 or 5 (possi-
bly using the Cabinet time) for a discussion of U.S. strategic arms policy
and U.S.-Soviet relations, with the specific purpose of your providing
at the end a preliminary decision on M–X basing and TNF in antici-
pation of the Schmidt visit and the U.S.-Soviet Summit, deferring the
other items to a later follow-­on meeting.5
5 Carter wrote “ok” below this paragraph.
136.	 Memorandum From Victor Utgoff of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, May 23, 1979
SUBJECT
3rd PRC on MX basing
Background
The 3rd PRC on MX basing is scheduled for Thursday, May 24th
options down to a very small number for presentation to the President
in an NSC meeting on June 6. DOD’s proposed agenda for this PRC is
The Basing Decision
At this point there appear to be 3 live basing options
—­a modification of the trench concept Bill Perry presented in the
last PRC meeting. The primary difference between the current concept
and the one you heard about last time is that due to cost, excessive land
use and security concerns the trench is now covered with removable
concrete slabs which are covered with earth. Nonetheless, any trench
can be scraped off and opened up for verification in about a day. Cost
for information.
2 Attached but not printed is the proposed agenda from the Department of Defense.

estimates vary for this system—OSD is saying roughly $6B more than
MPS, the Air Force is saying $10–12B.
—MPS with vertical shelters, or for $1–2B more, with sliding roof
horizontal shelters that should ease verification concerns.
—­a variation of the original Option 5 that deploys Trident II in sub-
marines, deploys a missile with some degree of commonality in STOL
aircraft and silos, and accelerates the cruise missile carrier program.
This option costs somewhat more than MPS but offsets much of the
high cost of the airmobile deployment with the reduction in the num-
bers of Trident subs, that can be justified by building a large SLBM. (S)
Agency Positions and Arguments on Basing
OSD champions the first option. They appear to believe that MPS
even with horizontal shelters is a non starter with the White House,
and they have decided that the dash-­on-­warning feature of the trench
option is the only way to beat the nagging doubts about whether the
Soviets will be able to discover the locations of missiles deployed in an
MPS system, perhaps without our knowledge. JCS prefers MPS but is
willing to go along with the trench concept. (S)
The Air Force still prefers MPS and argues that building MPS with
horizontal shelters should give it verification properties as good or bet-
ter than those of the trench. The Air Force is also concerned that the
uncertainties of the trench scheme may lead to further delays in field-
ing a survivable ICBM. Finally, they argue that the costs of building the
trench system are $4–6B more than the OSD estimates. (S)
OMB feels that the President must make a decision on the bas-
ing mode very soon and that the trench concept is too uncertain to be
choosable. They further argue that the Option 5 variant is not politically
feasible in that it would not satisfy the Air Force, and choosing it would
hurt SALT II ratification. OMB thus leans toward MPS. (C)
Partly on the basis of its panel’s report, OSTP feels that the trench
concept has too many uncertainties to be chosen right now. They argue
that we haven’t yet taken a serious look at the security and verifica-
tion issues, and there is no way to evaluate shelter hardness and thus
TEL speed and land requirements until DOD settles on a shelter design.
They also say that the system has much poorer location security than
MPS and could thus be vulnerable to a 2 phased attack in which SLBM’s
are used to deprive the system of its mobility and then ICBM’s are used
to destroy the missiles which would be located by covertly planted sen-
sors. Given the problems it sees with the other options, OSTP suggests
that the President announce a decision to proceed with the mostly com-
mon missile (which would keep all basing options reasonably open)
and commit the trench to perhaps another month of study. (S)

Assessment of the Basing Arguments
OSTP and OMB have a point in arguing that there are some uncer-
tainties regarding the trench system, but I think they are carrying their
point too far in saying the system is not choosable now. As a result of
their original interest in the trench concept the Air Force has a large
body of study and test information to draw on in completing a design
with the desired features, and I believe that reasonable answers will
drop into place if the trench idea is pursued. (C)
On the other hand, with a somewhat faster shuffling of missile
positions to minimize concerns about the possibility of a breakdown
in security, and with horizontal shelters to ease SALT related concerns,
MPS looks like a reasonable choice too. The key question would seem
to be—Are we so concerned about the possibility that the Soviets can
determine which shelters our missiles are in as to justify the very rapid
inter-­shelter mobility provided by the trench system? (C)
As far as Option 5 goes—I agree with OMB’s agreements that it is
not politically feasible. In addition, some other arguments given against
Option 5 seem very persuasive: 1) it does not restore the survivability of
the ICBM leg of the Triad and may thus encourage the Soviets to think
we will let their efforts to undermine our strategic forces succeed and,
2) it sharply increases our RV levels, which may increase Soviet interest
in mobile systems, but may also cause them to resist fractionation limits
in the future and simply proliferate RV’s themselves. (S)
The Missile Decision
OSD is now arguing that if the trench concept is chosen we should
also proceed with the largest missile possible. This is because smaller
missiles must be bought in larger numbers to reach any given level
of surviving capability and each additional missile requires additional
trench and a transporter, both of which are relatively expensive. (S)
OSD argues that if Option 5/air mobile is chosen we should pro-
ceed with a common missile. The largest missile won’t fit in the air-
plane they would use, and the mostly common missile will not offer
enough improvement over the common missile to justify the extra cost
and the management problems it would create. (S)
I believe these are reasonable arguments and that the mostly com-
mon missile is not a good idea for any deployment mode. In the deploy-
ment modes where it makes sense, trench and MPS, the larger missile
offers perceptional, political, schedule, and management advantages
that far outweigh the marginal cost saving that might be achieved with
the mostly common missile. (S)

The Bottom Line
I think the President’s best course would be to go ahead with the
MX decision in early June as now planned. I agree that there are still
some significant uncertainties in the trench concept. I also believe that
in the two weeks remaining until the NSC meeting to review the issue
with the President the Air Force and OSD will be able to refine the
trench and horizontal MPS options sufficiently to give the President 2
reasonably acceptable options to choose from. (S)
Finally, while Option 5 looks like an overall loser, I recommend
that it not be dropped from the list of options to be presented to the
President. Keeping Option 5 in the running and perhaps tuning it a
little and saying something nice about it may have a beneficial effect
on the final stages of DOD’s studies of the trench and MPS variant
concepts. (S)
137.	 Memorandum From Denis Clift, John Matheny, and
Ralph Crosby of the Vice President’s Staff to Vice
President Mondale1
Washington, May 24, 1979
SUBJECT
The third PRC (principals only) on MX Basing will be held on May
25. We recommend that you attend. The candidates for MX basing have
now been narrowed to three from the original list of five:
—ICBMS in Trenches. This concept was first introduced at the last
PRC and consists of a series of 25-­mile long trenches with several rail
cars carrying missiles running back and forth within each trench. The
trenches are covered with removable concrete slabs. This option would
run anywhere from $6 to $10 billion more than MPS and appears to
have no advantages (if MPS uses horizontal shelters) other than being
able to shift missiles more quickly during crisis buildup to enhance
security. OSD currently favors this option because they believe it has a
better chance of Presidential approval than MPS.
—MPS: The Multiple Protective Structure (MPS) System (the pre-
ferred option, in fact, of OSD and JCS)—­this time with an added feature
of horizontal vice vertical shelters to ease verification concerns (this
is the only one of the original options which has basically remained
intact).
—Common M–X/Trident II in SILOs, at Sea and Aboard Aircraft—­a
partly common missile for use in Trident submarines (more capable
missile, therefore less submarines), in STOL aircraft and in fixed SILOs.
This option also accelerates the cruise missile carrier program. This is
a hybrid (costing more than the other two options) which features the
largest increase in warheads per dollars spent (an analyst’s dream), but
which also dodges the question of a new large ICBM (“partly common”
is smaller than the original M-X) and abandons our land based missiles
to their present highly vulnerable deployment mode. (As noted in the
NSC memorandum, this is really not a politically feasible option—­it
does not restore survivability of the ICBM.)
What is not explicit in the PRC preparatory material is that the
President has made it clear on a number of occasions that he has a great
problem with MPS, although the Defense community (together with
OMB and the NSC) are almost universally for it.
The President is concerned over what he perceives to be more dif-
ficult verification problems than are thought to be the case by his advi-
sors; he believes that the Soviet response might be to produce more
reentry vehicles to defeat MPS or even try to “breakout” by duplicating
MPS in an unverifiable manner, thus escalating the arms “race.”
Ironically, the MPS system, if deployed, may have precisely the
opposite effect. By decoupling the force size from survivability, we are
forcing the Soviets to “come clean” as to their intentions. By the end
of the current SALT treaty, they will have matched us in total num-
ber of reentry vehicles—­this can be done within SALT constraints if
they MIRV their SLBMs with smaller RVs—­the final political plateau
to perceived Soviet equality. Should the Soviets seek to further frac-
tionate their ICBM RVs to try to defeat MPS (a violation of SALT II),
they are clearly moving in a counterforce direction and there can be no
argument as to their intent. Even if this were the case, however, we can
build holes in the ground as fast and as cheaply as they can build new
RVs, and the absurdity of that exercise may drive both sides to finally
reduce forces.
This third PRC is preparatory to an NSC meeting on June 62 at
which time the President is expected to reach a decision. Your entrance
at this point in time into the deliberation process would serve to make you
fully aware of the pros and cons for each MX basing option. We recommend
that you attend.
As you know, while no one in authority is saying so publicly, a pos-
itive decision by the President on MX is seen as vital by the Joint Chiefs.

This decision, in turn, cannot help but influence the final position of the
Chiefs on SALT II.
138.	 Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
M–X Basing
PARTICIPANTS
meeting took place in the White House Situation Room. The minutes of the meeting were
not found.
State
Warren Christopher
Deputy Secretary
JCS
General David Jones
Admiral Stansfield Turner
OSTP
Frank Press
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
OSD
Harold Brown
Charles Duncan
Deputy Secretary
William Perry
Under Secretary for Research and
Engineering
ACDA
George Seignious
OMB
John White
Deputy Director
NSC
Victor Utgoff
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The bulk of this meeting was used to review the trench basing
concept, which is converging on a design similar to the one originally
examined over a year ago but with two important differences. First, the
trench is covered, but its sectioned top can be completely removed to
allow verification. Second, the transporter has larger engines to give it
higher speed. This would allow it to completely randomize its position
within the flight time of a Soviet ICBM, if we suspect that the security
guarding our transporter locations has been broken. (S)

In discussing the environmental impact of such a system, it was
pointed out that the governors of the states where the system might be
deployed—Utah and Nevada—­had objected to the kind of area secu-
rity that an open trench system would require. With a covered trench,
we could go to point security, and the public could be allowed to use
much of the deployment area, though the area would be kept under
surveillance using national park-­type security, and would be periodi-
cally swept for covertly implanted sensors. Mr. Jordan commented that
while the environmentalists would like an underground system better
than one on the surface, both environmentalists and politicians would
be shocked at the extent of the system, and it should be concentrated
in as small an area as possible. Secretary Brown commented that the
construction should be confined, at least initially, to DOD land so the
public could see how little impact a completed system would have. (S)
In discussing the survivability of this trench system, Dr. Perry
pointed out that this basing mode is unique in having two methods
of achieving survivability—­deceptive location and a dash-­on-­warning
capability. He further noted that while the system was designed to
initially include 8,000 hardened shelters, another 8,000 could be built
between the original shelters for about $1B in additional costs. This
would defeat greater than expected Soviet efforts to fractionate their
missile throw-­weight, and any amount of further fractionation could
be similarly defeated. Mr. Seignious commented that this capability to
cope with increased fractionation should provide minimum incentives
for Soviet fractionation and thus help to preserve one of SALT II’s most
valuable achievements—­fractionation limits. (S)
Stan Turner questioned whether the Soviets would let us achieve
the high level of survivability anticipated for this system, when they
would be starting so far ahead in the warhead versus shelter race we
would be running. [3 lines not declassified] Secretary Brown argued that
many of the RVs in this estimate are below the 1 MT size used as a
design threat for the trench system, and many are [2 lines not declassi-
fied] He also argued that we can pour concrete faster than the Soviets
can build missiles, and that if the Soviets abrogate the SALT limits in
an attempt to maintain a high level of threat to the system, we could
conceivably defend it with an ABM system. Mr. Aaron suggested that
an analysis be carried out of the relative efforts required to expand and
to offset the threat to the trench concept. (S)
Finally, Dr. Press asked how the system would cope with a sce-
nario in which the Soviets use SLBMs to deprive the transporters of
their mobility, and then use ICBMs to attack shelters that have been
identified as containing missile transporters by covertly implanted sen-
sors. Secretary Brown commented that this scenario seems unrealistic,
particularly given the fact that the Soviet SLBM attack would provide

considerable warning of their intentions, and could be the basis for
launching our missiles upon warning of the follow-­up ICBM attack. He
also noted that the systems dash capability responded to the concerns
about catastrophic security breakdown that had been expressed by the
PRC in the previous meeting on this issue. He suggested that while
we could leave it out and thus save about $1B in the cost of the trench
system, he would not want to see the system cancelled later for lack of
such a capability. (S)
With respect to verification of the system, Bill Perry said that
within several hours any trench can be opened up enough to allow the
Soviets to see that it contains only a single missile transporter; uncov-
ering the trench completely might take a day. The trench could be left
open several days, and as many as 10 to 20 percent of the trenches could
be open at one time—­opening could be done on a regular schedule or
in response to Soviet requests. The key to this verification scheme is
arranging the deployment area so that missiles and transporters can-
not be brought in and taken out between surveillance opportunities. In
response to questions by Warren Christopher, Secretary Brown noted
that we would need to ask the Soviets to open any mirror-­image system
perhaps once per year, and that given a reasonable Soviet design, we
could deal with the amount of cloud cover encountered over the Soviet
George Seignious asked what we would do if the Soviets
responded to our deployment with a different system. Secretary Brown
commented that no US system solves this problem—­the real issue is:
does our action say that the Soviets can deploy something that is not
verifiable? (S)
At several points in the meeting Dr. Brzezinski asked questions
about the possibility of designing the system to run on the surface
using a large road vehicle. This would allow it to move out of its shelter
complex if sufficient warning were available and achieve even higher
levels of survivability. Secretary Brown responded that without strate-
gic warning, the system would be far tougher to kill inside its shelter
complex than on the surface trying to disperse. He also argued that
use of the M–X or mostly-­common missile implies a transporter with a
gross weight of roughly a million lbs. This would require special roads
within the deployment area which would have significantly greater
environmental impact than the covered trench. Finally, he noted that
while the system might have greater survivability in some scenarios,
its ability to move outside the designated deployment area would raise
verification concerns. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski noted our apparent willingness to spend billions
to protect this force from bolt-­from-­the-­blue attacks, and questioned
whether we wouldn’t regret being confined to our trenches if the Soviets

were to respond to our mobile systems by deploying something like
the SS–16. George Seignious said that getting a survivable system our-
selves is more of a concern than what the Soviets do. Secretary Brown
commented that we will always want to verify limits on Soviet propos-
als and should thus pay attention to the example we set in verification.
Finally, General Jones argued that the Soviets will be able to cover very
large areas with overpressure that would be lethal to a surface-­mobile
system, and that dispersing it in a crisis might be destabilizing in that it
could send a bad signal. (S)
There are [was?] some discussion of Option 5A,2 which deploys a
common missile in silos, the Trident sub, and a small number of aircraft,
and uses this same aircraft in an accelerated cruise missile carrier pro-
gram. Stan Turner noted that this option would provide significantly
more surviving capability than any of the others. Dr. Brzezinski com-
mented that he had not made up his mind on Option 5A and wanted
to see it brought forward. Secretary Brown noted that this option
would be more frightening to the Soviets due to the rapid rate at which
it would improve our SSBN and strategic aircraft forces. Frank Press
noted Option 5A’s greater effectiveness, and the fact that it did con-
tain the air mobile deployment option. He then added that the trench
scheme being discussed is only two weeks old—­and is a relatively
uncertain concept that is still changing. General Jones answered that
the air-­mobile concept is more uncertain than the trench concept, and
Secretary Brown showed a short film on trench construction and testing
to illustrate the point that the current trench concept is building upon
a body of knowledge that has been evolving for some time. Secretary
Brown concluded the discussion of basing modes by suggesting that
the MPS, covered trench and Option 5A alternatives be presented to the
President for decision. (S)
In discussing the issue of missile size, Dr. Brzezinski commented
that if we are not going to proceed with a ground-­mobile system that
might need a smaller missile, he favors building the largest missile pos-
sible under SALT II—­the 190,000 lb. M–X. He argued that this missile
is better defined than the various common missiles, and could be put
in full-­scale development almost immediately, where the others would
involve significant delays. Dr. Brzezinski noted that such delays might
be seen as an attempt to make it easier to cancel the deployment of the
new land-­based missile once SALT II ratification is behind us. George
Seignious added that there appears to be strong support by the Con-
gress for proceeding with the largest possible missile. (S)
Frank Press argued that we will have no flexibility to deploy the
new missile in other basing modes if we proceed with the large M–X.
2 The options paper was not found.

Secretary Brown responded that a surface-­mobile system might still be
possible, or deployment in the sort of small submersibles that Frank
Press’ panel had suggested. (S)
General Jones argued in favor of the large M–X, noting that the
smaller missiles were less capable, and that development of a common
missile could lead to common failure modes and would be a manage-
ment disaster according to several experts who had managed larger
missile programs before. Secretary Brown argued that these manage-
ment concerns were in his view overblown, and Bill Perry showed a
chart3 indicating that the capabilities of the common missile do not
compare that unfavorably with those of the large M-X if its accuracy
goals can be met. Secretary Christopher noted that given the tension
between survivability and verification, and Congressional attitudes, he
thought the trench concept with the full-­sized M-X missile would be
the best answer. Finally, Secretary Brown noted that interest in Option
5A implies interest in proceeding with the fully common missile. (S)
3 The chart was not found.
139.	 Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Science and
Technology (Press) to President Carter1
Washington, June 1, 1979
SUBJECT
M–X Missile and Basing Option
As you recall you directed me to convene a panel to review vari-
ous alternatives for the M–X missile size and basing mode. Although
much of their effort focused on multiple protective shelter (MPS) and
airmobile ICBM systems, they also briefly considered the recently pro-
posed trench and included some general comments on this system in
an addendum to their report (Tab A).2 Following is a brief summary of
the panel’s conclusions:
—Although technically feasible and more effective than other
alternatives in preserving the current attributes of our Minuteman
Chron File, Box 86, Defense: 1979. Secret.
2 Attached but not printed is the May 1979 M–X Panel Report.

force, MPS still has serious shortcomings including verification, break-­
out and security problems.
—The trench system could in principle resolve the MPS verification
problems but seems to involve an inherent conflict between verification
and security. The environmental and security problems could be mini-
mized if the trench were closed most of the time, as DOD is proposing,
but this would lead to verification concerns about possible clandestine
activities, such as digging side tunnels to store excess missiles.
—The Panel saw considerable merit in a system which would
involve placing some new missiles in current Minuteman silos and some
in airplanes. They felt that such a system would have some important
advantages due to synergistic cross-­force effects. For example, a simul-
taneous Soviet launch of ICBMs against our silos and SLBMs against
our airbased missiles would permit the silo based force to be launched
on confirmation of actual nuclear detonation instead of on warning as
at present.
Based on the panel’s findings and my own review of this issue,
I believe that a mixed silo and air basing approach which includes a
new aircraft that would also be used for cruise missile carriage and the
TRIDENT II SLBM is the best approach from the standpoint of military
and cost effectiveness. The DOD analysis indicates that for compara-
ble expenditures this system would have significantly more warheads
and surviving EMT than either the MPS or trench. For political reasons,
however, I think that it would be important to use a “mostly common”
missile in the silo and airbased forces rather than TRIDENT II. This
missile could carry 10 MK–12A RVs, the maximum we are allowed
under SALT, and its increased firepower would further enhance the
military effectiveness of this option. Since it would have a third stage
and guidance system that would not be compatible with SLBM use, it
would help offset the Chiefs’ concern that if TRIDENT II is picked, the
silo and airbased ICBMs would be dropped entirely at a later point.
The mostly common missile could cost an additional 2–3 billion dollars,
but this could be offset if necessary by reductions in missile or aircraft
procurement.
I believe that this option would also be the most compatible with
your arms control objectives. All of its components would be readily
verifiable and in view of its tremendous military effectiveness and the
fact that many procurement decisions would not actually be made for
several years, this option would give us significantly greater negotiat-
ing leverage with the Soviets.
In spite of its inherent advantages, however, there may be over-
riding political objections to this approach. It is not as effective as the
MPS or trench in preserving Minuteman’s attributes, and the mostly
common missile would not be as large as the 190,000 lb one we are
permitted to build under SALT. (It would weigh 170,000 lbs for silo
launch and 150,000 lbs for air launch.) For these reasons it is unlikely

this option would be supported by the Chiefs. It could be criticized as
an abandonment of the triad and could considerably complicate pros-
pects for SALT ratification. Consequently, you may want to proceed
instead with some variant of the trench system.
The current approach of having a heavy concrete and ground cov-
ering over the entire trench which would only be removed once a year
and even then with considerable difficulty would involve verification
problems approaching those involved with the MPS. The Soviets have
objected repeatedly to our use of temporary shelters over Minuteman
silos and could be expected to object even more strenuously to a system
that was covered most of the time. It is possible that a different concept,
such as placing the tracks and shelters completely on the surface with
no covering between shelters, could overcome this verification problem
and possibly be acceptable from an environmental and security stand-
point. Given the present uncertainties in the trench, however, I recom-
mend that you offer only tentative endorsement of this option pending
a fullscale definition study this summer.
There would be considerable objection to yet another delay on
the basing mode but this timetable would permit you to reach a final
decision by October 1, the M–X reporting date set by the Senate in its
review of the FY 80 budget, and prior to the vote on SALT ratifica-
tion. To minimize objections, however, it would be essential for you
to decide now on the size of the M–X missile and to authorize its full­
scale development. I recommend you select the mostly common rather
than 190,000 lb missile to preserve the flexibility for aircraft basing in
the event that the trench problems can not be overcome and to permit
eventual use of the first two stages for the TRIDENT II SLBM.

140.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 3, 1979
SUBJECT
NSC Meeting on Strategic Issues and US-Soviet Relations (C)
You will chair a meeting of the National Security Council on June 4
to discuss selected strategic issues and the general balance of power in
US-Soviet relations. It will have a four-­fold importance:
—On the eve of the Vienna Summit,2 you will review the trends in
the East-West strategic balance. For example, there is no doubt that JCS
support for SALT ratification will be enhanced if problems with this
balance are addressed at an NSC meeting and some specific actions
taken to mitigate them.
—The following day you will review the Defense budget with
OMB. It is important that strategic perspectives guide the budget deci-
sions, not vice-­versa.
—You will meet with Chancellor Schmidt two days later3 at
which time you will want to indicate your position on TNF, which will
also be reviewed at this NSC meeting.
—DOD will formally present its analysis of the M–X alterna-
NSC Meeting: Issues and Conduct
With the above points in mind, the NSC meeting agenda will be
as follows:
1. I will provide a brief review of CNA–78 and the PRC on the
DOD Consolidated Guidance with conclusions that bear on the strate-
gic trends. I shall also indicate several topics for a later NSC meeting,
including C3I and strategic doctrine. Others will comment briefly.
2. We shall briefly review policy and planning on Theater Nuclear
Force modernization, specifically: a) Chancellor Schmidt’s visit; b) the
The date is handwritten.
final day of the summit, the two leaders signed the Treaty Between the United States and
the Soviet Union on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms. See Foreign Relations,
3 Documentation on Chancellor Helmut Schmidt’s June 6 visit to the White House
is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.

status of NATO consultations; c) development of force posture options
within the USG. (An example is at Tab A.)4 You will receive a more com-
plete memo on this subject in your briefing book for the Schmidt visit.
You should instruct Harold to present you with specific deployment
options by the end of June for our decision and then discussion with
the allies in July.
3. The main business of this meeting is to discuss M–X alterna-
tives and basing, which constitute the most important immediate deci-
sion required for long-­term solutions to our strategic problems. Harold
Brown will present the results of PRC deliberations, options on basing,
options on the missile choice, and supporting analysis.
4. Time permitting, we shall have a brief discussion of the strategic
problem we may face in the early 1980s when Minuteman will be highly
vulnerable but offsetting new force deployments will not yet have been
made. We want to elicit views as to whether we have a critical problem
in the early 1980s and, if so, what short-­term fixes might be in order.
Several options have been surfaced, e.g., uploading more weapons on
our Poseidon SLBMs, delaying deactivation of Polaris SSBNs, raising
bomber alert rates, and accelerating B–52/ALCM conversions. We
want to determine whether a more systematic look at these and other
possibilities is in order. You should also ask Harold to present you with
specific proposals by the end of June.
Throughout the meeting you should keep in mind three ques-
tions5 as criteria for decisions and guidance you may give on strategic
matters:
a. In view of the continuing Soviet buildup and capability, what
will be required to maintain stable deterrence in the 1980s and beyond?
b. In the event of a strategic crisis with the USSR, what will be
required for a stable bargaining posture?
c. Finally, if deterrence fails in a crisis, what will it take to make our
military power support politically selected war aims instead of letting
our military posture draw us into a meaningless spasm war?6 (TS)
Analysis of M–X Choices
As I see it, you have two broad options to choose between—­you
can deploy a survivable land-­based ICBM system (Harold’s option A)
using one of the mobile/shelter systems that have been proposed, or
you can place more emphasis on strategic aircraft and SLBMs and main-
tain an ICBM that is not independently survivable (Harold’s option B).
4 Not found attached.
5 An unknown hand underlined “three questions.”
6 An unknown hand drew a bracket in the left margin next to points a–c and wrote:
“key issues.”

The main arguments in favor of option A are that land-­based mis-
siles provide the easiest way to achieve a quick response force with
rapid reliable C3 and the capability to destroy all types of targets—­in
fact the land-­based options being considered under option A have sig-
nificantly lower life-­cycle costs than SLBM or strategic aircraft forces of
equivalent size.
The main argument for option B is that it does not require us to
solve the collection of technical, environmental, and verification prob-
lems associated with option A. On the other hand, no matter what we
say, abandoning the idea of a survivable ICBM force will be seen as a
defeat for the U.S. It would also permit the Soviets to concentrate their
efforts on jeopardizing our other forces.
If you choose option A, you must then decide on which approach
to take in achieving ICBM survivability. DOD is strongly opposed to
the air-­mobile system because of its high cost and low endurance, and
dead-­set against truck mobiles because of their dependence on strategic
warning and/or their high public impact when dispersed. Thus, the
basing mode choice appears to be between MPS and the track-­mobile
systems. (See Tab B.)
The main technical distinction between these systems is the speed
with which the missiles would move from shelter to shelter. This dis-
tinction leads to major differences in the systems’ verifiability, envi-
ronmental impact, and their acceptability. The MPS system shuffles
its missiles relatively slowly, which implies a critical dependence on
maintaining the security of missile locations, and the required security
measures complicate verification. The track mobile system uses high
speed transporters that allow complete randomization of missile loca-
tions within the flight time of a Soviet ICBM. This feature costs perhaps
$2 billion more than the corresponding MPS system if the tracks are
on the surface, but makes missile location security less important and
leads to a system that is considerably easier to verify. A track system
in an openable trench would be less verifiable than one on the surface
and somewhat more expensive—­whether it would have more or less
environmental impact is not clear. (S)
The choice of which missile to deploy must also be made unless
you choose option B, which makes sense only with the common mis-
sile. As I see it, we are eventually going to want to build the Trident
II missile independent of what we do for the land based force. This is
because once a dozen or so Trident submarines have been built, it will
become more cost effective to go back and fill those submarines with
the largest possible SLBM than to build toward an equivalent capability
using only the Trident I. Thus, the issue is do we want a significantly
different land based missile? (S)

In our PRC meetings, OSD compared the capabilities of the Trident
II and the 192,000 lb MX missile the Air Force prefers. These compari-
sons show that if the Trident II can meet its accuracy goals, it would be
nearly as capable as the large MX and thus not many more would be
required to achieve the assumed design goals of the land based force.
Thus a savings of perhaps $4 billion might ultimately be achieved
by using the Trident II in the land based deployment—­though more
money would be required up front to design a missile that is able to
operate in both basing modes. (S)
There are major problems involved in choosing the common mis-
sile approach however:
—­many in Congress and elsewhere want “largest” missile allowed
under SALT II;
—Trident II is not well enough defined to begin now. The 6–12
month delay needed to define it will exacerbate concerns about Soviet
strategic momentum;
—­designing a missile for land and sea use will pose a significant
management challenge—­some see possibility of another TFX;
—­a common missile implies some increase in the probability of a
simultaneous failure in both land and sea based missile forces;
—­suspicions will be generated that we will cancel the land based
deployment once SALT II ratification is behind us. Such suspicions will
result in lower SALT support that would have been generated by the
choice of the largest missile;
—­the Air Force is strongly opposed for above reasons and more;
—­the Navy is opposed because funding for Trident II will divert
resources from other programs they strongly prefer (S)
Taking everything into account, I don’t believe it would be prudent
to choose the common missile for the land based deployment. I believe
the partly common missile is even a poorer idea because it poses pretty
much the same difficulties as the common missile, but promises signifi-
cantly smaller ultimate saving even if everything works out. (S)
M–X Decisions
You should try to make as many of the above decisions as you can.
At a minimum, you should make the broad choice between options A
and B. If you choose B, it is extremely important that you announce it
before the Summit in order to avoid any impression that it is the result
of a deal with the Soviets. (TS)
Assuming you choose A, you should also try to choose between
MPS and the track-­mobile systems and, unless you choose MPS now,
you should ask Harold to refine the track-­mobile concept by the end of

Again, assuming you choose A, I recommend that you decide in
favor of the large M–X missile and announce it now, particularly if you
are not ready to choose between MPS and the track-­mobile concept. (S)
Agenda and Recommended Decisions
1. CNA–78/CG review—ZB; comments by others.
2. TNF—Brown instructed to provide concrete deployment plans
by the end of June.
3. Early ’80s imblance—Brown asked to present by the end of June
options for short-­term fixes.
4. M–X issue—­resolve as completely as possible prior to Sum-
mit—­if B is your choice, must be announced before Summit.
141.	 Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1
Minutes from NSC Meeting on Strategic Issues and
US-Soviet Relations (C)
Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting by stating that its purpose was
to review the trends in the US-Soviet balance as indicated in CNA–78
and the recent PRC on the Consolidated Guidance,2 and to reach some
decisions concerning tactical nuclear forces and the M–X. He noted that
other meetings would be needed later on to discuss some related issues
such as strategic targeting, C3I, and our strategic doctrine. He then
stated the following seven key conclusions that he had drawn from
CNA–78 and the Consolidated Guidance meeting:
1. The US continues to enjoy considerable advantages in all non-­
military aspects of the US-Soviet competition. (TS)
2. Only with our Allies do we have an advantage over the Sovi-
ets in the crude dimensions of military power. Thus we cannot afford
to jeopardize Alliance cohesion and confidence which are crucially
dependent on US power and resolve. (TS)
mary of Conclusions of the meeting, in attendance at the meeting, which took place in the
Cabinet Room at the White House, were Carter, Mondale, Vance, Jones, McIntyre, Press,
Utgoff, Brown, Duncan, Turner, Seignious, Brzezinski, Aaron, Jordan, and Powell. (Ibid.)

3. With respect to trends of the regional military balance, in the Far
East favorable political trends may offset an unfavorable military bal-
ance; instabilities in the Persian Gulf/Mideast region create an adverse
balance with an uncertain future; and in NATO the balance is slowly
improving. (TS)
4. The strategic nuclear balance is deteriorating faster than we
expected two years ago and will continue to do so to the early ’80s. The
Soviets have been outspending us in defense since the late 1960s and
military investment is important because it accumulates. (TS)
5. In the early 1980s we will face “a strategic dip.” We will not meet
the criteria established in PD–18 that we maintain essential equivalence
and a balance no worse than that existing in ’77.3 (TS)
6. The strategic gap of the early ’80s could produce damaging
political perceptions and encourage assertive Soviet behavior. (TS)
7. If these trends are not corrected, the US will be able at best to
wage a spasmic apocalyptic war rather than one controlled for political
purposes. Because of this situation, the US will be less able to bargain
stably in a protracted crisis situation and therefore the US may be less
able in the ’80s to deter the Soviet Union from assertive behavior. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski also noted that it would really be an irony if our
strategic position in the 1980s forces us to again rely on massive retali-
ation just as we did in the ’50s when we possessed a massive strategic
superiority. Finally, Dr. Brzezinski said that he recognized that there
were some divergent views with respect to these conclusions and sug-
gested that the other principals comment. (TS)
Secretary Vance said that he agreed with all Zbig’s conclusions,
with two exceptions. First, he felt that characterizing the situation
outside NATO as adverse was too pessimistic, that it would be more
appropriate to characterize it as uncertain. More important, however,
he felt that we will have a situation of rough strategic equivalence in the
early ’80s and that we should not take the position ourselves that we
are inferior—­this is a very dangerous way to characterize our situation,
and we may hurt ourselves in doing it. (TS)
Secretary Brown began by saying that while he felt the comprehen-
sive net assessment was in some cases too pessimistic—­the strategic
forces balance being one example of this—­he thought the assessment
was too optimistic overall. In supporting this view, Secretary Brown
made the following points:
—While relative dislike of the Soviets felt by other nations is a
modest advantage to us, making too much of this point draws attention
away from the fact that the Soviets can play on other nations’ fears of
them to achieve their objectives.
—We would be hurt more than the Soviets by adverse events in the
Third World.
3 See Document 31.

—While the gross resources available to, and the military efforts
being made by the US and its allies were larger than those of the Soviet
Union and its allies, they can’t really be added together since our
objectives are not always the same. Further, our column includes the
resources and efforts of countries like the People’s Republic of China
and Iran.
—The military investment imbalance in favor of the Soviets may
be far more significant for the future than we realize. By 1985 the Sovi-
ets will have greater strength than the US in almost every military cat-
egory, no matter what we do. We are going to have to be prepared to
live with this. (TS)
Secretary Brown also noted that there are some bright spots work-
ing for us, particularly in the area of technology, and he mentioned the
space shuttle in particular. However, given the Soviets’ large efforts in
the technology area, they might produce something revolutionary in
the way of military capabilities. (TS)
Finally, Secretary Brown commented that we must be careful that
we don’t let spending for strategic forces improvements absorb too
much of the resources that we devote to defense. (TS)
George Seignious commented that perceptions of Soviet superior-
ity will have to be handled carefully in order to make sure that they do
not have major adverse effects on our arms control efforts. (TS)
The President then said that much of this perception of Soviet
superiority is created by this group. He noted that he had just convened
a group of experts to discuss the problem of public perceptions and atti-
tudes, and their discussion had convinced him that maintaining a bal-
anced view of our actual situation is a serious problem. He noted how
the newspapers tend to distort the testimony given about military mat-
ters by high-­level DOD officials. He commented that the eleven mem-
bers of the House of Representatives he had recently met with at Camp
David had expressed concerns about the problem of perceptions. He
commented that it seemed strange that we would hear so much about
emerging military problems, given the fact that we have been increas-
ing DOD funding. He remarked that we should do what we can to let
people know that we have a strong, powerful, permanent government
and that we are not crawling abjectly before the Soviets. He pointed out
that we have military advantages over them such as the fact that the
Soviets have multiple enemies, where we do not. (TS)
Stan Turner commented that he generally agrees with Harold
Brown’s assessment of Zbig’s conclusions about the overall balance.
[4 lines not declassified]
General Jones remarked that the Chiefs have muted their concerns
about the evolving military balance and cited as an example of their
care to contain their concerns that it took three months for their memo

to the President about SALT to leak to Evans & Novak.4 Jones noted
that it poses a real dilemma to the Chiefs to be so muted when they
have such concerns about where we are going, and he commented that
he has never seen his fellow Chiefs or the Allies more concerned than
they are now. He remarked that the NIEs sound more pessimistic now
and that past NIEs have proven optimistic in their projections of the
future. He said that he expected that the Soviets may be very assertive
during the early ’80s and that thus this period will be far less stable. He
noted that we are far more vulnerable today than we used to be, partic-
ularly given our dependence upon imported oil. He also remarked that
in his view the Soviets probably could achieve a conventional victory
in NATO though they cannot feel confident of it. Finally, General Jones
said that his colleagues told him that they don’t believe that it will be
possible for Jones to express their concerns strongly enough. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that the meeting was already behind schedule
and suggested that the discussion of tactical nuclear forces be skipped
except for a request to Secretary Brown to develop specific deploy-
ment plans for tactical nuclear forces for discussion in another meet-
ing. Dr. Brzezinski also suggested that the President show Chancellor
Schmidt during his upcoming visit5 the illustrative plan for long-­range
tactical nuclear forces that was forwarded to him during the weekend,
and thus attempt to smoke out his attitudes about having Pershing II
only in Germany and only GLCM elsewhere. Finally, Dr. Brzezinski
noted that we should consider possible short-­term fixes to the strategic
imbalance problem that is going to appear during the early ’80s, and he
listed several possibilities including uploading more weapons on our
Poseidon SLBMs and accelerating B–52/ALCM conversions. Secretary
Brown responded by noting that he also has other options for alleviat-
ing the early ’80s imbalance, such as deploying SLCMs. Dr. Brzezinski
suggested that we meet in July to discuss these problems. (TS)
The President then said that he had decided to notify the Allies
that we are ready to take a leadership role on tactical nuclear forces. He
said that we have told our Allies that we will try to accommodate their
political needs and will try to get them to support each other. These
points will be made to Chancellor Schmidt in the upcoming visit. (TS)
12 memorandum from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense Brown requesting
that he send it to President Carter. The memorandum, dated March 16, is in Foreign Rela-
memorandum from Ermarth to Brzezinski, “Harold apparently decided not to send the
JCS memo. His office told me ’not to worry; Harold is taking care of this by himself.”’
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 54, SALT:

The President also said that he recognizes the MINUTEMAN vul-
nerability problem and the nation’s longstanding commitment to the
concept of Triad. He noted, however, that his decision was made more
difficult by the fact that he had been presented with options that were
stated only in counter-­force terms. He remarked that we should also
pay more attention to the capabilities of ALCMs and bombers. He also
said that he sensed that many in the group did not sufficiently share
his concerns about the effects this decision might have on SALT, and
that his own attitude was not a question of timidity. He said that he
needed the assistance of the assembled group, and he remarked at the
progress that had been made in getting the Congress to accept the idea
of proceeding with an M–X missile, which was quite a reversal of their
previous attitudes. He also remarked, however, that there are limits on
the amount of money available for military expenditures, and that large
increases in military spending must be recognized for the threat they
could pose to our economy. (TS)
The President suggested that the group should make a greater effort
to put themselves in his shoes—­that he was not interested in destroying
SALT and then having to embark on a massive arms race. He suggested
that the group had not explored nearly enough means for solving our
strategic forces problems and that getting on with a solution was not a
question of lack of will to solve the problem or dollars. He remarked
that the effects on SALT III of this decision are very important. The
President suggested that a longer meeting would be required to discuss
the M–X issue and that an evening meeting be scheduled. Finally the
President asked Secretary Brown if he needed more guidance concern-
ing theater nuclear forces. (TS)
Secretary Brown remarked that he thought that he had enough
information on TNF to proceed. He then stated that he thought that
the President should make as much of the decision on M–X as possible
before the Summit. He noted that there are two general options. The
first is Option A; this option preserves the Triad and presents opportu-
nities for scaling-­back production of new strategic forces later on. Thus
it would be compatible with reductions achieved in SALT III. Option
B, on the other hand, is more of a force increase and is thus somewhat
less compatible with our ultimate goal of reduced strategic forces. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that if the President is interested in choos-
ing Option B, he should do so before the Summit. It was important
that such a decision not be seen as the result of his discussions with
the Soviets. Dr. Brzezinski also argued that the missile decision can be
made before the Summit. (TS)
The President responded that the missile decision is easy; it’s just
a question of money. The basing decision, however, is a much tougher
question, and until late last night he had not even heard of the covered

trench. He noted that he had an exchange of correspondence with Pres-
ident Brezhnev discussing the question of verification of mobile sys-
tems, and that he had assured the President that the US would not
deploy a system that was not verifiable.6 The President commented
that he could not see how a 20-­mile trench that could be opened once
per year after 10,000 tons of dirt had been scraped off, could lead to
a verifiable system. In his view, a decision in favor of such a system
would mean the end of SALT, though perhaps he did not understand
everything. Secretary Brown responded that the President didn’t
understand the concept. The President continued by noting the prob-
lems we had had with canvas covers over the MINUTEMAN silos, and
the problems created as a result of darkness and cloud cover, and the
possibility of openings for extra missiles along the sides of the trenches.
Secretary Vance remarked that he could not recommend the non-­open
trench, and then said that the open trench is what he had thought the
group was talking about, a concept that he could recommend enthusi-
astically. (TS)
Secretary Brown said that there is an open trench variant that could
be put completely on DOD land. The concept would be to build the sys-
tem and cover it later if expansion of the Soviet threat required it. The
President responded that this sounds like a better idea. Secretary Brown
then continued by noting that the covered trench is not as difficult to
verify as you might think. The trench would be open to view for a long
time during its construction process, which would presumably rule
out the possibility of hidden chambers for extra missiles. The launch-
ers that would be used are million-­pound vehicles that would only be
assembled at the deployment site and the trench would be openable in
as little as two hours in that enough of the section can be removed to
guarantee that no more than one missile is inside it. He then remarked,
however, that given the President’s and Secretary Vance’s perceptions,
it looked like we would have to stay with an open trench although it
would not be as good. The open trench would require large amounts of
land to be fenced off and might have more impact on the environment,
and it might not be as good militarily either. (TS)
Secretary Vance then remarked that the Soviets might want to do
the same thing. Secretary Brown responded that this question had been
discussed before and that the real issue was whether we were deploy-
ing an unverifiable system. (TS)
Frank Press commented that going to the open trench concept will
lead to closing off 3–4000 sq. mi. of area that is currently open to public
use. Secretary Brown responded that only the area immediately around
each trench would have to be fenced off. (TS)

The President then remarked that the capability to cover the trench
is okay in his view, but that he would not want to try to explain the
covered trench concept in Vienna. He then remarked that if we proceed
with the largest M–X missile allowed under SALT and the cruise mis-
sile improvements as well, we will be in a good position to expand our
forces if SALT breaks down. He also noted that at this point he really
didn’t know how many TRIDENTs we might ultimately need, or if the
TRIDENT II missile would be needed. Finally the President remarked
that the $75–80B figures that Harold Brown is citing in the memo he
forwarded are going to come as a big shock to the public and Congress
since so far we have only been talking about numbers like $25B. (TS)
Secretary Brown responded that the figures we are giving are the
acquisition costs for a number of systems that will be purchased over
a number of years. He suggested that perhaps it would be better to
think about strategic costs in year-­by-­year terms and wondered if we
wouldn’t have a different attitude towards our domestic programs if
their costs were presented in terms of sums for a large number of years.
He then presented figures comparing the costs of the systems being
proposed today to those of the corresponding submarine and land-­
based missile systems we built in the ’60s. These comparisons showed
that those original systems would be quite expensive in ’80 dollars and
that the strategic modernization effort we made in the late ’50s and
early ’60s was really massive. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski said that we clearly cannot solve the whole problem
today but perhaps some parts of the overall question can be resolved.
The President responded that he would hate to see us give up land-­
based systems and that he agreed with the concerns that have been
expressed in the memos that had been sent him that this would be a
serious political blow. He stated that it would be worth a great deal of
effort on our part to avoid such a setback. He also stated that over the
years a mystique had built up about the M–X and that not going forward
with it would also be a political blow. The question of exactly what kind
of a force mix we might want is another issue and a very complex one
that he is not ready to decide. The basing issue in particular is complex,
and though he liked the open trench idea, he must analyze this concept
further. He remarked that the environmental questions are going to be
very tough and he cited a problem that had been related to him during
the weekend with the opening of a single copper mine in Utah. He said
that this mine had been blocked by the environmentalists by the expe-
dient of having a series of people file suits against it over a long period
of time. He said that he thought that the statements that had been made
that the governor of Utah was for the M–X deployment were a little
glib and that one could conclude that the problem was much bigger, if
you consider the problems we have had in places like Michigan. The

President stated that he was prepared to make preliminary decisions to
maintain the Triad and proceed with the large M–X. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski asked if the President was saying that he was decid-
ing against Option B though not among the various ways of realizing
Option A, and that he was also deciding that there would be no com-
mon missile, at least as tentative decisions. The President said Yes, but
that the question of the 190,000 lb missile versus the 170,000 lb missile
isn’t completely closed. (TS)
Jim McIntyre then stated that he saw some technology and cost
questions associated with the trench concepts. Secretary Brown
responded that we know a great deal about the trench already and have
developed some of the machinery required to build it, and have even
built several segments. Jim McIntyre continued that he was uncomfort-
able about some of the costs being cited for the mix of systems being
considered. He also saw the schedules that were cited as uncertain, and
was also concerned that there might be serious environmental prob-
The President suggested that the entire basing issue would have
to be discussed further and asked Zbig to schedule an evening meet-
ing for this purpose. The President then remarked that we needed a
fallback on the basing question if we are to hedge against the possi-
bility that we run into insurmountable difficulties. However, for the
moment, the decision to proceed with the M–X should be enough to
keep us busy. He then remarked that we have serious problems in get-
ting Congressional support for our defense spending and that the scare
language that might be needed to gain another $5B in defense spending
might work to reduce our confidence in ourselves by the equivalent of
$20B in defense spending. (TS)
Secretary Brown commented that one fallback position would be
to put M–X in silos. He thought however that moving MINUTEMAN
around would be a real problem. The President responded that if you
had 50–100 MINUTEMEN on trucks that would be something—­but
that he was not trying to dodge the issue with suggestions like this. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski, referring back to the question of perceptions, said
that we must of course say that we are strong, but on the other hand, we
can’t close our eyes to the possibilities six years from now. (TS)
The President responded that we have done all right in our
approach to the Congress for defense funding. The Congress used to
cut the defense budget by $5B automatically but in recent years the rea-
sonably unified position that we have presented to the Hill had done
all right. He said that he would hope that we can sell our solution to the
MINUTEMAN vulnerability problem to the Hill without using scare
tactics. The President remarked again that while the trends are against

us, we are strong, and that we must solve the problem posed by percep-
tions that we are not. (TS)
Secretary Vance suggested that we attack the SALT critics head-­on
and as part of combatting these misperceptions. Jody Powell remarked
that he thought the problem is an overall unease with our situation
and that we need an honest and frank assessment of our problems. He
said that if we don’t play it straight, “we will get our heads beat in.”
Secretary Brown said that there are some very respectable people who
believe that we may actually have too much military strength. (TS)
Finally the President closed the meeting with a request that the
charts Dr. Brzezinski had used in his presentation be returned. He said
that he hoped that they would not show up in Evans and Novak. (TS)
142.	 Minutes of a Meeting of the National Security Council1
SUBJECT
US Strategic Arms Policy and US Soviet Relations
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
in the Cabinet Room at the White House. The date on the original, June 4, from 3 until
4:20 p.m., is incorrect. A handwritten note on the first page of the minutes reads: “Note:
Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
State
Cyrus Vance
JCS
General David Jones
OMB
James McIntyre
OSTP
Frank Press
NSC
Victor Utgoff
OSD
Harold Brown
Charles Duncan
Deputy Secretary
William Perry
Under Secretary for Research and
Engineering
Admiral Stansfield Turner
ACDA
George Seignious

White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
Hamilton Jordan
Jody Powell
DETAILED MINUTES FROM THE NSC MEETING
Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting by noting that there were four
items on the agenda: first, the choice of the missile, second, the question
of basing mode (four concepts would be discussed), third, the question
of verification, and finally, the conclusions and recommendations of the
principals, including public relations aspects. (C)
Secretary Brown opened the question of missile size by describing
the 190,000 lb. missile and stating that it was deployable in all of the
ground deployment modes, though not in aircraft or in the Trident sub-
marine. He stated that this missile was designed to carry 10 Mark–12A
warheads, though, if necessary, it could probably be uploaded to as
many as 12. He also argued that this missile was already designed
whereas other possibilities such as the partly common missile or com-
mon missile would involve at least a one year delay. He noted, how-
ever, that the 190,000 lb. missile involved no common elements that
would be usable in the Trident missile. Finally, he stated that the capa-
bility of this missile would be comparable to that of the SS–18. He then
discussed the 110,000 lb. common missile, stating that this missile could
RVs. He said that the effectiveness of the smaller RVs would be more
sensitive to the accuracy achieved by the missile. (S)
The President asked if the common missile would be as accurate
as the larger MX missile. Secretary Brown responded that this would
depend upon whether we were thinking about the sea-­based or the
land-­based deployment. At sea, the missile would certainly be less
accurate, and in this case it would be hard to make the argument that
its capabilities would be comparable to those of the SS–18. (C)
Secretary Vance asked what RV sizes were being considered. [1 line
not declassified] (S)
Secretary Brown said that DOD had also looked at the 160,000 lb.
partly common missile, and that he had come to the conclusion that
this was probably the worst of both worlds. In particular, it would pose
quite a management challenge to design a single missile for operation
in both the Air Force and the Navy environments. (C)
Secretary Brown and General Jones responding to a question from
the President, noted the differences in the two environments, and cited
the fact that the Air Force employs missile designs that use a liquid
fueled post-­boost vehicle, while the Navy is not willing to use liquid
fueled rockets aboard submarines for safety reasons. (C)
Secretary Brown noted that savings could probably be obtained, but
they would be delayed until we actually decided to go forward with

deployment of the Trident II missile. He said that he had actually been
through a program to design a major piece of hardware for use by both
the Air Force and the Navy, and that while such joint use programs
were feasible, they were a great strain. (U)
General Jones noted that he would prefer a survivable MX mis-
sile to an SS–18 based in a silo. Secretary Brown replied that Jones had
combined several questions here, and asked him how he would feel
about the two missiles if they were both based in silos. General Jones
responded that this would be a wash in his view—­his point was that
deployment of the large MX missile would defuse concerns about the
Soviets’ large missile advantage. (C)
George Seignious commented that he thought it was extremely
important that we take full advantage of the single ICBM exception
that was allowed under SALT II, by deploying the largest missile per-
Secretary Brown argued that many in the Congress want the largest
allowable missile, and that he also prefers the 192,000 lb. MX, although
he was not convinced of this several months ago. (C)
The President asked if there were any contrary opinions. (U)
Frank Press responded that he supports Secretary Brown’s pref-
erence for the larger missile, but he went on to note that we would
have greater flexibility in going to alternative deployment modes if we
deployed a somewhat smaller missile. (C)
Stan Turner then raised a concern he had about the possibility that
the Soviets might want to keep our land-­based missile force vulnerable
and thus might try to stay ahead of our effort to deploy more aimpoints
than they could attack. [3 lines not declassified] He noted that while we
might be able to achieve our aims if the Soviets remain within the limits
of SALT, if their desire to keep us vulnerable were strong enough, this
might make them unwilling to agree to any future SALT limits. (S)
The President asked Admiral Turner what sort of a solution he
would suggest to such a problem. Admiral Turner responded that we
should go to a more flexible missile, and place more emphasis on our
SLBM and bomber forces. (C)
Secretary Vance asked Admiral Turner if he would still want to go to
a smaller missile if our SLBM force and our bomber force were already
much stronger. Admiral Turner responded that he would still like to see
more flexibility. Frank Press added that flexibility is particularly import-
ant if we run into obstacles in our pursuit of a survivable land basing
Secretary Brown noted that the large missile would be deployable in
the small submergibles that had been suggested by Frank Press’ panel.
He further noted that while the large MX missile would not go in the

Trident submarine, we might end up building only ten of these sub-
marines and thus these boats might be only a minor part of our SLBM
force. He remarked that he was reluctant for that matter to depend too
much on SLBMs. He also noted that if we did not pursue a surviv-
able land-­based missile system, this almost implies an invitation to the
Soviets to concentrate on reducing the survivability of the other two
strategic force components. He noted the diversity of problems that the
Soviets would face in trying to find counters to some sort of a multiple
aimpoint scheme as well as to our SLBM force. Finally, he remarked
that given the large R&D efforts the Soviets were making, there was
always the possibility of a technological breakthrough against one of
our strategic force components. (S)
Stan Turner remarked that yesterday the President had criticized
the principals for not presenting more information on the SALT impacts
of the schemes they were discussing.2 He noted that, in his view, stay-
ing in the land-­based missile business may work to the disadvantage
of our long term SALT interests. He remarked that if we got out of the
land-­based missile business, and then deployed the Trident II missile,
which would be good enough to put Soviet land-­based ICBMs at risk,
this might push the Soviets toward adopting mobile survivable sys-
tems as well, and thus we would have created a very good situation in
which neither side’s forces would be vulnerable. (S)
The President asked how many missiles the Soviets had deployed in
silos. [1 line not declassified] (S)
Secretary Brown disputed Admiral Turner’s arguments by argu-
ing that if the Soviets can concentrate on anti-­submarine warfare, they
might actually succeed in threatening the survivability of our SSBNs.
He argued that maintaining a variety of survivable basing modes
may pose such a challenge to Soviet interests in gaining counterforce
capabilities as to encourage their acceptance of arms control. He also
noted that by pursuing survivable basing modes for all our systems,
we would be in a posture in which it would be easier for us to accept
arms control reductions. He noted that with a fully survivable Triad we
could probably reduce our forces by a factor of two or more. (S)
The President remarked that the main point of all these arguments
seems to be that there is no flexibility if we proceed with 190,000 lb.
missile. (C)
David Aaron asked if [less than one line not declassified] the Soviets
can really outrace us [less than one line not declassified] Secretary Brown
responded that calculations the Defense Department had done indi-
cated that fractionation would be a losing proposition for the Soviets.
He remarked that under current plans, a large margin of extra shelters
2 See Document 141.

would be built into the initial basing deployments. He also commented
that even if the Soviets did choose to attack our forces, they would have
to accept a very adverse exchange ratio in the process of destroying
our forces. He went on to remark that if the Soviets choose to build
more missiles in order to increase their capability to attack our land-­
based deployment, we would have to build more trenches or shelter
arrays, but that calculations done within DOD suggest that the cost to
the Soviets to jeopardize our basing deployment with more missiles
would be approximately twice as large as the cost to us to maintain our
survivability. (S)
Admiral Turner disagreed with Secretary Brown’s calculations,
[2 lines not declassified] He also remarked that the Soviets may be willing
to spend more money trying to overcome our efforts than we will be
willing to match, even at an economic exchange ratio of 2 to 1. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that we will be better off politically if we
build a survivable land based missile force, because it will be easier
to increase our forces—­moving to a dyad implies an inherently poor
SALT bargaining position. (C)
The President suggested that we look at potential Soviet reactions
to the various options. He said that his sense is that choice of the dyad
will be interpreted as a yielding to them, a sign of weakness. In addi-
tion, if the Soviets aren’t interested in further SALT treaties, he would
feel better with the MX ready for deployment, even if we had to put
it in a basing mode that was not verifiable. He remarked that backing
away from the Triad would be an error. He went on to say that he felt
our objectives should be to arrange for a situation in which the easiest
path for the Soviets would lead to a treaty and a strategic posture that
would allow verification and be stable. He said that his guess is that the
Soviets would respond best to a strong move on his part. He remarked
that in his contacts with the Soviets, he had come to believe that they
suffer from a sense of inferiority and that strategic equivalence with us
may make them somewhat easier to deal with. Finally, he noted that
they would be ahead in conventional forces for a long time. (TS)
General Jones remarked that one aspect of arms control that had
struck him as having something of an Alice in Wonderland aspect
was the fact that during the many years of negotiations we had been
engaged in, the number of strategic weapons deployed had continually
and rapidly risen. He remarked that in the past we had not wanted
warhead limits perhaps because that was our only advantage, but that
given the situation that was emerging now, such limits may be far more
acceptable. He said that he would like to see warhead limits in SALT III,
and that such limits would be far easier to accept with a fully survivable
Triad than with the augmented Dyad. [2 lines not declassified] He also
remarked that the augmented dyad would lead to increased pressure

on our ALCM carrier—­first, because we will be depending more upon
that force, and second because the Soviets will be able to better con-
centrate their efforts against it. He said that we would probably need a
hardened cruise missile carrier that will have many of the characteris-
tics of the B–1, but that our need for this aircraft will be somewhat less
under the Triad options than under the dyad. He also remarked that he
wouldn’t recommend the airmobile approach because of the C3I prob-
lems it would pose, and the reduced accuracy that would result with
an airborne missile system. Finally, he remarked that he did not like the
fact that the dyad option would require us to use a smaller missile. (TS)
Secretary Brown noted that the survivable Triad options did not
require us to make a decision on ultimate force size until 1985. Secretary
Vance asked why, and Secretary Brown responded by noting that IOCs
of the systems we would be pursuing under this option came slightly
after 1985. He went on to note that with this option, the survivability of
our land-­based missile force could be made independent of the number
of missiles deployed in it. (C)
The President asked if it was true that we were deploying three
additional RVs every day. He was told that we were deploying more
like one a day (this was later corrected to approximately one a week).
The President noted that some of the anti-­war literature he had seen
had made the statement about three. It was also noted that the Soviets
are currently deploying approximately 5 RVs each day. (S)
Secretary Vance asked if warhead proliferation wasn’t mostly a mat-
ter of ALCM deployments. Secretary Brown reviewed some of the num-
bers involved, and drew the conclusion that the options that were being
discussed involved deployments of comparable numbers of ALCM and
missile warheads. (C)
The President asked what the maximum allowable range of the
ALCM was, and was told that it was intercontinental. He remarked
that this suggested that additional cruise missile deployments might
provide a good response to a Soviet breakout, but he wondered where
we would find targets for all of the additional warheads. (S)
Frank Press remarked that if we can find a way to build a surviv-
able Triad that is secure, verifiable, and feasible, it would be the best
idea. The President remarked that the question was whether or not there
existed a land-­based deployment scheme with these three characteris-
tics. He added that it is obvious that the point of the small missile is that
it really keeps the dyad option open. (C)
Secretary Brown noted that we should look at ways to get the
190,000 lb. missile to sea. Bill Perry commented that we have put $40M
for Trident II into the ’81 budget. Secretary Brown remarked that per-
haps the best policy would be to push both Trident II and the large MX
for a year. (C)

Frank Press suggested that we pursue the idea of putting Minute-
man on trucks as an interim measure, while pushing forward with the
large MX missile and looking at alternative ways to deploy it. Secretary
Brown commented that he has examined the truck idea in some detail
and it doesn’t look practical to him. Bill Perry added that 200 Minute-
man IIIs can be deployed on trucks within three years for approxi-
mately $3B. Secretary Brown responded that such a deployment would
be easily destroyed by the Soviets if we didn’t get sufficient strategic
warning. Bill Perry remarked that Minuteman III deployed on trucks
would have considerably higher survivability than they would have in
silos, if ten hours of strategic warning were available. (C)
David Aaron said that it was important to note the long period of
ICBM vulnerability that we were going to face. He said that the Con-
gress will say that if we can live with this period of vulnerability for
awhile, why can’t we live with it forever. He suggested that we should
look at the Minuteman on trucks idea in light of this question—­in other
words, it may be a suitable, short term fix to our problems. Secretary
Brown said that he thought other alternatives should be looked at for
dealing with the period of vulnerability, and that he had some better
alternatives. (S)
The President asked how long will it be until we had deployed the
first ALCMs on B–52s. Bill Perry answered that the first deployment
will take place in 1981, but that we will not have a complete squadron
of B–52s with ALCMs until 1982. Dr. Brzezinski remarked that pushing
the B–52/ALCM program somewhat harder might represent a good
interim fix to the early ’80s problem. (S)
David Aaron remarked that simply assuming the Soviets will make
every effort to stay ahead of us may not be reasonable in the light of
history. He noted that they were ahead in the ABM area, but that once
we demonstrated our willingness to compete, a process began which
resulted in the ABM treaty. (C)
Secretary Brown remarked that this outcome probably resulted
from Soviet fears that we would deploy a better system. He went on
to note that the only thing the Soviets would probably feel comfortable
with is the complete vulnerability of all our strategic forces, a situation
we should certainly not cooperate in arranging. (C)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that the Soviets would be most worried if we
proceeded with the dyad option, because this option would involve the
largest expansion of our forces, and would pose the greatest threat to
Jim McIntyre said that he wanted to go on record that OMB sup-
ported the 190,000 lb. MX missile, despite its larger cost, because of the
political and technical problems that would be involved in proceeding
with the smaller missile. (C)

The President asked if anyone knew how much money might be
saved with smaller missile. (jocularly) Bill Perry responded that $2–3B
might be saved, if one assumed that the alternative would be to pro-
ceed with both missiles. (C)
Secretary Vance commented that in his view the 192,000 lb. missile
was politically the best choice and would provide the best bargaining
position with the Soviets. He disagreed with Stan Turner’s arguments
that the Soviets might try to stay ahead of our efforts to achieve a sur-
vivable land-­based deployment. (S)
The President said that Stan is apparently saying that proceed-
ing with the Triad option would lead to a larger Soviet threat—Stan
responded that that was not quite his point. (C)
The President said the problem he saw with Stan’s calculations was
that they placed too much emphasis on our current vulnerability. The
President argued that it would be better to show the Soviets that we are
resolved not to accept their attempts to make us vulnerable, and that if
we do so, they will respond better than Stan is suggesting. (S)
Secretary Vance again stated that he likes our position better if we
proceed with the survivable triad option. (C)
David Aaron remarked that the Soviets might simply want to match
our numbers of warheads in which case proceeding with the dyad
option will pose the larger problem for our arms control interests. (C)
George Seignious noted that going to the large numbers of warheads
provided by the dyad option creates a situation that would place max-
imum stress on our verification capabilities. This is because the Soviets
will be more motivated to proceed with mobile systems, and they may
elect to proceed with SS–16 type systems which are particularly diffi-
cult to verify. (TS)
The President then noted that he’s not prepared to decide this issue
now. He must first understand better the possibilities for achieving a
survivable land-­based deployment mode. (U)
Bill Perry began the discussion of ground-­based deployment modes
by describing the track mobile system in the covered trench. He said
that he believes that this is the best system because it has two modes
of survival, its position is normally hidden, and it can randomize its
position in a very short period of time if desired. He said that this sys-
tem was designed to deploy missiles on large trailer erector launcher
systems that would be the size of railroad locomotives, and would be
capable of moving at maximum speeds of approximately 30 knots. He
said that the system was designed to enhance two features: verifiability
and survivability. (C)
Dr. Perry went on to describe two classes of mobile deployment
modes. The first, which he called “full-­mobile systems”, included the

road mobile, the air mobile, and the submarine mobile deployment
modes. He said that these systems are soft and that they achieve their
survivability by hiding in very large deployment areas. The other class
of mobile systems which he referred to as “confined-­mobile systems”
included multiple silos, the track mobile system, and the horizontal
MPS system. He pointed out that these systems are deployed in a very
limited area, and are therefore required to be very hard. He went on
to compare the verification difficulties encountered with each of these
systems. He said that the confined-­mobile systems were an advantage
for verification in that one knew where to look for them, though seeing
the missiles in these systems required opening them up for verification.
He then remarked that the full-­mobile systems can pose trickier veri-
fication questions—­and that submarine launchers are verifiable only
because they are so large that they can be easily seen during construc-
tion and when in port. (C)
The President then asked if B–52s are required to be visible under
the SALT II agreement. He was told that there are no such constraints,
and that these systems are often under cover—­they are monitored as
they were built and deployed, and through the use of COMINT. The
President noted that this was an interesting point, and then asked what
the problem was with the covers that had been placed over the Minute-
man silos. Secretary Brown answered that the basis of the Soviet objec-
tion was that these covers might be hiding a change in the size of the
Dr. Perry continued his explanation of verification problems by not-
ing that the problem with the vertical MPS system is that the launcher
is very small and difficult to see into, thus raising suspicions that there
might be a missile in every silo. He contrasted this system with the
track mobile system by pointing out that track mobile would use a very
large locomotive type launcher that is easy to count. (S)
Frank Press remarked that we could still hide extra missiles in the
trench. Bill Perry responded that the current SALT limits are not based
on limiting missiles, but rather on limiting launchers, and that the
trailer erector launchers used in the trench system are too large to allow
extra ones to be hidden. Frank Press responded that a single TEL could
nonetheless launch extra missiles. Bill Perry agreed but said that the
same thing was true for silos. (C)
The President then asked about the MPS system using horizontal
shelters. He asked if we could deploy 200 missiles in such a system,
on the surface, and completely within DOD land. Secretary Brown
responded yes. The President said that he hadn’t heard of this system
before, and went on to note that, provided we had hard points within
which to hide the missiles, it would seem that the need to have a trench

would be smaller, which should lead to smaller environmental prob-
David Aaron pointed out that there are two basic possibilities for
systems that rotate missiles among a large number of shelters—­we can
proceed with systems that use very fast transporters, allowing very
rapid rotation between shelters, or go with systems that use slow trans-
porters in which case there might be a requirement for decoys to help
hide the movements of our missiles. (U)
The President commented that while he now sees the problems with
covered trenches as somewhat smaller than he had before, nonetheless
it looks like a surface system would be more acceptable for environ-
mental reasons. (C)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that for safety reasons it might still be neces-
sary to fence off the roads or rails connecting the shelters. It was noted
that while railroad tracks aren’t generally fenced off today, we might
have a tough time introducing a railroad system into the country now,
given current concerns about environmental impact. (U)
General Jones noted that the track mobile concept being considered
does not involve putting the entire system on military bases. The Pres-
ident asked why not—­to which Jones responded that there aren’t that
many large military bases, and the cost for such a system would be very
much larger if it had to be broken into numerous small deployments.
The President asked why it was necessary to have 20 miles of track
for each missile. He was told that approximately 40 shelters would
be needed for each missile, and that they could not be spaced closer
together than approximately a half a mile, given yields of current Soviet
warheads. The idea is to ensure that a single warhead will not destroy
on the average more than one shelter. (C)
Frank Press noted that there was not enough area on military bases
to allow for deployment of the 3–4,000 square mile system envisioned.
Secretary Brown responded that the suitable bases could provide approx-
imately one-­third of the total area required. He also noted that it would
not be a good idea to go to a substantially smaller deployment because
the purpose was to reach deployment levels that would discourage the
sort of scenario that Admiral Turner had described. (C)
Bill Perry noted that if we made the planned deployment, we could
create a situation in which the Soviets would have to use up all of their
ICBMs in order to destroy our ICBMs—­this would leave our bomber
and SLBM forces facing the corresponding forces on their side, a situ-
ation that they certainly wouldn’t like. Thus, they would be deterred
from making such an attack in the first place. (S)
In response to Secretary Brown’s request for a discussion of the
open trench, Bill Perry said that they were looking at the possibility
of putting an open trench system in Nevada and Utah. The President

interjected that he thought that pursuing such a system was a pipe
dream and that the environmentalists would simply never let it hap-
pen. Bill Perry responded that the governors of these states had been
asked about the acceptability of an MPS system with 4–5,000 shelters
and point security. Such a system would involve fencing off 4–5,000
small areas of about four acres apiece, and the governors had said it
would be acceptable. Perry noted that the covered trench system he had
in mind would result in the same sort of situation. A fairly large num-
ber of small areas fenced off, but the bulk of the deployment area open
for public use. (C)
The President said that you are coming close to convincing me. He
then asked: if the Soviets were to do the same thing, what would we
want them to do for us to allow for adequate verification. (U)
Dr. Perry said that he would ask for two things: first, he would
want them to use a large enough transporter system so that there was
little possibility that it could roam freely outside the nominal deploy-
ment area; second, he would want the Soviets to open their trench sys-
tem every several months to allow for verification. (At this point there
were a number of joking comments about the possibility of allowing
the Soviets to walk through a U.S. trench system or having a JCS repre-
sentative walk through Soviet trenches.) Bill Perry continued there were
three possibilities for connecting our shelters. We could leave the con-
nectors completely open, we could close them with some sort of heavy
structure, or we might use some sort of effectively transparent covers.
Of the three, Dr. Perry felt that only the open trench was a non-­starter
because it would restrict so much land from public use. He said that he
had very high confidence that we could get the covered trench accepted
by the people of the states where we would hope to deploy it, certainly
by their governors. (C)
The President asked if it wouldn’t be possible to use an arrangement
of shelters and connectors like spokes, radiating from a hub. He won-
dered if such an arrangement might reduce land requirements. He was
told that the constraints of the rough topography in Nevada and Utah
implied that the spoke arrangement would require more land rather
than less. (C)
Frank Press asked Stan Turner for his view on the verifiability of the
trench concept. Admiral Turner responded that the concept had evolved
fairly rapidly, and that he had not yet had time to carry out a thorough
study of its verifiability. He said that he expected that it would be more
verifiable than the vertical MPS system. He went on to note, however,
that our arms control efforts will eventually require cooperative mea-
sures and on-­site inspection. He suggested that the verification require-
ments of the systems being considered now might actually be a good

thing, in that they might motivate us to seek improved verification
arrangements in the near term rather than putting it off. (S)
Dr. Perry noted that the trench system might lend itself to veri-
fication through the use of various types of black boxes which could
provide electronic verification information to the other side. (S)
Secretary Vance remarked that even aside from the verification
problems, anything but an open trench or one covered with transpar-
ent plastic would generate complaints from the Soviets. David Aaron
expressed skepticism about proceeding with any system if it required
on-­site inspection, cooperative measures or other special procedures
that might have to be negotiated. (S)
John White remarked that it’s important to understand the need for
the dash requirement—­he was told that it simply reduces the need for
location security. (U)
Frank Press noted that a system of this type, with interconnecting
roads or rails on the surface, might be particularly susceptible to attacks
designed to reduce the system’s mobility. The movements of the trans-
porters might be observed, and their positions reported back after their
mobility had been lost. (S)
Secretary Brown said that most of these questions are probably
resolvable in several weeks, but he asked whether we don’t already
know enough to be able to choose to go ahead with some sort of ground
system. If we can choose, then we can get started on a missile. (C)
Jim McIntyre remarked that there are a great number of uncertain-
ties to be resolved. (C)
The President remarked that he has no doubts that we should pro-
ceed with a large MX missile, but that we must look more to the ques-
tion of which land-­based system to deploy. He noted that we will face
a massive outcry which could delay its deployment, at least outside
DOD land. (C)
The Vice President then began a discussion of some of the politi-
cal problems involved with this decision. He said that we may wish
to look at the possibility of legislation similar to that used to overcome
environmental opposition to the Alaska Pipeline. He also noted that we
are going to be in a touchy position on the Hill. If we make a very spe-
cific choice on the MX, we may lose some pro-SALT II votes. If on the
other hand we make no choice at all, we will raise concerns that we are
not maintaining an adequate strategic balance which will also reduce
support for SALT. He suggested that the best policy may be to identify
with the 190,000 lb. MX missile, yet stay in a reasonably flexible posi-
tion with respect to basing mode. He noted that Senator Jackson would
take anyone’s help in beating SALT, and that he might be very ready to
suggest an MX deployment for every state. (C)

Secretary Vance said that he agreed with much of the Vice Presi-
dent’s argument, but he felt that we should definitely eliminate the
MPS system. The President said that the appropriate thing to do would
be to say that we are going to proceed with a verifiable land-­based sys-
tem, and that this approach would enhance stability and eliminate the
Soviet counterforce advantage, and that it would also enhance the pos-
sibility of deep cuts later on. (C)
Secretary Vance asked how this would solve the MPS problem.
The President noted he’d been against MPS on verification grounds all
along, and that MPS was simply not verifiable. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski suggested that the President’s posture should have
three elements: (1) that we were going to proceed with a verifiable land-­
based deployment mode, (2) that we were going to proceed with the
largest missile allowed under the SALT II agreement, and (3) that we
would resolve the question of exactly which basing mode we would
use within several weeks. He suggested that it might be useful not to
preclude MPS before the Summit—­it might be possible to trade MPS for
some sort of a concession from the Soviets. He noted that MPS can be
eliminated as something desirable for us on a number of grounds. He
went on to suggest that the President surface this posture with Senator
Nunn, and that the Vice President talk to those on the other end of the
political spectrum about this posture being necessary for SALT III. (C)
Secretary Vance said that he really disagreed with the idea that you
can simply gut it through on the MPS issue. He said he wasn’t sweating
the possibility of leaving this system in play for another seven days,
but that going much longer would be a mistake. Secretary Brown com-
mented that if we hold off until after the Summit to eliminate the verti-
cal MPS system, we risk accusations that we gave the system away. (S)
Frank Press said that we would not know that much more in several
weeks, and wondered if we wouldn’t be better off by proceeding with
the idea of Minuteman III on trucks which would buy us enough time
for a more careful study of the basing mode question. Secretary Brown
responded that this would be seen as simply waffling the issue. (C)
The President said that unless unforeseen circumstances arise, he
proposes to go ahead with the full size MX. He said, however, that he
wanted to reveal his decision in his own way, and that he would like
for the people in the room to concentrate on how to present the deci-
sion to the Soviets, and to the public. He said that he would like them
to evolve the best possible approach to briefing the Senate, and that
he wanted to brief all kinds of Senators—­that he was not interested in
separating them into different groups. Thus he must understand the
arguments that would appeal to both sides. He gave several straight-
forward examples of the sorts of arguments that might be used, and
noted that we would have to decide what to tell the Soviets if anything,

and that it would be very important to make a strong presentation of
this decision. Finally, he remarked that he feels at ease with the decision
to go ahead with a full size MX in the land-­based mode. In response to
Dr. Brzezinski’s suggestions, the President instructed everyone not to
brief anyone outside this room on this decision. However, the President
went on to say he wants the republic to know of this decision before the
Dr. Brzezinski said that it was important to announce this decision
soon, and suggested that it should be done before the end of the week.
There were several comments to the effect that the decision should be
announced before there was much chance of its leaking to the press.
Dr.  Brzezinski continued that the announcement should not be too
close to the Summit, where it may seem heavy handed. (There were
a number of jocular remarks about the possibility of combining the
announcement with announcements on Rhodesia and health care, and
perhaps having the MX decision announced by Secretary Califano.)
Dr. Brzezinski asked those assembled to send in their contributions on
how to present the decision. He told the President he would try to have
a package assembled by the next evening. (C)
The President said that we should list all the points bearing on the
decision and base all our arguments on hard facts. He also said that he
would need a specific plan on how to approach the Senate. The President
also asked if any of the principals would have to seek help in making
the preparations he had requested—­help from people or subordinates
not currently in the room—­the principals all said no. (U)
Secretary Brown asked how we were going to approach resolution
of the basing issue. The President responded that it would have to be
resolved before the SALT vote. Secretary Brown answered: perhaps even
earlier, perhaps before the debate. The President commented that it will
help to know the reactions of some of the more influential Senators,
such as Nunn, Culver, and Glenn. (C)
General Jones noted that while he needn’t tell any one about this
decision, he would like to be able to tell his colleagues before any Sen-
ators became aware of the decision, and he was told that this would be
possible. (U)
Jody Powell asked if the President’s decision should be considered
tentative, pending receipt of the material that he had requested. The
President agreed and the meeting was adjourned. (U)

143.	 Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, July 5, 1979
SUBJECT
Defense Investment (U)
The attached chart, one you used at the 4 June NSC meeting, makes
a point we shall have to take increasingly into account in defense plan-
ning and budgeting: Soviet defense investment has exceeded ours for
a decade, has exceeded ours by about 75 percent for the past several
years, and is projected to continue to do so well into the 1980s.2 (S)
This is the conclusion of work done in Andy Marshall’s net assess-
ment office in OSD. I’ve had a chance to review informally a draft of
his full report, and want to pass on some additional highlights. Andy
has sent copies to Harold Brown and other senior DOD people. After
responding to some of their comments, he will distribute a finished ver-
sion. Almost all of the analysis, incidentally, is unclassified. It derives
from comparing published US and NATO defense data with unclassi-
fied CIA analysis of Soviet and Warsaw Pact defense outlays. (U)
The key message is in the chart itself. While Soviets outspend the
US on defense by 25–40 percent, depending on how you measure, they
out-­invest us by even larger amounts. Defense investment is defined
as spending on military R&D, procurement of hardware, and military
construction. Unlike spending for current operations and maintenance
(except for training), defense investment is aimed at future strength. It
tends to be cumulative (although there is also the opposite tendency for
investments to “decay” through obsolescence and wear-­out of equip-
ment and facilities). In other words, even if we somehow matched
Soviet defense investment next year, we could not suddenly match the
results of Soviet investment in earlier years. (U)
This is, of course, a highly generalized indicator of relative
defense activity. Captured within it are such specific developments as
those Soviet strategic force improvements that have made MINUTE-
MAN vulnerable. Andy’s study reaches the judgment that unless the
USSR sharply alters very long-­standing defense spending patterns,
Copies were sent to Brement, Odom, and Utgoff.

continuation of established US defense spending policies, including
budget increases currently projected, will lead the US into a clearly
inferior position in the 1980s. The trends and magnitudes depicted in
this analysis have to be radically in error for any other conclusion to be
reached. It follows naturally, to quote from the draft, “We will have to
spend a lot more on defense if we are to remain a major power relative
to the Soviets.” (U)
The Marshall study considers various arguments advanced to
soften or discount so stark a judgment. For example:
—Methodological uncertainties in measurements of this sort may
lead to an overly gloomy view. This may be so. Or the true picture could
be even worse. CIA data probably understate Soviet defense investment
somewhat because they do not measure all real investment in defense,
e.g., construction for R&D facilities. At the same time, US projections
of actual US defense investment in the 1980s may be optimistic. In any
case, the gross picture of relative investment is not likely to be wrong.
—The role of our allies compensates somewhat. This is true. But
taking allies on both sides into account shows the Warsaw Pact out-­
investing NATO by 15–20 percent. Moreover, as Victor noted in our
pre-NSC discussions, NATO defense efforts are a “dependent vari-
able”; they depend on US strength and leadership. If the Allies see the
overall trends against the West, they will not take up the slack, but seek
refuge in Soviet good will, knowing that they cannot compensate for
Soviet power.
—Do we have compensating technological advantages? Yes, but
they are dwindling. Our general level of military–technological inno-
vation appears to be subsiding, and we put less of our available techno-
logical potential into deployed systems than the Soviets do.
—The Soviets continue to fear our demonstrated capacity to
­mobilize our industrial base for defense when we get excited. But they
probably also notice that this US capability has declined in recent years
for various reasons: (1) Due to our shrinking overall defense effort, the
defense industrial base for mobilization has shrunk, e.g., many sub-
contractors have left the business. (2) Modern weapons systems are
more complex and, therefore, expanding their production takes more
time than past experience would suggest. (3) We pay less attention to
national mobilization as an aspect of defense policy than does the USSR.
—In the 1980s, Soviet internal difficulties may persuade Soviet
leaders to reduce defense effort. This is possible but not likely, and,
according to CIA, not dictated by economic necessity. Soviet priorities
are well entrenched. The opportunities and threats of the 1980s are
likely to impress upon Soviet leaders the wisdom of past emphasis on
defense. Defense is a “success industry” in the USSR from a political
viewpoint. And, as Bialer keeps reminding us, today’s USSR is striking,
not for the severity of its internal problems, which it has always had,
but for its socio-­political stability and its ability to manage despite these
problems. (U)
It might be argued that investment is a measure of “inputs” to
defense, but not necessarily a measure of useful military outputs. The
investment imbalance may be thought to reveal Soviet inefficiency;

they have to spend more because they get less out of it. In fact, the Sovi-
ets are probably a lot less efficient in the defense sector than we used
to think. But this measure does not reveal it. Rather, this measure is
largely the result of military outputs. Soviet defense costs are estimated
by CIA on the basis of observed physical activity, e.g., missiles, ships,
bunkers, etc. Occasional clandestine reports of real Soviet defense bud-
get figures confirm that our totals are about right. (S)
A more significant deficiency of Andy’s analysis might be called
“the problem of relative starting points.” If the Soviets were far enough
behind the US in real military strength when, around 1968, they began
to invest more than we in defense, then all their effort may amount
to no more than closing large gaps. This merely reminds us that we
cannot divorce gross investment and spending trends from real force
balances, trends in those balances, and missions. To a large extent the
Soviets have been closing gaps. They have also been investing in areas
where we choose not to compete and may, in fact, be forcing them to
waste investment, e.g., in air defense. And they must invest against the
China threat. (U)
Yet it is hard to accept that a Soviet investment effort larger than
ours for more than a decade will yield no more than gross military
equality, given the starting point. In the late 1960s, the Soviets had
functional strategic parity with the US by their own testimony. They
enjoyed preponderance in theater forces in Europe. And they had
largely completed the quantitative expansion of their forces opposite
China, a power balance in which the US also has an interest. They suf-
fered deficiencies in all these areas. Naval forces were a major area in
which they lagged. Here differences between US and Soviet naval mis-
sions and doctrine are important. In terms of missions, the US needs
naval superiority; the USSR does not. (U)
We should keep in mind that Soviet spending levels in the 1970s
result from steady growth since the late 1950s, not any change of Soviet
policy. It is we who changed our behavior, reducing real defense out-
lays since the late 1960s after a period of growth. One cannot easily
escape the conclusion that, sooner or later, a superior effort by a com-
petent performer will yield a superior position. (U)
If this overall message is approximately correct, it has far-­reaching
implications:
1. The increases in defense spending we now talk about are likely
to be insufficient. In no case can we turn things around quickly. Sub-
stantial increases in defense spending as a percentage of GNP over a
sustained period may be necessary to alter the prognosis in five years
or so.
2. Increasing the efficiency with which we select and buy defense
assets is a necessary, but insufficient, condition for redressing the bal-
ance. There must be more resources. But at the same time we probably

do require radical reform of defense decisionmaking to achieve a new
level of innovative capacity and to squelch time-­honored forms of
resource misallocation. Trying to find the “most cost-­effective options”
among many dozens of discrete choices tossed up by the established
system will only exhaust the leadership and defeat it in detail. At best
we may sub-­optimize at the wrong level of performance. (S)
It would be useful for you to mention the defense investment
study to Harold at one of your regular meetings. You should solicit his
reaction to its basic messages, and urge him to send it over to us for
comment. If it withstands critical examination, it could be then made
“background reading” for the DOD budget review and possibly incor-
porated into another NSC meeting, as was CNA 78 in the last one.3 (C)
­Document 142.
144.	 Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth and Victor Utgoff of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 19, 1979
SUBJECT
DOD’s Military Investment Balance Paper (S)
On 5 July, Harold Brown sent to the President a paper on the
US-Soviet defense investment balance prepared by OSD’s Net Assess-
ment Office.2 We have reviewed that paper carefully and spoken at
length with the authoring office and CIA analysts who supplied critical
input data. For reasons developed below we believe the paper should
be replaced by a short memo from Harold Brown to the President. (S)
The overall message of the OSD paper is valid. The USSR has been
investing more in military strength than the US for at least a decade.
Its military investment effort—­that is, spending on military RDT&E,
procurement, and construction—­now exceeds ours by around 75%,
measured in dollars. Moreover, there is no evidence that the steady
2 Not found.

growth of Soviet military investment will be reversed or slowed before
the mid-1980s, if then. Unlike much defense spending on current oper-
ations and maintenance, investment accumulates over time and pays
its returns in the future. (S)
The study concludes that the US will have to increase its defense
investment spending markedly if we are to remain a competitive mil-
itary power. This message implies a gloomier future for relative US
power than the prevailing public view, and a much gloomier view than
the President now holds. It calls for a major shift of federal spending
priorities toward defense at a time when, not withstanding its commit-
ment to growth in defense spending, the Administration faces sharply
competing spending-­related priorities, namely with respect to energy
and inflation. (S)
However, as a contribution to understanding our defense
predicament—­which is how Harold describes the paper in his cover
memo—­the paper has substantive deficiencies. In particular, it under-
rates the US on a number of counts:
—It does not distinguish how much of past Soviet investment only
permitted catching up with the US as opposed to surpassing us. Nor
does it address the advantage to the USSR of being able to follow tech-
nological paths pioneered by the US, advantages given up as technol-
ogy gaps are closed.
—It doesn’t appear to give adequate weight to US technological
developments now in train that serve to devalue Soviet investments,
e.g., cruise missiles vs. their air defenses.
—It doesn’t attempt to account for the fact that some Soviet military
investment is directed against China, not NATO. While such resources
can be redirected and we have an interest in the Sino-Soviet balance,
some discounting of such Soviet efforts would seem reasonable. (S)
Were these and other substantive problems addressed, the main
message of the paper probably would not change. But it would be more
persuasive and the policy problem it poses more manageable. (S)
The paper suffers from being much too long. Harold suggests that
the President read some 35 pages to get the essence of it; and OSD sup-
plied an “executive summary” not much shorter. We think the study
In addition, the paper contains no policy recommendations other
than the general admonition to spend more. We believe the Secretary of
Defense should accompany the bad news with a clear statement of his
opinion about the message and its policy implications. (S)
The NSC should not block the communication of the message to
the President. At the same time we should not forward difficult analytic
3 For Brown’s summary, see the attachment to Document 145.

material when Harold Brown has not been sufficiently explicit about its
implications. (S)
We recommend that you ask Harold for a short (3–5 pages) memo
to the President that does the following:
—Presents a crisp summary of the paper’s findings;
—Mentions the appropriate caveats;
—States Harold’s view of the findings and the implications he sees
for US defense spending. (S)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the attached memo to Harold Brown at Tab A. (S)

Tab A

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown4
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
DOD’s Study of the US–USSR Military Investment Balance (S)
I have reviewed the subject paper you sent to the President on
5 July. Although it’s an impressive piece of work and it presents an
important message, the paper may characterize the defense investment
imbalance too unfavorably and even the executive summary is much
too long to ask the President to read. (S)
Because the message of this study is very important and disturb-
ing, I urge you to prepare a short 3–5 page memo for the President that:
—­crisply summarizes the study;
—­states the appropriate caveats (our staffs have discussed the
more important ones); and
—­states your own view of the implications for our defense spend-
ing and policies. (S)
Zbigniew Brzezinski5
4 Secret.
5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

145.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, August 1, 1979
It has become evident that we have won the debate on SALT II in
the Senate hearings and with the media (and probably the public). But
we have not yet won the Senate vote. There will be difficult bargaining,
in the process of achieving a two-­thirds vote of approval in the Senate,
over the issue of defense programs and budgets. Sam Nunn speaks for
a group without whose votes we probably can’t get Senate approval of
SALT. He clearly believes that the present five-­year defense program
is inadequate, and that the financial plan won’t fund even the pres-
ent five-­year program. He will demand a commitment, whose exact
nature he can’t yet specify, to an annual growth in the defense budget
of at least three percent (perhaps more) after actual inflation. At the
same time, others such as George McGovern could well be brought to
vote against SALT II by such a commitment. And whether the Con-
gress would actually be willing to put money where some of its mem-
bers’ mouths are is questionable. John Stennis wants to support SALT
II and is for a stronger defense program, but is more influenced than
Nunn by fiscal conservatism; his views may provide a good vehicle for
compromise.
My present thought is that one way to meet the Nunn position
may be to revise the fiscal guidance for the Five Year Defense Plan
(1981–5) to assure a genuine after-­inflation annual budget growth rate
of three percent. The Congress has those figures, and it is on the basis
of the claimed growth rate and assumed inflation rates contained in it,
along with the past effects of underestimated inflation rates, that Nunn
has taken his position. Another (and they are not mutually exclusive)
way would be to submit a FY 1980 supplemental. This could cover the
amount of Congressional cuts (which I anticipate could well be 1B$
or more—­the House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee will rec-
ommend a 2B$ cut) and/or the unprogrammed increases in fuel costs
In this situation, I believe it would be useful for you to consider the
findings of a DOD examination of the military balance, specifically the
military investment balance.2 I described these findings at the June 4
NSC meeting which updated the Comprehensive Net Assessment
Alpha Channel.
report of the Military Investment Balance were not found.

conclusions of that DOD study boiled down to a few pages; they are
attached.
My judgment is that those conclusions are essentially correct. In
some ways they may be too pessimistic. In particular, I think that if
we exert the efforts necessary to put some of our advanced techno-
logical concepts into operational hardware, we can make the trend of
the balance somewhat less adverse—­but I also believe the Soviets are
likely in the next five years to confront us with some technological sur-
prises of their own. In any event, I believe the highly probable dangers
of the prospective military balance fully justify an annual growth in
the defense program, after inflation, of at least three percent annually
through 1985. Moreover, I believe that the Congress as a whole would
support that growth if such a program is put forward vigorously by the
Administration. I recognize the major problem posed by House Repub-
licans voting in the Budget Resolution process to increase defense, and
then voting against the Resolution. But I do not believe that a defense
budget set at the level of the median view of the Democratic Party will
satisfy either the defense needs of the country or the demands of the
electorate. Your leadership can, in my view, produce Congressional
support for the necessary program. We should be reticent in respond-
ing with compromise to what Sam Nunn (and Kissinger) are saying
about the defense program.4 That should be saved for the end game.
But I believe that program and process can be elaborated during the
next month or two, and that they will need to be reflected in some joint
Presidential-Congressional statements and actions before Congress
adjourns this year, if SALT II is to be ratified.
Harold Brown
3 See Document 141.
4 Carter drew two vertical lines in the right margin next to this sentence.

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense5
Washington, undated
THE MILITARY INVESTMENT BALANCE
We have recently assessed the US–USSR Military Investment Bal-
ance. Some military expenditures contribute only to current capability,
others—­in varying degrees—­to future as well as present military capa-
bility, and ought to be considered as investments. The assessment con-
centrated on future-­oriented activities such as RDT&E, procurement of
long-­lived weapon systems, and the construction of military facilities.
It examined those current investment flows, and the accumulated stock
of past investments, which contribute to future military capability. The
assessment, thus, is an indicator of the future military balance.
The main message of this balance is that continuing current trends
in and differences between US and Soviet military efforts for 5–10 years
will place the US in a clearly inferior military position. Focusing on
investment makes this clearer, providing a picture less favorable to the
US than does comparing overall efforts.
The assessment is based on CIA-­produced dollar estimates of
Soviet military programs. Those show that:
—Soviet military efforts measured in dollars have exceeded ours
by a steadily widening margin since 1969 and are now almost 45%
greater.
—The Soviets have out-­invested us for 10 years and, for the last
few years, their investment effort has been about 75% larger than ours.
—Projecting current Soviet trends and US plans into the future
shows only a slow reduction in the gap in the rate of investment, and
even that reduction is uncertain.
The Soviet advantage is growing even more rapidly than is
revealed by the respective rates of current investment flow, since:
—Soviet investment stock value is now about 25% more than ours.
—That differential is expected to increase to 40–60% by the mid
80’s, depending on assumptions about the depreciation profile.
—The stream of Soviet investment dividends can be expected to
exceed those of the US for many years.
The analysis also examined several possible, but not very convinc-
ing, arguments as to why these investment trends need not be cause for
concern.
5 Top Secret; Eyes Only.

—Adding allies’ defense efforts to both sides changes the com-
parison, but much less in the investment area than when total defense
efforts are compared. In either case we think there is more unproduc-
tive duplication among NATO than among Warsaw Pact programs,
which are centrally directed.
—US technological leads are being eroded by massive, broad-­based
continuing Soviet R&D programs, increasingly in high-­risk, high-­cost,
potentially high-­payoff areas. However, as I have indicated earlier, we
ourselves have two or three efforts underway that I consider of major
potential effect.
—The fundamentally stronger underlying US economy is offset
somewhat by Soviet design and manufacturing processes which facil-
itate military surge production. Further, the relevance of industrial
mobilization is questionable in many cases.
Trying to assess the balance from the Soviet perspective suggests
they probably measure their efforts against those of the US, the NATO
Allies, and at least Japan and China. Therefore they may:
—Believe they face total defense efforts greater than their own.
—And see reasons to sustain or even increase the rate of growth in
their defense efforts in the recent reversal of the downward trend in the
US defense efforts, the NATO commitment to real defense growth and
the US–PRC rapprochement.
The assessment also notes our uncertainty about how Soviet
defense efforts will be constrained by demographic, energy and eco-
nomic problems. This is a possible future bright spot for the US and is
a critical area for further study.
However, Soviet gains in the military balance are likely to be even
greater in the future because:
—Soviet investment flows have continued to grow while ours, in
general, are lower than in the 50’s and 60’s.
—The fruits of the Soviet differential in military investments have
yet to be realized due to the long lead times between large investments
in R&D and visible, deployed weapons.
Finally, the assessment addresses the consequences if current
trends persist. The following three scenarios outline some possibilities:
—Continuation of current US and Soviet military trends into the
mid-­eighties, followed by slackening in the Soviet military buildup
because of economic, demographic and other problems.
—Continuation of current trends throughout the 80’s to a situa-
tion of clear US military inferiority with respect to the Soviets. This is
unlikely to be a stable situation, however.
—A major confrontation a few years hence triggered by the Soviets
aggressively pushing their advantage somewhere. Depending on the
nature and severity of the crisis and the political reaction in the US to
the crisis or to consequent US losses, a major increase in US defense
expenditures and a more competitive US-Soviet relationship may

result. (In the past four decades, 40–200% increases have occurred three
times—­each following a crisis involving combat.)
The assessment concludes that the consequences of any of these
scenarios are enormous. They will likely impact directly on our ability
to defend our interests and our allies. Also, since the US has been the
core around which western alliances have formed, allied perceptions of
US inferiority are likely to lead to severe stresses6—­at the very least—­in
these alliances. They could break, others could be formed, and there
could be hedging and increased compliance with Soviet desires on the
part of former allies. The US has had such a central role in organizing
the western world that repercussions would likely be felt throughout
the world.
I found this assessment, focused on expenditures and investment,
to be particularly useful. The adverse overall trends indicated are gen-
erally confirmed by the changes we see in more detailed assessments of
various military balances:
—We see deterioration in the strategic nuclear balance by all the
common indicators, static and dynamic which will very probably con-
tinue until we deploy the ALCM and, later, the MX.
—NATO’s ASW forces have probably improved relative to the
Soviet submarine force, and the Central Region ground force balance
has been roughly static, but the balance has deteriorated in theater
nuclear forces, tactical air forces, and forces on the flanks (particularly
the Southern Flank).
—(The perceived balances in the Persian Gulf and Korea have also
deteriorated, but these have resulted from revolution in one case and
new intelligence in the other rather than from differences in US and
Soviet military investments.)
In the context of policy, all this implies that we have not and will
not maintain an overall balance of military power between the United
States and its allies on the one hand and the Soviet Union and its allies
on the other at least as favorable as that existing in early 1977, the cen-
tral requirement laid down in PD–18.
We have yet to achieve a 3% annual real growth in defense spend-
If we continue that trend because of insufficient provision for inflation,
competing demands for national resources, or any other cause, the mil-
itary balance will become perilous over the next five years.
6 Carter underlined the phrase “allied perceptions of US inferiority are likely to lead
to severe stresses” and wrote in the right margin next to it: “U.S. officials’ wringing of
hands doesn’t help.”

On the other hand if we and our NATO allies achieve a 3% real
growth rate, the military balance likely will roughly stabilize after a few
years. Even then it would still not meet the PD–18 criteria.
—We would have essential equivalence in strategic nuclear forces,
but the general purpose forces situation would be far less satisfactory,
in (small) part because of the diversion of resources to the higher prior-
ity strategic force investments.
—The conventional force balance would give us only a question-
able ability to stop a Warsaw Pact attack and practically no confidence
in our ability to restore prewar boundaries.
—Our ability to cope with some plausible crises involving local
and Soviet forces in the Middle East, Persian Gulf or Korea would still
be severely limited, depending both on generous warning times and on
freedom from crises elsewhere, particularly in Europe.
To redress the balance and meet the criteria of PD–18 by 1990 will
require an average annual real growth in the US defense program well
in excess of the 3% we have discussed; it would also require increased
allied efforts.
146.	 Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth and Charles Stebbins
of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 6, 1979
SUBJECT
PRC on M–X Basing Mode (U)
Tomorrow Harold Brown will recommend to the PRC that the M–X
be deployed in a mode involving multiple horizontal shelters among
which the launcher could be moved surreptitiously or, in extremis, dash
on warning. The basing concept is adequately described at Tab A.2 (S)
All in all, we believe the DOD has come up with a satisfactory
basing mode against the difficult criteria of survivability, verifiability,
environmental impact, and cost. State, ACDA, and OMB are expected
notation in the upper right-­hand corner of the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.”
2 Attached but not printed is a July 23 paper prepared in the Department of Defense,
entitled “The Horizontal Dash MX System.”

to endorse the DOD recommendation. Admiral Turner may raise two
points of criticism (noted below). We recommend that you express sup-
port of this basing mode and believe the PRC can promptly make this
recommendation to the President. (S)
This memo highlights certain issues and data you may find useful
in the meeting. (U)
Survivability
The DCI may argue that the proposed baseline deployment of 4600
shelters could be swamped by large numbers of Soviet ICBM RVs in the
late 1980s. Tab B displays his tabulation of possible Soviet RV threats as
extracted from the latest NIE.3 These threat levels are physically possi-
ble. But that possibility does not obviate the viability of the multiple-­
aim-­point basing approach.
—Under SALT II limits, assuming they are extended into the late
1980s, the attacker would fall short of weapon numbers required to kill
M–X and Minuteman, or have just about enough. In any case, he would
have virtually to exhaust his ICBM force in order to swamp our base-
line deployment.4
—With or without SALT, if we see a proliferating RV threat, we can
tional deployed RVs probably cost the Soviets on the order of $3–5M
each if the missile force is expanded. Buying more RVs through frac-
tionation would cost them on the order of $1–2M per RV.
—Should SALT II limits break down, SALT III fail, and we see the
Soviets trying to swamp our expanding set of aim points, this would
signify a kind of competition in which current constraints would surely
be relaxed. We would be much more willing to consider:
• Hard-­point preferential ABM defenses for M–X.
• Launch-­under-­attack options that could be more effective in the
late 1980s against a 5000+ RV raid into a small area than such options
are today as a response to Minuteman vulnerability.
• M–X mobility outside confined areas.
The point is that there are no perfect, good-­forever answers to this
or any other strategic problem. Insisting on them tends to mean opting
out of the competition. (S)
Verifiability
DOD, State, ACDA and CIA staff believe the DOD basing con-
cept would be verifiable if deployed by the US or the Soviets. Admiral
3 Not found attached.
4 A marginal note at the bottom of the page reads: “sheltered reinforced truck-­
mobile system.” The word “reinforced” was struck through.

Turner reportedly has residual concerns about verifying a Soviet ver-
sion. He fears they might try to slip a small highly mobile missile into
the system as an evasion or breakout approach. This is possible, but
would have to be in large numbers to matter. Moreover, this is a risk no
matter what we do with M–X. Only a complete and tightly policed ban
on all mobile missiles of strategic size could eliminate this problem . . .
and that might not be enough. (S)
People in the Area and Security
You raised a question this morning about “campers along the dash
road.” Under normal peacetime conditions, the missile TEL would
move but once every six months or so. This would leave plenty of time
to clear intruders from any specific confinement where a missile is
being moved. Even a “rapid shuffle” (complete relocation over some
12 hours) would allow enough time to clear roads. In a crisis, deploy-
ment areas could easily be cleared. Only in the case of a large-­scale dash
on tactical warning might there be some chance of running a camper off
the road. Incidentally, the average camper, jeep, etc., could outrun the
people with it for operation, security and other functions. (S)
Costs for SALT
There is some concern that we are buying a horizontal basing mode
($26.9B acquisition costs) that is more expansive than vertical MPS
($21.1B) largely for SALT verification reasons. Some may be unwilling
to pay $6B to solve a verification problem the Soviets don’t really have.
In actuality, the extra $6B buys a mixture of increased verifiability and
increased survivability through rapid shuffle and dash capability. At
most, $1–2B less would be spent if we wanted horizontal shelters but
didn’t care about verification. Registering the principle that systems
can and should be designed for verifiability is worth it if the Soviets
follow suit. (S)
Acceleration Option
At Tab C5 is a US AF point paper that argues we could possibly
should be discussed at the PRC, further examined, but not immedi-
ately decided. It has political and strategic attractions. But it would fur-
ther warp the budget in favor of strategic spending when, with M–X
now moving, general purpose programs may be more deserving. This
should be resolved in the context of new defense budget levels. (S)
5 Not found attached.

Presidential Decision
You may wish to discuss the possibility of having the President
announce the basing mode decision at the beginning of a press confer-
ence in order to identify himself with strong defense and strategic equiv-
alence. The President’s tone should be one of fiscal sacrifice in order to
relieve Soviet-­induced pressures on our land-­based ICBM force. A PRC
recommendation to the President that he make the announcement per-
sonally would be persuasive. (S)
147.	 Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
M–X Basing (S)
PARTICIPANTS
Situation Room. The Summary of Conclusions of the meeting is ibid.
State
Secretary Vance
R. Bartholomew, Dir., Bureau of
­Politico-Military Aff.
OSD
Secretary Brown (Chairman)
W. Perry, Dir. Defense Research &
Engineering
G. Schneiter, Dep. Dir., SALT Task
Force
JCS
General Jones
LTG J. Pustay, Asst. to Chairman, JCS
Adm. Stansfield Turner
R. Bowie, Dir., National Foreign
Intelligence
H. Stoertz, NIO for Strategic Programs
ACDA
Spurgeon Keeny
Barry Blechman, Asst. Dir.
OMB
John White, Dep. Dir.
OSTP
Ben Huberman
White House
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Landon Butler
NSC
Fritz Ermarth

MINUTES OF MEETING
Brown: You’ve been briefed on the basing option involving hor-
izontal shelters with a dash capability.2 We want to review the con-
siderations involved in deciding whether this is acceptable, namely,
survivability, verifiability, and public acceptance. Soviet reaction is a
factor in the case of survivability and verifiability. Then we want to con-
sider how to move to a decision, possibly to an NSC meeting where we
make a final recommendation to the President. Bill Perry will address
the survivability issue.
Perry: I’ll present three illustrative threats and options for our
responding, with the help of these charts (draw-­down curves).3 In the
first case the Soviets fill out their ICBM force under SALT II limits to a
in a Soviet attack. The attacker can then devote the rest of his ICBM
RVs to attacking our base-­line M–X shelter system of 4600 aim points.
He basically exhausts his ICBM force, leaving us with zero or very few
survivors. The force balance is then constituted of SLBM and bomber
weapons.
Turner: He can get this capability by 1982–83, whereas we don’t get
those 4600 aim points until much later.
Perry: In the next case, the Soviets go to 10 RVs on most of the 820
ICBMs, extensively deploying their new ICBM for this purpose. They
Turner: They could do it by 1986 under the High SALT Force of the
NIE.
Perry: If we see this threat coming, our response is both to expand
the number of shelters and to expand the number of deployed missiles
such that, at a minimum, we could enforce the exhaustion of his ICBM
force and retain a few survivors because of his unreliable missiles. The
main thing is that we must see this threat coming about 1983, and we
probably would see it for him to have such a capability by 1987–88.
This threat level will also drive M–X procurement costs in the expen-
sive years, 1984–86.
Keeny: [1 line not declassified]
Turner: [2 lines not declassified]
Perry: Basically, such inputs don’t matter. If they put an RV on a
shelter, they can destroy it. The outcome is defined by the numbers of
weapons and shelters plus missiles in shelters. In the third case, the
Soviets go for very high fractionation levels and force expansion after
1985, essentially doubling the number of RVs we now expect on their
3 Not found attached.

could have a 12,000 weapon ICBM force by, say, 1989. In this case we’d
halve the separation distance between shelters to 3500 feet from 7000
feet, doubling the number of shelters right off, and further expand the
number of shelters as necessary. This would again enforce the exhaus-
tion of his force. In the first case, our costs would be the base-­line costs
case, we’d have to make a decision around 1983–84 to respond.
Brzezinski: Can we see the threat that soon?
Brown: We can respond when we see the tests he has to conduct to
give himself these high fractionation levels.
Perry: We can build shelters and expand the system as fast as he
can expand RV numbers.
Brown: We’d build the necessary roads and mark out shelter sites
from the beginning. This could “bluff” him out of going the high frac-
tionation route.
Brzezinski: Or it might provoke him to take that route, or give him
an excuse. Whether they actually believe it or not, they could adopt the
public rationale that they expect all our shelters to be full and hence
have a right to cover them with weapons.
Brown: Of course, if the Soviets feel threatened by empty shelters,
that would be an ominous development indeed. If they’re that para-
noid, how can we reassure them by self-­restraint? We could go to shel-
ter numbers capable of exhausting 20,000 RVs, but this becomes an
unreal world. In my view it becomes unreal for the attacker before it
becomes unreal for the shelter builder.
Perry: The Soviets face some limits on the amount of nuclear mate-
rial they have for these high weapon levels. They also face an exchange
ratio of 3 weapons expended to kill one of ours. At the force levels pos-
ited here, moreover, [3 lines not declassified] but by running this kind
of race they can assure that we could destroy their whole ICBM force
in a first strike. It is this logic that may persuade them to go mobile.
Remember, moreover, that these are limiting cases. In the real world,
they would probably never put all their ICBM weapons against our
ICBM targets. Hence, at the shelter numbers indicated, we would come
away with respectable numbers of M–X survivors.
Brown: The point is that the multiple shelter approach to M–X bas-
ing can adequately respond to threat growth. There are many uncer-
tainties around, but they weigh most heavily against the attacker.
Perry: In the third case, we’d aim for about 400 M–X by 1990.
White: Do you see any cases to which we cannot adequately
respond by expanding the shelter numbers?

Brown: No, not realistic threats. But if you want to worry about
threat levels I consider unrealistic, we have other options.
Turner: We see it a bit differently. Because the yields we use for
these calculations are somewhat higher, when the Soviets fractionate,
we see that they might put weapons between shelters and get more
than one-­for-­one.
Brown: In this kind of game, it is inconceivable to me that Soviet
target planners would not insist on placing a weapon on each shelter.
No US planner would proceed otherwise.
Turner: I think it’s quite possible they would try for multiple shel-
ter kills. The point is, can we safely rule that out?
Brown: If we go to 3500 foot spacing, I feel very confident that he’d
have to put a weapon on each shelter to be in the game.
Jones: This is sort of academic, since we’ll use the best data on
yields and numbers available at the time we start construction.
Turner: I’m challenging the assumptions here. My calculations
show that, if the Soviets pursue a moderate effort under SALT, they
will be some 600 ICBM weapons short of an ability to target our
ICBMs. If their effort is on the high side, then they could have some
1800 ICBM weapons more than necessary to cover MINUTEMAN and
M–X. But with SLCM and bomber weapons counted, we’d still have
a 2-­to-1 advantage in residuals. But these outcomes are highly depen-
dent on SALT II limits affecting RV numbers. Without those limits, he
residual weapon advantage. A high effort without SALT could give
him in excess of 10,000 ICBM weapons. We’ll have to pay a high pre-
mium to assure extension of the SALT II RV limits beyond 1985. By
1983–85, he could put a lot of pressure on us by starting to test the
technology for, say, 30 RVs on an SS–18. He could limit the number of
simulated RV releases to 10, but design a new bus capable of handling
30 new RVs.
Vance: He’d then be in violation of SALT II.
Brown: We’d certainly consider that a violation. This is a major
matter, but not new.
Keeny: If he didn’t try to draw us down all the way, then he’d
have a residual force under Perry’s calculations and a more favorable
exchange ratio.
Brown: You’re now talking about a limited attack of 5,000–10,000
RVs. I don’t believe in that.
Perry: The right answer is that he’s better off not starting. If he
leaves any of our M–X surviving, they are much more effective against
his force because he is in single silos.

Turner: Let’s try to get these calculations in line with the NIE before
we present them to the President.
Brown: The President should understand the picture of possible
threats and our response options. We should not pretend we can depict
future threats with certainty.
Turner: But we have agreed threat estimates within the government.
Perry: We can adjust my calculations for the official NIE numbers.
The results will be the same: we can, at a minimum, present a shelter
array that would exhaust the Soviet ICBM arsenal.
Turner: That’s true if you keep running up the number of shelters.
Brown: Of course. I can run up the shelter numbers as easily or
more easily than he can run up the weapon numbers. (Nautical anec-
dote about anchors and hurricanes followed.)
Perry: The great benefit of SALT II is that it assuredly delays the
development of the worst kinds of threats to this system. We need SALT
II to prevent them from exploiting their throw-­weight and getting the
jump on M–X deployment.
Turner: We ought to look at the threat of early Soviet abrogation of
SALT II in order rapidly and early to expand their RV threat to M–X.
Perry: Going into M–X without SALT II would be a real problem.
There is a physical limit on suitable land. At 7000 foot spacing, we could
Brown: This is a ridiculous extreme.
Brzezinski: But there is another angle to Stan’s point. The Sovi-
ets have an incentive to abrogate SALT II on account of M–X. If they
showed us a credible threat or preparation to do so, would we want to
go ahead with M–X? We should examine this gambit as a Soviet means
of deterring us from proceeding with M–X.
Brown: This is a good question. Facing that kind of threat, we would
be credibly interested in options beyond expanding the number of shel-
ters, e.g., providing for ABM defense of M–X. To deter the Soviets from
trying the abrogation threat, we have to have a credible ABM program.
We also have to convey willingness to abrogate the ABM agreement or
be willing to regard Soviet abrogation of SALT II as tantamount to total
abrogation of SALT.
Perry: We could also sharply accelerate other programs, e.g.,
increase our buy of ALCM. In terms of numbers of weapons added to
the force over time, we could match a Soviet ICBM escalation with an
escalation in the procurement of ALCMs. This in addition, possibly, to
the ABM defense would be an adequate response to and deterrent of
the Soviet SALT II abrogation threat.

White: This would be in addition to, not a substitute for, expansion
of M–X shelter numbers?
Brown: Yes.
Turner: My concern is, given these kinds of threats and neces-
sary responses, is M–X in multiple shelters the right way to contend
with possibilities readily open to the Soviets because of their high
throw-­weight?
Brzezinski: This is a real question because the Soviets are likely to
have a strong incentive to cover the whole strategic target set as well
as they can.
Brown: But there are lots of strategic targets they have an incentive
to cover. Our aim is to give them a problem that is too tough and expen-
sive for the payoff.
Keeny: We should not lock ourselves into a specific base-­line num-
ber of shelters like 4600 because this can too easily be demonstrated by
the amateur critic to be inadequate. In any case, these calculations show
that M–X is not survivable against the threats postulated. M–X exhausts
the threat but does not survive. You’re left with SLBMs and bombers
against each other, which is where you’d be without buying M–X.
Brown: What do you think the Soviets would do with their 5,000–
10,000 ICBM weapons? Without a large hard-­target array to shoot [1 line
not declassified] Part of the problem is whether the Soviets have a sur-
vivable ICBM capability while we do not. Kissinger has made the point
of how intolerable this would be. M–X challenges the survivability of
Soviet ICBMs. As to the apparent failure of M–X to survive in these
calculations Bill presented, remember they are limiting cases in which
the entire Soviet ICBM arsenal is thrown at M–X and MINUTEMAN.
They would never throw [number not declassified] percent of their force
at [number not declassified] percent of ours. They have many targets to
cover and residual force needs.
Keeny: But these kinds of calculations make it look like the ratio-
nale for M–X is to exhaust the enemy, not to survive. This is in part a
political problem.
Perry: If we actually deploy according to the defense conservative
logic we display in these calculations, we would in fact have much
higher survivability. And when the Soviets look at the problem in an
offense conservative manner, then they will be deferred from attacking
and probably dissuaded from attempting to overcome the shelter array
with weapon numbers.
Vance: These massive and pure attacks are highly unlikely. In a real
attack, M–X would be more survivable than displayed on the charts.

Brzezinski: At a minimum, we can enforce a situation in which he
must disarm himself to attack M–X. In reality, we can do better than the
minimum.
Jones: Today, if you want to believe in highly artificial attack
threats, he can take out 100 percent of our bombers with 100 percent of
his ICBMs in an area overpressure attack.
Perry: The more realistic depiction of the threat is the one used by
the Air Force to configure the base-­line. If he puts [number not declassi-
fied] percent of his hard-­target-­capable weapons against [less than one
line not declassified] percent of the M–X missiles will survive.
Brown: Let’s move on to verification. We have an overhead photo
here4 which [2 lines not declassified] There are, of course, other means to
verify than photography. Stan, do you want to comment?
Turner: There are two problems: The Soviets verifying us, and we
verifying the Soviets. [13 lines not declassified] Our confidence in verify-
ing a Soviet version is bound to be less than theirs because we face a
closed society and shall have less confidence in cooperative measures.
Brown: But we have better resolution and real time imagery.
Turner: By the late 1980s these advantages may not be so great.
[9 lines not declassified]
Brown: How many SS–16s might they hide this way, in your view?
Turner: [3 lines not declassified]
Brown: Why not hide them elsewhere, away from multiple aim
point confinements? They’ll have more chance of getting away with it
where we are not looking hard.
Turner: [5 lines not declassified]
Brown: Wouldn’t they do better to deploy SS–16 type missiles in
SS–20 deployment areas?
Turner: [1 line not declassified]
Brown: But we shall be looking closely at both possibilities for
cheating, and using all types of intelligence.
Vance: [1 line not declassified]
Turner: [1 line not declassified]
Jones: Adjacent confinements could be opened simultaneously to
assure no escape of an illegal missile from one to another.
Perry: In our scheme, we would be able to open a whole valley of
several adjacent confinements to protect against this problem.
Brzezinski: In my view, it’s hard to see them building the multiple
shelter system unless they are planning to cheat.
4 Not found attached.

Turner: [2 lines not declassified]
Brown: They can go straight mobile deployment.
Turner: [2 lines not declassified]
Brzezinski: On the contrary, they’ll claim M–X is unverifiable and
use that to justify building their preferred mobile deployment scheme
as they wish without reference to our verification concerns.
Brown: I am convinced we have a good case on verification.
Brzezinski: That may be, but we cannot enforce it. Their incentive
to cheat is high.
Keeny: DOD has clearly made heroic efforts to make our scheme
verifiable. Our topography in the West helps, especially the separated
valleys. What about Soviet topography? How do we stand with the size
of the port holes required? How about the problem of using an image to
fake the bottom of the shelter?
Stoertz: Stereo and other image enhancements help.
Brown: Faking images is a problem in other areas too, e.g., making
SSBNs look like SSNs.
Jones: Different sensors will be used, e.g., radar, to ease this problem.
Perry: The observation ports have to be big enough to allow stereo
imagery of the floor, to measure real depth.
Vance: I take it, Stan, you’re satisfied we can verify [1 line not
declassified]
Turner: [3 lines not declassified]
Vance: [less than one line not declassified]
Turner: [less than one line not declassified]
Stoertz: But it would not be definitive.
Brown: We need your position on this sooner. We are under pres-
sure to move quickly to a basing recommendation. The verification
problem you raise will never be resolved definitely.
Brzezinski: We need a recommendation to the President by the end
of the month when he returns. And we can hold an NSC on it in the first
week of September.5
Brown: We have the following agenda of issues, then: Stan, you will
complete your study [less than one line not declassified] by the end of the
month. DOD will reconcile Bill’s draw-­down curves with official NIE
data. And we shall look at the threat of Soviet abrogation of the SALT
5 On August 17, President Carter and Mrs. Carter flew to Minneapolis to embark on
a steamboat cruise down the Mississippi River, arriving in St. Louis on August 24. From
St. Louis they flew aboard Air Force One to Camp David, where they stayed until August
30, when they departed for Plains, Georgia. They returned to the White House the eve-
ning of September 3. (Carter Library, Presidential Material, President’s Daily Diary)

II limits prior to 1985, plus our responses other than expanding shelter
numbers.
Keeny: We still have to examine the likelihood that the location
uncertainty will collapse.
Brown: This is less critical because we can reshuffle or dash.
Keeny: But surely maintaining location uncertainty is still critical.
We might not know that we should move or dash.
Brown: Our move/dash capability denies him any basis for confi-
dence that he could ever use his ability to locate the missiles were he
ever to acquire such an ability.
Brzezinski: Would we dash in all cases of tactical warning of an
incoming attack?
Brown: We could require dash on tactical warning if the number of
incoming weapons indicated that the attacker thought he had broken
the location uncertainty. We’ve provided for including mass simulators,
but I believe we need only deploy them if we see convincing evidence
that he can threaten to break location uncertainty.
Turner: Maintaining location uncertainty is a genuine concern.
Sensor technology is improving, cooperative measures to assure ver-
ifiability will tend to compromise location uncertainty. The Soviets
will certainly work on the problem. Would you build the system this
way if there was a reasonable probability they could break the location
deception?
Brown: This is a matter of juggling doubts and uncertainties on
both sides. Our side will have doubts about survivability. Their side
will have doubts about their capacity to attack the system. On balance
these doubts will come out favoring not going to war, i.e., favoring
deterrence. That is why we selected this approach.
Brzezinski: What is the speed of dashing?
Perry: If dashing were fully adequate for survivability, we wouldn’t
have to hide. The combination of hiding and dashing is adequate.
Brown: Let’s conclude. Have we had enough discussion to make a
recommendation to the President right after Labor Day? What issues
remain?
White: We have to examine costs further: cost uncertainties, the
impact of IOC on cost profiles, and the impact of M–X spending pro-
files on other DOD spending priorities.
Brown: We’re hurting when the annual outlay for M–X hits $2B.
Jayne: The year of FOC is crucial.
Brown: 1983–85 will be the expensive years.

Vance: Our decision schedule turns on Stan’s date for completing
his work, doesn’t it?
Turner: My concerns may not be all that critical; they involve rel-
atively unlikely possibilities on which we must have good analysis as
we move ahead.
Vance: We have to answer your questions.
Turner: We’ll do our best.
Brown: Other issues? Public acceptance?
Vance: The public acceptance issue of greatest importance right
now is the requirement that we speak with one voice. It should be
DOD’s voice.
Brown: We’ll look further at the location uncertainty question.
Huberman: We understand you will also be conducting a positive
security program for maintaining location uncertainty, analogous to the
program for submarine security.
Keeny: In addition to location uncertainty, what about the threat of
SLBM attack?
Perry: If SSBNs come in close, we shall go into a mode of constant
motion or readiness for motion with the ability to get to a new shelter
in time to thwart an SLBM attack. If we get indicators of enemy SSBNs
coming in close, we can defeat the SLBM and the ICBM threat.
Ermarth: We may have a political problem between now and early
September, according to the schedule laid out. The attentive public
expected a firm decision out of the 14 August PRC; this is that PRC.
How do we represent the results of this meeting? It will not do to say
we are continuing to study the problem.
Brown: We’ll say what I’ve been saying in testimony: A consensus
has emerged on a satisfactory basing mode, and a recommendation will
be made to the President in a matter of weeks. Of course, we have been
saying “a matter of weeks” for a matter of weeks.

148.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, August 9, 1979
SUBJECT
The Defense Budget (U)
I want to share my personal views with you on what course we
should advise the President to take over the next few months as he
responds to Congressional and inflationary pressures on the defense
With respect to the possibility of overall dollar adjustments, I
suggest that we determine what kind of long-­term budget strategy—­
defined in terms of specific programs—­would best counter the adverse
trends indicated by your recent paper on the military investment bal-
ance,2 and that we attempt to conform any near-­term (beginning FY 81)
dollar adjustments to the long-­term strategy. This should be done soon
if we’re to have any impact on the effort initiated by Jim ­McIntyre’s
August 3, 1979 memo to the President on “SALT and the Defense
With respect to what is bought with whatever overall dollar
adjustments the President makes, it seems of vital importance that the
additional monies be applied against our remaining highest priority
strategic and tactical needs. My own view of which needs are the most
important from among those identified in PD/NSC–18 and your subse-
quent Consolidated Guidance documents, is as follows:
—Strategic:
Highest—­improve C3I; short-­term
fixes.
Next highest—­accelerate
­modernization (M–X IOC, cruise
missile carrier ­development,
ALCM IOC)
—TNF
Highest—­improve C3I
Next highest—­accelerate ­theater
nuclear forces modernization
(including MRBM development)
2 See Document 145.
3 Not found.

—Non-NATO GPF
Highest—­man, support and
exercise the quick reaction
contingency force; expand
mobility (lift) capability.
—NATO GPF
Highest—­accelerate ground force
modernization (XM–1, 1FV). (TS)
I believe that applying monies against the above list of needs would
be both militarily and politically defensible in that: (1) I am confident
the list will prove to be consistent with the long-­term budget strategy
I mentioned earlier; and (2) since the list has been evolving since the
earliest days of the Administration, it cannot be labeled as merely a
reaction to the SALT TWO ratification debate. (TS)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
149.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, August 10, 1979
SUBJECT
Telecommunications and C3I Policy Issues (U)
A number of C3I issues (which require action by the National Secu-
rity Council) have been raised by telecommunications legislation and
the National Communications System Annual Report.2 They can, I
believe, be brought together in two groups. (U)
The first concerns legislation for de-­regulating the telecommu-
nications industry. Executive Order 12046 placed responsibility for
national security telecommunications policy with the National Security
Council, and in carrying that policy responsibility, my staff has tried
to resolve a number of differences on pending legislation between the
Department of Commerce and national security agencies represented
through the National Communications System. The interagency paper
at Tab I reflects NCS efforts at stating a national security position on
2 The 1978 National Communications System (NCS) Report is ibid.

telecommunications legislation.3 Commerce found it unacceptable, but
a dialogue continues on legislative issues. (U)
Three points emerge rather clearly from an examination of the
debate between the NCS agencies and Commerce.
—In the past, there has been a reliance on AT&T for the provision
of adequately survivable and restorable communications networks. It
is doubtful, in light of present vulnerabilities in the system, that such
reliance is justified. (U)
—De-­regulation, if it leads to a competitive telecommunications
industry, is not necessarily detrimental to our national security interests
as long as legislative authority is reserved to the Federal Communica-
tions Commission enabling it to set standards that ensure adequately
survivable and restorable networks. (U)
—The lack of defined national security requirements addressing
survivability and restorability hamper our efforts to obtain legislative
authority to deal with these national security needs. (U)
Concerning this last point, your Annual Report on the National
Communications System calls for the establishment of a national pol-
icy for  C3I addressing survivability and restoration. Indeed, we need
such a policy if it will provide the basis for legislation and for holding
telecommunications common carriers to appropriate standards. My
concept of such a policy is a statement of national security telecom-
munication objectives which serve as the basis for your staff and other
agencies’ staffs determining C3I requirements and working out the
technical standards essential for telecommunication carriers to meet
them and for the FCC to rule effectively in support of them. (U)
I propose the following set of objectives as national security tele-
communications policy: (C)
1. Provide communications between the NCA and our strategic
forces to support a flexible execution of retaliatory strikes during and
after an enemy nuclear attack. (C)
2. Provide communications to support the operational control of
the armed forces at all levels of conflict, including an extended nuclear
3. Provide for continuity of government in a nuclear war and
during natural disasters. (C)
4. Support recovery of political, economic, and social structure of
the nation during and after a nuclear war or natural disaster. (C)
5. Provide for adequate transmission of intelligence to support all
of the foregoing objectives. (C)
I welcome your reaction to these objectives. I would like to present
them to a meeting of the SCC in September before recommending them
to the President. (U)
3 Not found attached.

The second group of issues concerns NCA survivability beyond
the endurance of the NEACP, that is, about 72 hours. I have directed
a review of the Federal Preparedness Agency (now FEMA) programs,
which include this longer-­term survival for Presidential successors and
the civil side of emergency government. Progress reports from that
study indicate that our present system of alternate hardened sites for
the Executive Branch are not adequate to withstand a Soviet attack. The
vulnerability of our “continuity of government” system as well as our
“NCA survivability system” is growing no less rapidly than the vul-
nerability of some of our weapons systems, i.e., land-­based ICBMs. I
request, therefore, that you give special assistance to John Macy, the
Director of FEMA, in working out a new concept of basing the NCA for
both of the leadership responsibilities in an emergency: commanding
the armed forces and governing the country. (S)
I am also particularly concerned that military contingency plan-
ning for less than all-­out nuclear war be fully integrated with the basing
and protection of our civil leadership in emergencies. (C)
Crisis stability in the future could depend on managing a con-
ventional conflict from a leadership posture which could survive a
surprise nuclear attack. Furthermore, a number of vulnerabilities
revealed by the recent JCS connectivity studies can be dealt with effec-
tively only through a significantly different approach to leadership
protection. (S)
It is desirable to make a decision on a more survivable system of
leadership protection early this fall. I would like to expedite that part
of the FEMA study and take the results to the President by October
Zbigniew Brzezinski

150.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, August 24, 1979
(C) I have made my final review of the MX program preparatory
to your decision. Upon your concurrence, I will initiate full scale engi-
neering development of the basing system. Development of the large
missile (190,000 pounds and carrying 10 RVs) has already begun, as we
agreed in June.2 The baseline MX program envisions deploying 200 of
these missiles, each mounted on a transporter-­erector-­launcher (TEL).
Each TEL would have a deployment area consisting of 23 horizontal
shelters interconnected with a loop-­road. We would conceal which
of the 23 shelters contained the TEL, but would periodically (or on
demand) open the shelters for inspection by satellites. As an additional
security feature we would be able to redeploy the missiles from one
shelter to any other in a time less than that of ICBM flight.
(C) The basing concept is described in more detail in the attached
paper, which also covers costs, survivability (including resilience to
escalated threats), verification and environmental impact.3 The material
presented is essentially that discussed at the PRC meeting of 7 August
1979, with additional clarification on matters pointed out by the partic-
ipants at the meeting and in subsequent conversations with them.4 The
paper has been reviewed in draft by other agencies at the staff level. I’m
sending Zbig copies to distribute to Cy Vance, Stan Turner, Frank Press,
Jim McIntyre, and George Seignious.
(C) The system is estimated to cost about $33 billion in FY 80 dol-
lars, including development, production, and installation; operating
costs will be $440 million per year. That is a substantial expense, but
comparable with other major strategic programs. Corresponding costs
for the Minuteman program (in FY80$) are $40 billion, with operating
costs running $340 million per year. By comparison, the TRIDENT pro-
gram will cost $39 billion (FY80$) if we build enough TRIDENT sub-
marines (25) to maintain a force of 600 SLBMs (slightly fewer than now
deployed).5 Operating costs for the SLBM program run more than $1
2 See Document 142.
3 Not found attached.
4 See Document 147.
5 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this and the previous sentence: “looks like
SLBM’s are cheaper.”

(including tanker costs). Alternative MX concepts with adequate sur-
vivability would be even more costly (Air Mobile MX and Trench MX
for example), except for the vertical shelter MPS system. That would
cost about $27 billion (FY80$) but would not be as satisfactory a solu-
tion either from a verification or a survivability point of view.
(C) The costs have been carefully prepared, but with any complex
system projected 10 years into the future, there is bound to be uncer-
tainty. Historically, major DoD projects have averaged 15% higher
than their originally estimated costs. I have taken that as a challenge
to prepare careful and conservative estimates in the first place and to
maintain tight management control during the execution phase. The
most critical phase in terms of cost control is the first year or two, when
requirements tend to balloon (“gold-­plating”) and when the contract
structure is established. There is already pressure to “improve” the sys-
tem in various ways (installing radar intrusion sensors at each shelter
instead of each complex, e.g.) which I intend to resist. There are some
features which probably will ultimately be added to the system (mass
simulators, e.g.), but which I intend to defer until their need is clear.
Finally, there is the possibility that the Soviets will increase their ICBM
threat more than we have estimated, especially in the absence of SALT
or termination of SALT. In that case we would expand the MX system
in response and that would, of course, increase the cost. Expanding to
300 missiles and 6900 shelters, for example, would cost an additional
$8 billion.
(C) It may also be possible to reduce costs by actions we take in
the engineering development phase. The shelter spacing is set conser-
vatively at 7,000 feet. We will explore the possibility of reducing this to
6,000 feet with concomitant reduction in road costs. We will also inves-
tigate the development of automated mass production techniques to
reduce the cost of the shelters. Finally, there is another side to the threat
uncertainty. We may be able to negotiate significant reductions in the
Soviet ICBM threat in SALT III, which would allow us to deploy fewer
MX missiles than planned, with a corresponding cost reduction.
(S) A key technical-­military issue with this system is whether it
poses a sufficiently difficult task to the formidable Soviet counterforce
capability projected for the 1990’s and beyond so that our ICBM forces
can then be considered survivable. The system will not achieve its full
operational capability for 10 years. During that period we must depend
primarily on our SLBM and bomber/cruise missile forces for high con-
fidence deterrence because of the possibility of a crippling surprise
attack on our Minuteman force. While the bombers and cruise missile
carriers can also be attacked at their bases by Soviet SLBMs, I believe
that our at-­sea SLBM force will be invulnerable to attack during this 10-­
year period. However, we cannot count on such SLBM invulnerability

indefinitely, especially if we give the Soviets a chance to concentrate on
it. From that, in major part, flows the importance of restoring the ICBM
survivability by the end of the 1980’s. Other factors include the C3 and
accuracy associated with the ICBM force.6
(S) The MX achieves survivability by (a) forcing the Soviets to tar-
get shelters instead of missiles, and (b) building more shelters than
they can realistically attack effectively. We achieve the first objective
by concealing which one of the 23 shelters contains the missile. I
believe the elaborate measures we have devised will allow the Soviets
to know that only one shelter has a missile but will not allow them to
know which one. If this belief proves unfounded, that is even if the
Soviets were to locate the missiles and launch an attack, we could
move the missile to a different shelter, before the ICBM reached its
target. This rapid dispersal capability is intended primarily to com-
plicate the task of the Soviet war planner (thereby deterring him from
attacking) and to give the President an insurance policy against loss
of security, or assertions of such loss. As a result of these measures,
we can have high confidence that any attacker wanting to destroy the
MX missile force would have to target all of the shelters. [10 lines not
declassified] In short, the Soviets would be in a worse position after the
attack than before, even without considering a US retaliatory strike
against residual Soviet forces.
(S) Larger Soviet ICBM forces are possible to envisage. These
would require a correspondingly larger MX “force” (more shelters, and
perhaps more deployment areas, depending on the nature of the threat)
to achieve comparable levels of survivability. In the attached paper we
describe, in addition to [21 lines not declassified]
[1 paragraph (15 lines) not declassified]
(S) Another crucial issue is verifiability of the system. I believe we
have designed a system which deals effectively with that issue, both in
fact and in perception. This system should be easier to verify than other
mobile systems—SLBMs, bombers, and road mobile systems like the
SS–20 that are not confined to a designated deployment area. CIA and
[less than 1 line not declassified] analysts have done an outstanding job
of assessing verifiability (and as a result have influenced some of our
design features). They conclude that the system can be verified either
as a US deployment or as a Soviet deployment. The verification issue is
treated in detail in the attached paper. Also, Stan has prepared a sepa-
rate memo on this subject which you will want to review.7
6 Carter wrote in the margin to the right of this and the previous sentence: “ex
schizophrenia.”
7 See Document 151.

(U) Environmental impact and public reaction have been handled
very well by the Air Force. There is good public support in the probable
development areas—Nevada and Utah. The Governors of both states
have written to you expressing their interest. The attached report con-
tains a section on this matter. We plan a vigorous effort to make MX
energy-­independent via solar techniques. Though very much a side-­
issue in military terms, such an effort could be of significant national
value in maturing that technology so that costs reduce to acceptable
levels for other applications.
(C) I believe that we should move out promptly with a decision to
start full scale development.8 We now have the funding (the FY 79 Sup-
plemental Appropriation) and we can demonstrate to Congress and the
public a forceful step to strengthen our strategic forces. By announcing
a decision before 5 September, we can take the initiative rather than
appear to be responding reluctantly to the criticisms of delay that will
be made when Congress reconvenes.9 Before you make a public state-
ment, you or I should personally call Governor List of Nevada and Gov-
ernor Matheson of Utah, as well as Senator Robert Byrd and Speaker
O’Neill, to give them advance notice.
Harold Brown
8 Carter underlined “move out promptly” in this sentence.
9 Carter underlined “before 5 September” in this sentence.

151.	 Memorandum from Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 24, 1979
SUBJECT
Comments on Proposed MX Basing Mode From an Intelligence Point of View
1. Attached are two sets of comments on the proposed MX basing
concept.2 One covers considerations of verification which are relevant
to this system and responds to your memorandum of 13 August;3 the
other addresses possible Soviet responses to the deployment of an MX
system. Both are summarized below.
2. Monitoring:
a. Objectively the Soviets should be able to monitor with high
confidence the MX system as currently proposed by the Secretary of
Defense.
b. The Soviets will probably not actually feel quite that confident.
c. The Soviets will very likely continue to protest that this basing
mode is not verifiable.
d. Should the Soviets deploy an identical system, we believe that
we could monitor the number of MX type missiles deployed in it with
high confidence; there are, however, possibilities for cheating [1 line not
declassified] The Soviets are not likely to view this cheating possibility
as an attractive option.
e. A Soviet multiple protective shelter system would likely differ
in some respects from the US proposal, and our monitoring confidence
would depend heavily on the characteristics of that system.
3. Soviet response: [4 lines not declassified] The proposed baseline
MX basing system would have 4,600 shelters, or aim points by 1989.
The following tabulation shows how many RVs the Soviets could have
in excess of the number required to attack all Minuteman silos, the
baseline MX system, and command and control facilities in the US. This
is not intended to imply that the US should or would need to build this
many shelters, but it does serve to illustrate the scope of the problem
the Soviets might create.
were sent to Vance, Brown, and Keeney.
2 Attached but not printed are two comments on MX basing.
3 Not found.

Case
Excess Soviet RVs Following
Attack on Minuteman,
Command and Control, and
Baseline MX
1. Moderate Soviet effort within
SALT II
−310
2. High Soviet effort within SALT II
2,140
3. Moderate Soviet effort if SALT II
fails
3,130
4. Accelerated Soviet effort in 1986 if
SALT II RV limits expire
2,750
5. Accelerated Soviet effort after
­abrogating SALT II in 1982
4,620
6. High Soviet effort if SALT II
fails
8,490
While it is difficult to predict which option the Soviets may
elect, it is clear that they do have options which at the least would
apply pressure on us to seek continuation of the limits on RVs (Cases 1
and 2).
4. Detailed back-­up analysis is being performed and will be made
available as soon as possible. This report is forwarded preliminary to
that to meet the deadline requested in your reference memo.
Stansfield Turner
152.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 28, 1979
SUBJECT
MX Basing (U)
Harold Brown has sent you the memo at Tab A recommending full
scale development of the horizontal shelter/ground mobile MX basing
scheme I briefed you on several weeks ago.2 I also asked Stan Turner to
provide his comments on the verifiability of the system—­the result is at
Tab B.3 While there is general agreement that we should proceed with
this system, as you will see, Stan Turner continues to be concerned that
the Soviets might try to defeat the MX system by sharply increasing
their strategic forces. (S)
This material will be the basis for the NSC meeting that I propose
you hold early next week. I believe that the basing decision must be
made at that meeting or very shortly thereafter—­an inconclusive meet-
ing is likely to hurt our efforts to get the SALT II agreement ratified. In
this meeting we must also agree on a unified position for answering
critics of MX counterforce capability. (S)
I recommend that you read Harold’s 5 page cover memo (Tab
A)—­it summarizes the important points in his longer attachment. You
should also read Stan Turner’s 3 page cover memo (Tab B). In reading
this material you should keep the following points in mind:
—While DOD has done an excellent job of minimizing the concerns
of the citizens of Utah and Nevada, opponents of the system are certain
to try to block the system on environmental grounds. To defuse the
considerable concerns already surfacing that you might simply allow
this to happen, Lloyd Cutler and I believe that when you announce the
MX decision, you should also state your intention to seek legislation to
prevent environmental blocking of the system. Such a statement will
underline your resolve to proceed. (C)
—Harold Brown believes that, beyond the perceptions issue, the
primary advantage of matching the Soviets countersilo capability is
to motivate them to go to smaller, mobile survivable ICBM’s. I believe
that the primary advantage of survivable countersilo capability is to
remove any potential Soviet advantages in a counterforce exchange.
Such advantages might make the Soviets more willing to press their
interests in any deep crisis, and thus increase the threat of nuclear
—Stan Turner’s continuing concerns with the possibility that the
Soviets might try to expand their forces to provide extra RV’s for target-
ing the MX system seem overblown. They obviously can expand their
forces but I doubt that they will because (1) we can expand our MX
force at lower cost, (2) if we do, their efforts will have gained them
nothing, and in fact, (3) if they race us by deploying new silo based
forces and we respond by expanding MX, the potential US advantage
in any counterforce exchange becomes increasingly more significant. In
the NSC meeting you may wish to briefly discuss this issue again—­a
consensus of your advisers on this issue would be useful. (C)
Finally, as part of our preparations for the upcoming decision,
Hamilton Jordan’s office is working with my staff and DOD to develop
2 Attached but not printed is Brown’s memorandum; see Document 150.
3 Attached but not printed is Turner’s memorandum; see Document 151.

a plan of action for announcing the decision. We believe—­and Lloyd
Cutler agrees—­that you should make a short announcement yourself,
and Harold and others should provide more detailed backup. We are
therefore preparing a draft statement as well as other backup material.
We will also provide a list of people you should call in advance of any
public announcement. (C)
153.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 4, 1979
SUBJECT
NSC Meeting on MX Basing (C)
The purpose of this NSC meeting is to review and decide upon
the MX basing mode Secretary Brown described and recommended in
the memo he sent you last week.2 If at all possible the meeting should
result in your final decision on a basing mode—­an inconclusive meet-
ing would probably have an adverse affect upon SALT. (S)
I suggest you consider the basing issue in terms of two separate
questions—­should we proceed with the recommended basing mode?
and how should any decision to proceed be implemented? To begin dis-
cussion of the first question Secretary Brown is prepared to give a quick
summary of the major features of his recommendations—­the summary
will assume that all present have read the backup memo. The issues of
potential disagreement are:
Cost: Jim McIntyre (and some parts of OSD) believes the initial sys-
tems acquisition is likely to be significantly higher than the $33B or
so estimated by Secretary Brown. They may be right, but in my view
Secretary Brown’s arguments as to how costs can be held down sound
reasonable too, and even if the costs were another $5B–10B higher, the
arguments in favor of this kind of system rather than any of the alterna-
tives, particularly a dyad, are compelling. (S)
dum and wrote “Swamp—[illegible].”
2 See Document 150.

Survivability: Stan Turner believes that the Soviets may try to
increase numbers of ICBM warheads numbers enough to make tar-
geting all MX shelters feasible. This doesn’t seem reasonable. While
increasing numbers of silo based missile warheads might be possible at
costs comparable to those required to make corresponding increases in
the size of the MX system, the Soviets will see that their efforts can read-
ily be offset, and that such a race would increase their vulnerability to a
U.S. first strike. If on the other hand the Soviets consider expanding the
threat to MX in the form of mobile missiles, they have some significant
technical problems to solve, and would be at a significant economic
disadvantage in such a race given the extra costs of mobile systems. (S)
Verifiability: Stan Turner also believes that we do not yet know
what design measures are needed to allow satellites to verify that extra
missiles are not hidden in the shelters (memo at Tab A).3 His staff
believes that appropriate measures can be found—­perhaps [1 line not
declassified] You should question Stan to get as tight a statement of his
concerns as possible, and then simply instruct Harold to ensure that the
shelter design does allow satellite inspection.4 Waiting another several
weeks or months in order to sort out the detailed design requirements
of inspectable shelters isn’t reasonable. (S)
If at this point you can make a decision to accept Harold’s recom-
mendation, or if you anticipate accepting it soon, we should discuss
how to implement it. (U)
The first question on implementation is how we should continue
to explain the counterforce capabilities of the MX. We need to agree
on what the valid arguments are, and that no other arguments will be
given without further NSC discussion.5 This is necessary in order to
minimize the chance that anyone will undermine the arguments that
have been made so far, or alternatively that the MX decision will be
taken to imply things it does not necessarily mean such as—­we are tak-
ing a first step toward a damage limiting capability. (S)
In my view there are two valid arguments we should use:
—We don’t want the Soviets to see a potential advantage in any
nuclear exchange limited to strikes against each others forces (I used
this argument in answering Senator Hatfield’s criticisms)
—MX counterforce capabilities should push the Soviets toward
the same kinds of relatively expensive mobile systems we are moving
toward. This would prevent them from maintaining their strategic pos-
ture at significantly less cost than we maintain ours, and may ultimately
3 See Document 151.
4 Carter drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this and the preceding
sentence.
5 Carter drew an arrow in the right margin pointing to this sentence.

mean greater strategic stability. (Harold has used this argument in his
memo to you) (U)
You may wish to discuss the arguments in this meeting, or sim-
ply say that the counterforce arguments in Harold’s meeting and the
interagency Q’s and A’s (my argument is the only one used there) are
the only ones to be used until the counterforce issue has been further
addressed in another NSC meeting. (C)
You must also decide whether or not to ask for legislation to guard
against attempts to block the MX on environmental grounds.6 Lloyd
Cutler and I favor your announcing your intent to do this when the
basing mode decision is announced. Such an action will underline your
determination to proceed, and will undercut suspicions that you intend
to let the system be blocked one way or another. (C)
Finally, there are the questions of who you should call in advance
of the public announcement, and whether you should make a public
announcement yourself. Background material on these questions has
been developed and forwarded to you by Hamilton Jordan’s office. You
might ask the principals at the NSC meeting for their views on whether
you should make an announcement, for any inputs they might have
on who should be contacted in advance—­and any ­special points they
think should be made in such contacts.7 I believe you should make
a short announcement of the decision yourself, just as you did with
6 Carter drew an arrow in the right margin pointing to this sentence.
7 Carter drew an arrow in the right margin pointing to this sentence.

154.	 Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Management
and Budget (McIntyre) to President Carter1
Washington, September 4, 1979
SUBJECT
MX Costs
In connection with your upcoming decision on MX, I want to
inform you of our latest efforts to understand the cost implications of
the program now recommended by Harold Brown. Harold estimates
that this system will cost $33 billion to acquire (constant 1980 dollars),
about $8 billion more than the vertical multiple protective silo system
originally proposed by the Air Force. The currently proposed system is
more costly because of features that provide increased security against
attack (rapid shuffle, dash) and increased verifiability (openable hori-
zontal shelters).
OMB staff has been working closely with DOD and the Air Force
for some weeks, including a cost analysis session with the project office
in California. In our judgment the DOD $33 billion estimate is probably
understated by about $8 billion for the following reasons:
—Based on historical data, we believe the baseline system cost
is overly optimistic, and should be increased by about $5 billion. Our
judgment here derives in great part from the massive road and shel-
ter construction involved. Given the unprecedented magnitude of this
major construction, these added costs are likely to happen even if the
program is tightly managed. The cost growth could be much worse
otherwise.
—Modifications to the baseline system that are now under
active consideration would add another $3–4 billion. These modifi-
cations include deployment of mass simulators to preserve location
uncertainty, development of a larger reentry vehicle to fully exploit
the throw-­weight capacity of the MX missile, command and control
improvements, and improved road surfacing needed for rapid dash. In
my opinion, some if not all of the modifications will be recommended
to you eventually.
Over and above our OMB estimate of $41 billion for the presently
configured system, it is also likely that a larger system will be needed
to counter an expanded threat. If the Soviets build to the MIRV limit
allowed by SALT II, the currently planned MX system would become
very vulnerable (almost all the MX missiles could be destroyed). To
expand this system to meet the threat would require another $7–8 bil-
lion, primarily for constructing additional shelters and the connecting
roads.
Harold Brown estimates that Soviet costs to increase the threat to
MX would be approximately 25% higher than ours to respond, but this
is very little cost leverage. My staff estimates that it may well be cheaper
for the Soviets to build an additional 10 RV missile than for us to build
the additional shelters needed to maintain planned survivability. If the
Soviets exceed SALT II limits, we may have to expand the system even
more.
Most optimistically, MX will cost $33–41 billion over the next
decade. The proposed horizontal shelter system with its improved
security and verifiability features is about as expensive as trench bas-
ing, although environmentally more acceptable. Funding for the system
funding levels that allow 3% real growth in defense spending, MX
alone will take about half of the total real increase through 1984. This
means that unless defense totals are increased beyond current plans,
important conventional force modernization (particularly shipbuild-
ing) and readiness improvements will be curtailed. Another choice is to
slip the MX program schedule. This is likely to occur anyway, since the
currently planned 1986 deployment rate is very optimistic. Such a slip
could lessen 1983–85 funding requirements but would probably further
add to total system costs.
Recommendation. While the additional security and verification fea-
tures of the proposed system may be necessary, defense should pursue
R&D on a less costly alternative. In particular, we should let further
study determine whether dash and rapid shuffle features are really nec-
essary or whether a system with simple transporters and smaller shel-
ters would be acceptable. Even if these additional features are deemed
necessary, DOD should design the system so that the basic capabilities
could be built first, with dash and other features added later (beyond
1986) if appropriate. Given the difficult overall defense budget choices
mentioned above, this “building block” approach provides maximum
flexibility in the early 80’s for you to allocate adequate funds to our
most pressing DOD requirements.

155.	 Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1
SUBJECT
M–X Basing
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
State
Warren Christopher
Defense
Harold Brown
JCS
General David Jones
Admiral Stansfield Turner
OMB
James McIntyre
ADCA
George Seignious
OSTP
Frank Press
White House
Hamilton Jordan
Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
NSC
Victor Utgoff
Detailed Minutes
The President opened the meeting by stating that the agenda would
consist of two topics—M–X basing, and a short discussion of the ques-
tion of Soviet troops in Cuba. Dr. Brzezinski added that another NSC
meeting would be held soon on the related subjects of C3I, targeting,
and theater nuclear forces. Dr. Brzezinski then asked Harold Brown to
explain his recommendations on M–X basing. (C)
omitted material, are in the original. The meeting took place in the White House Cabinet
Room. The meeting ended at 3:35 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s
Daily Diary)

After the President’s comment that he had read all the background
memoranda he had received on M–X, Harold Brown summarized the
main features of his preferred basing system, referring to a model of it
on the table. Harold’s main points were:
—­the basing system would maintain uncertainty about the location
of the missiles by rotating them among shelters every several months;
—­given this uncertainty, the Soviets would have to attack all the
M–X shelters;
—­the number of shelters had been chosen to make attack of the
M–X system by the projected Soviet threat very disadvantageous, if not
impossible;
—­there were a number of alternatives for responding to expansion
of the Soviet threat;
—­that he believes we can stay ahead of the threat, though this will
be more difficult without the limitations on the Soviet threat contained
in the SALT II Treaty;
—­that the Soviets would find competing with us (to make M–X
vulnerable against our efforts to keep it survivable) an unattractive
proposition, particularly because the only way they could expand their
threat at a cost comparable to the offsetting efforts we could make,
would be through further investment in vulnerable silo based forces,
and finally;
—­that the disadvantages the Soviets would see in such a competi-
tion would deter it. (C)
Finally, Harold noted that Stan Turner has a different view as to
how the Soviets might view this competition. (C)
The President noted that Jim McIntyre had told him that the overall
cost estimated by DOD for M–X is 20% too low.2 The President also
questioned the need for the proposed dash capability, and for shelters
hardened to [less than 1 line not declassified] He asked whether we could
maintain options for these features but not commit ourselves to them
at the outset. (C)
Jim McIntyre added that he was skeptical about the feasibility of
quick movement of so large a vehicle as the M–X transporter, and par-
ticularly, of stopping it quickly once it got moving. Jim said he was
prepared to discuss the cost question, but suggested that Harold open
that discussion. (C)
Harold Brown said that $33 billion is his estimate—­which is slightly
above the $30 billion cost estimated by the Air Force. Both these costs
2 See Document 154.

are in 1980 dollars. Harold noted that while these amounts are large,
they should be compared to the roughly $40 billion it would cost to rep-
licate the POSEIDON or MINUTEMAN forces today. Harold admitted
that, historically, costs for major systems have risen as the programs
have progressed from their initial stages to deployment.
Generally, however, most of these cost increases are associated
with add-­ons that become attractive as the system development pro-
gresses. (U)
In response to McIntyre’s comments on the feasibility of building
so large and agile a transporter, Harold noted that its horsepower was
only twice that of the M–X tank, and stated his conviction that construc-
tion of this vehicle is feasible. He stated that he was very much against
leaving out the dash capability—­that it would to deter Soviet efforts
to develop means for discovering which shelters contain missiles. (U)
The President asked if we would want to move the M–X missiles
upon detection of a Soviet attack. Dr. Brzezinski answered that this
would depend on how you want to respond. Secretary Brown added
that suspiciously small attacks might suggest that the missiles should
be moved (a point that Stan Turner supported). (U)
The Vice President noted that without the dash capability, you
would not be able to shift missile locations if you wanted to, upon
warning of a Soviet attack. He noted that the ability to quickly shift
positions of the missiles is one of the best arguments on the Hill for
adopting this particular basing scheme. (U)
The President asked if there is a comparable ground vehicle in
existence. Harold Brown answered the proposed vehicle is similar to
a locomotive. The President responded that Harold Brown’s response
suggests that he doesn’t know the answer. Harold responded that he
did indeed know that comparable tracked vehicles exist. The President
added that strip mining equipment is somewhat comparable. (U)
Jim McIntyre noted that OMB had presented the President with an
alternative basing plan that he thought would be a safer choice for the
President. He noted that we will need good answers now for the ques-
tions raised about Harold’s proposal, or we will be in trouble later on
the Hill. Harold Brown asked what particular questions McIntyre was
referring to. (U)
Jim McIntyre said that he was skeptical about whether a million
pound vehicle could run on gravel. He added that Harold’s figure of
these roads would cost more to maintain than Harold had assumed.
Finally Jim said that his staff believes that some shelters had not counted
in Harold’s costing. (U)

Harold Brown argued that Jim’s cost figures reflect add-­ons that
DOD did not see as necessary, and that OMB was costing the system
for a larger number of shelters than DOD believes is necessary in view
of the projected threat. Jim McIntyre countered that even the basic sys-
tem that DOD was talking about was priced $5 billion too low. Harold
asked whether this was a “not to exceed” figure—Jim responded that it
was a best estimate. (U)
The President asked Jim McIntyre if OMB had developed indepen-
dent estimates of shelters and road costs. Jim McIntyre responded that
they had not, and that their cost estimates were based on comparing
various components of M–X to similar but not identical things. The
President then said that even if we assume Jim McIntyre’s figures of
$41 billion is correct, what can we do about it? Jim McIntyre stated
that $5 billion should be added to DOD’s figures in order to achieve
a realistic figure for the Hill—$3 billion of this figure is required for
mass simulators, and the rest to achieve the postulated dash capabil-
ity. Harold Brown asked what advantage there was to stating such an
estimate? (U)
The President commented to Jim McIntyre that he presumed the
Defense Department had made a detailed cost estimate and what he
is hearing now is that OMB has not done this. Jim McIntyre responded
that DOD cost group is the source for his estimates. (U)
Harold Brown said that there may be some honest differences in
judgment, but that he does not believe that the DOD figure is low. He
argued that the costing has been more honest and careful than say
that done for Trident, and in addition these costs are based on some
testing. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that there is no real alternative to M–X even
at $38 billion. The President agreed, and stated that the question is: “do
we hurt our credibility by being either lower or higher than our best
estimate”? Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we should take a further look
at this question. (U)
Harold Brown remarked that we are going to simply have to admit
to some uncertainty in our estimates of the cost of the system. The Pres-
ident said that perhaps we should simply say that the DOD estimate is
$33 billion, and some say the cost may end up being somewhat more.
General Jones remarked that the incentives of the involved bureaucracies
suggest that we should start with the lowest reasonable number. He
pointed out the problems inherent in discussions of costs in constant
dollars, and suggested that we don’t overemphasize the confidence we
have in the cost estimates. (U)
The President remarked that if a low figure is used, DOD may
assume that more money will be available for other types of forces,

which will lead to problems. He suggested that the appropriate course
of action would be to go with the best estimate, but recognize the degree
of uncertainty we have about it. Jim McIntyre proposed that OMB and
DOD take another look at the systems costs. He noted that he was not
interested in signing up for another program with significantly higher
costs than originally estimated, such as we had done with the program
of action associated with the Panama Canal Treaty. (U)
The President then said, setting aside the question of its exact cost,
this basing mode looks better than those proposed previously. He sug-
gested that the discussion turn to the question of basing mode compat-
ibility with SALT, particularly with respect to verifiability, and system
expandability if SALT breaks down. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski suggested that Stan Turner and George Seignious
comment on the question of verification. Admiral Turner responded by
summarizing the main points on verification that he had made in the
background paper he had submitted for the meeting. In making these
points, Admiral Turner argued that 1) given the appropriate verifica-
tion provisions, limits on the numbers of M–X type missiles in the sys-
tem would be adequately verifiable by the Soviets, or by us, if they
were to build the same system, [3 lines not declassified] (S)
The President said that we need to understand how much notice
DOD would want for opening the shelter systems for verification. He
said that he wanted to avoid being at odds with DOD in future negoti-
ations with Brezhnev. (U)
Harold Brown said that the verification plugs could be pulled in
a day, and that this length of time should be acceptable, if the system
clearly has no cross country capability. He noted that there was the
question of how many shelters should be opened simultaneously. He
thought that the appropriate thing to do would be to open all the shel-
ters in any given cluster. (U)
The President then asked if the sort of thing DOD had in mind was
perhaps a capability to open 10% of all the M–X shelters with 24 hours
notice, and keep them open for say 48 hours? Harold Brown responded
that opening a total of 5% at any given time was more what he had in
mind. General Jones said that he thought it was important that we be
able to simultaneously open all the shelters in any valley. The President
asked if he could count on a capability to open 10% within 24 hours for
a period of 48 hours. Both General Jones and Harold Brown agreed to give
the system this capability. (C)
Admiral Turner said that the length of time we would want the
shelters open in a similar Soviet basing scheme would depend on
cloud cover conditions. [2 lines not declassified] The President said that
whatever we would demand from the Soviets in the way of verifica-
tion provisions in this kind of system we must make sure to provide to

them. George Seignious said that cooperative verification arrangements
are clearly needed for this system, and we will have to tell the Sovi-
ets what we will be doing to insure verification. Admiral Turner added
that we would have to carefully time our challenges against any similar
Soviet missile basing system if we expect to meet our exact verifica-
tion requirements, and we will have to watch for phony excuses for not
meeting our challenges. (C)
The President said: “I may have a different concept of how this is
done, but I thought the idea was to open all the shelters in a given area
within say 24 hours notice for a period of perhaps 48 hours. If we are
prepared to do this kind of thing, then we can demand the same of
them.” He then asked DOD, “can you open all the shelters in a val-
ley in such a simultaneous manner?” Harold Brown answered that this
should clearly be possible with enough cranes. Admiral Turner said that
CIA estimated that the proposed system would allow opening all the
shelters in a valley within a day. David Aaron noted that Stan appeared
to be arguing for a quick challenge to avoid the possibility of slipping
missiles out of the cluster of shelters to be examined and into others. (C)
Frank Press asked why Soviets would see an advantage in plac-
ing extra small missiles within this kind of basing system if they were
to build one? Admiral Turner responded that missiles need supporting
infrastructure which could be found there. The President then asked
Admiral Turner the key question: “Do you want to change anything
in DOD’s design?” Admiral Turner responded no—­he just wants to
arrange proper challenge procedures. Dr. Brzezinski then asked why the
Soviets would spend the equivalent of $40 billion to build a system of
this kind, which so obviously takes great care to minimize the potential
for cheating, if their purpose were to cheat? (C).
The President then turned to the question of the ability of the system
to expand to counter larger Soviet threats. He noted that if we made no
effort to build a survivable replacement for Minuteman, we would be
worse off than if we ended up in a race to keep M–X survivable against
an expanded Soviet threat. He noted that the question would seem to
be: Is there an alternative basing scheme that is better from the point of
view of our ability to stay ahead of expanded Soviet threats? (U)
George Seignious noted the danger inherent in thinking of this basing
system as “sponge” for Soviet warheads. He also said that we should
not exaggerate the survivability of the system. Finally, he argued that a
Trident II missile should be pursued as a hedge against the possibility
that the M–X program would not work out as currently conceived. (C)
The President said “I think the Soviets have thought they could
win the strategic arms race. In my view, M–X, plus other improve-
ments we are making will convince them otherwise—­will make them

more willing to negotiate. Without M–X, the Soviets will whip [us]—­
something the US has been slow to realize”. (U)
Harold Brown said we are not just building up a force of 2,000 war-
heads, what we are doing is decoupling the numbers of warheads on
our side from their survivability. The key to understanding the poten-
tial for a race between Soviet efforts to expand their capability to target
M–X and our efforts to maintain M–X survivability is that, unless the
Soviets go mobile, they will have to worry about survivability them-
selves. For that matter, if they push too hard, we can conceivably put
M–X’s in silos ourselves. (C)
George Seignious noted that the prospect of this system will change
the context of the SALT negotiations in 1982. We will be moving toward
a system that will be able to destroy the Soviet’s missile silos. (C)
Harold Brown noted that if the Soviets build 20,000 RVs, that implies
no SALT, and that we should consider ballistic missile defense systems
for M–X. We should also realize that we will have the option of expand-
ing our ongoing cruise missile programs. (C)
George Seignious said that, in view of the uncertainty of the situa-
tion we are looking at, we should not lock ourselves too tightly into the
idea of exactly 4600 M–X shelters, it might be more, and it might be less.
(Presumably in response to Seignious’ remark about the possibility of
fewer than 4600 shelters), the President said that it would be a mistake
to view M–X as a bargaining chip). (C)
The President then remarked that he was prepared to go ahead
with the system. Dr. Brzezinski then asked how the President’s decision
ought to be announced? (C)
The President asked if, setting aside the cost uncertainty, and
assuming that suitable arrangements for cooperative verification can
be negotiated, and that we are satisfied concerning the possibility of
a dramatic expansion of the Soviet threat, whether anyone saw any
other issues that seemed to suggest a need for a different basing alter-
native? (U)
Admiral Turner responded that the Soviets may make us pay heav-
ily for the continuation of the implicit limits on numbers of RVs that is
embodied in SALT II. He went on to say that a strong US commitment
to this system could thus be particularly expensive. The President asked
if the costs to each side of competing (in terms of an expanded threat
and the adjustments to M–X required to meet this expansion) are com-
parable? Stan Turner responded yes. (C)
The Vice President asked if Harold Brown hadn’t said that the Sovi-
ets would pay more than us to run such a race? Harold Brown responded
that the real drawback with the Soviets in running their cheapest race

would be that they would be investing further in vulnerable silo-­based
missiles. (U)
Admiral Turner noted that with this step we are entering the world
of mobile ICBM’s, [less than 1 line not declassified] The President countered
that it was his understanding that the system being proposed would be
verifiable given provisions costing a tiny fraction of the overall cost of
the system. Harold Brown added that the verification provisions embod-
ied in the system add no more than $3 to $4 billion to the overall system
cost. He then noted that while Admiral Turner’s point was a good one,
he derived a different conclusion. Specifically, the inevitable vulnera-
bility of fixed silo based systems implies a need to go mobile. But if
mobile strategic missiles are going to be introduced, we should set the
standard for verification of such systems. The President noted that we
have committed ourselves to making mobiles verifiable. He noted his
letter to Brezhnev on this subject, and Brezhnev’s reply.3 (S)
The President then said he accepts this basing mode but requires
that any declaration concerning its costs, verifiability, or ability to cope
with expanded Soviet threats must be reviewed by the involved agen-
cies and approved by him personally. He said that they must all agree
on a single position on each of these issues, and that Harold should take
the lead in developing each position. (C)
Dr. Brzezinski said that we need background material for explain-
ing this decision, including appropriate Q&As, by Friday. The President
noted that we probably can’t explore the cost question by Friday,4 but
should develop tentative positions on the issues as rapidly as possi-
ble. Dr. Brzezinski noted that, in view of the closeness of the Summit
with Brezhnev, we really need to have this material in hand by COB
Thursday, September 6. Admiral Turner remarked that the group really
didn’t have major differences bearing on the appropriateness of pro-
ceeding with this basing system. Dr. Brzezinski said that we will have
an announcement worked out by Friday. The President stated that he
would make the announcement, and suggested that it be done at the
Pentagon. (C)
for “the rapid conclusion of a formal agreement between us on those issues on which
both of us seem predisposed to agree,” and included among those issues: “c) provisions
for mutually satisfactory verification” and “j) elimination of mobile intercontinental bal-
March 15 response, Brezhnev stated: “The issue of mobile launchers for ballisitc missiles
of intercontinental range naturally should find its solution in the agreement in question.
Earlier we proposed to agree that over the period that agreement remains in force the
sides should refrain from deploying land-­based mobile ICBM launchers.” (Foreign Rela-
4 September 7.

Jim McIntyre asked if the need for mass simulators would be
resolved by Dr. Brzezinski and the others. The President responded that
this system need not include mass simulators initially. (U)
General Jones noted the skepticism on the Hill, to the effect that the
President is going ahead for M–X strictly to develop adequate support
for SALT. He noted that we should probably ask for legislation to get
around unreasonable opposition to the system based on uncertainties or
exaggerations of its possible environmental impact. He also remarked
that asking for multi-­year funding for M–X would improve perceptions
of the President’s seriousness in seeing this system through. (C)
General Jones also noted that he had been called by Senator Nunn
concerning remarks Nunn said were coming from the White House,
to the effect that DOD could not effectively spend additional funds
over and above the 3% increase the President was already committed
to. General Jones remarked that comments of this kind from the White
House hurt preceptions of the President’s support for an improved
defense. (U)
The President responded that to his knowledge the White House
was not making statements of the kind Nunn reports, and that he per-
sonally had no doubt that DOD could spend more money usefully. (U)
Jim McIntyre remarked that General Jones had raised some good
points. He added that we must guard against supporting the notion
that is being voiced in some quarters that M–X will never be built. The
President responded that you can quote me concerning my determina-
tion to see this through. Harold Brown added that as we proceed with
this system, we must make certain that people understand that our
intention is not to violate the laws protecting the environment. (U)
[Omitted here is material unrelated to national security policy.]

156.	 Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, September 5, 1979
SUBJECT
Strategic Aircraft Programs (U)
With the M–X decision process completed, the next big strategic
force posture issue is the future of the air-­breathing leg of the Triad. It
ranks along with strategic C3I in importance and dependence on basic
decisions about doctrine. By contrast the future of the SSBN force is not
so pressing. In the early 1980s we shall have to decide on Trident II and
the possible need for a smaller SSBN. But we should not enter the 1980s
without a firm planning concept for strategic aircraft. (C)
The questions being asked now include the following:
—We shall definitely need a follow-­on to the B–52 as a cruise mis-
sile carrier. But when and what design?
—Do we need a new manned penetrator? When? What design?
—What are the tanker implications?
—Should we design advanced strategic aircraft to accomplish
other missions, like conventional bombing, sea-­control, and bomber
defense? (C)
The timing of fiscal constraints and technological opportunities is
of concern. By 1984, M–X will be eating up a large piece of the strate-
gic budget and there is some incentive to load a new strategic aircraft
program into earlier years. This argument has been used on behalf of
the FB–111 B/C and derivations of the B–1 design. On the other hand,
living a bit longer on the B–52’s may permit us to exploit newer tech-
nology for the strategic aircraft fleet of the 1990s, especially interesting
because the penetration problem is expected to get very severe. (C)
It is clear, whatever the course and timing chosen, we’ll want high-­
performance airframes. Base-­escape requirements and the possibility of
very long-­legged Soviet air defenses2 probably rule out the application
of a wide-­body commercial design as the cruise missile carrier for the
late 1980s and 1990s. The Air Force can be expected to push for the
2 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to the portion of this para-
graph that begins with “It is clear” and ends with “long-­legged Soviet air defenses.”

inclusion of an effective penetrator. And it seems likely that tanker sup-
port aircraft (if needed) will have to be comparable to bombers/CMCs
in base escape characteristics. (C)
As reported to you by Charlie Stebbins, the Air Staff is attempting
a short study of all this intended to go to SecDef later this month. The
rush results from CINCSAC pressing hard for the FB–111B that the Air
Force is not keen about. (C)
This seems likely to be a major programmatic issue over the next
year to which we must pay close attention for fiscal and political rea-
sons. Even more important, like C3I, strategic aircraft are likely to be
closely linked to doctrinal questions. Although we are not in a position
simply to pronounce a strategic doctrine for the 1980s and 1990s (doc-
trine doesn’t get made that way anyhow), we can and should assure
that the future of strategic aircraft is discussed in terms of future doc-
trinal perspectives. For example, what are the new implications of your
three questions on stable deterrence, crisis bargaining and warfighting?
How should our growing concern about endurance and reconstitution
shape strategic aircraft design? Do capabilities for limited options pres-
ent special requirements? What SALT III, etc., environment should we
plan for? (C)
The Air Force, SAC, and other strategic aircraft advocates have
long sensed the value of new doctrine in promoting their interests. The
“flexibility” of manned aircraft is always featured in the relevant bro-
chures. But when they get down to cases, these people generally think
of strategic aircraft as dump trucks to carry megatonage into the USSR
in a short, intense war having no aftermath of interest. Designers and
force planners do not develop doctrine; they use it (or evade it) to ratio-
nalize “their thing.” (C)
We are in close touch with the Air Staff people currently working
this problem, and with their OSD audiences. We can therefore track and
influence the results. (C)
But we should take further steps:
—At an early BBV lunch you should raise the nexus of aircraft and
doctrine.3
—We should follow the planned NSC meeting on C3I, “quick fixes”,
and counterforces with a follow-­on that addresses the content of “coun-
tervailing strategy” (Harold Brown’s felicitous name for the strategic
doctrines you are pushing) and its implications for strategic aircraft.4
3 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this point and wrote:
“and ask what?”
4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to the portion of this point
that begins with “addresses the content” and ends with “implications for strategic air-
craft,” drew a line from this section to the bottom of the memorandum, and wrote: “this
is interesting. What would it involve?”

—We should then define the broad criteria that define future stra-
tegic aircraft posture. (C)
Unless General Ellis gains ground for his FB–111 B/C (some report
that he is doing so), these ought not be big issues in the FY 81 budget.
They should be quite significant for FY 82. (C)
157.	 Editorial Note
On September 7, 1979, President Jimmy Carter, joined by Secre-
tary of Defense Harold Brown, spoke to reporters in the Old Executive
Office Building to announce details of his decision to develop a new,
mobile land-­based intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) system, the
MX, as part of his administration’s plan to strengthen the U.S. strategic
Triad of sea-, air-, and land-­based nuclear weapons. At 95 tons with
10 independently targetable warheads each, the MX was the largest
ICBM system to date and was comparable to the Soviet SS–18 ICBM
system (its largest in 1980). (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pages
In his remarks, Carter outlined the five criteria for the MX basing
system: “First, it must contribute to the ability of the strategic forces to
survive an attack. Second, it must be verifiable so as to set a standard
which can serve as a precedent for the verifiability of mobile ICBM sys-
tems on both sides. Third, it must minimize the adverse impact on our
own environment. Fourth, its deployment must be at a reasonable cost
to the American taxpayer. And fifth, it must be consistent with existing
SALT agreements and with our SALT III goal of negotiating for sig-
nificant mutual reductions in strategic forces.” Carter then announced
the development of a system of 200 MX missiles, transportable among
23 shelters via specially constructed roadways in Western states of the
United States at a projected cost of $33 billion. Carter concluded by
stating that MX was “not a bargaining chip,” but rather a necessary
addition to ensure national security Carter concluded: “As long as the
threat of war persists, we will do what we must to deter that threat to
our Nation’s security. If SALT II is ratified and SALT III is successful,
then the time may come when no President will have to make this kind
of decision again, and the MX system will be the last weapon system
of such enormous destructive power that we will ever have to build.
I fervently pray for that time, but until it comes we will build what
we must, even as we continue to work for mutual restraint in strategic
armaments.” (Ibid.)

158.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown and the
Director of the Office of Management and Budget (McIntyre)
to President Carter1
Washington, September 10, 1979
SUBJECT
The Defense Budget
The two of us, together with Cy, Zbig and Lloyd Cutler, believe
it important for you to resolve the Administration’s position on the
defense budget issue immediately, before the Second Budget Resolu-
tion reaches the floor.
Even before the Cuba situation,2 many of those whose support
is essential to Senate approval had joined the growing chorus calling
on you to affirm your intention to propose and support real growth in
defense spending. Recent events have now underscored that position.
They have also emboldened SALT critics to believe that they can defeat
SALT II ratification by claiming defense spending and the Soviet com-
bat brigade in Cuba as demonstrations of an unacceptable lack of will
and willingness on the part of the Administration in defense matters.
Sam Nunn has proposed as much as a 5% real annual increase,3
though his conversations with us suggest that he has some flexibility
on the numbers, especially for 1980. Others have aligned themselves
with 5% or even more. We believe that you can—­and at least for now,
should—­hold the line at the amount to which your Administration and
our NATO Allies have publicly committed in the past. Your civilian
advisers feel comfortable in arguing that a real 3% growth will prob-
ably do what is needed, and we think that, depending on how this is
interpreted in the out years, there is a good chance that the JCS can be
orandum on McIntyre’s behalf.
2 On August 31, the Department of State issued a statement indicating that the
United States had “recently confirmed the presence in Cuba of what appears to be a
Soviet combat unit. This is the first time we have been able to confirm the presence of
a Soviet ground forces unit on the island.” (Department of State Bulletin, October 1979,
p. 63) Vance discussed the troops in a press conference held September 5, as well as
before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee later that day; Carter addressed the issue
in September 7 remarks before reporters in the White House Briefing Room. (Bernard
Gwertzman, “Vance Tells Soviet Its Troops in Cuba Could Imperil Ties,” New York Times,
3 In July, Nunn suggested that his vote on SALT II was contingent on the Carter
administration’s willingness to undertake “‘effective’ military competition with the
Soviet Union” through “increasing defense spending by 4 to 5 percent in constant dol-
lars.” (Charles Mohr, “Arms-Pact Debate: A New Script Has Both Sides Winning,” New

brought along. Moreover, since this would be in effect a reaffirmation of
an existing Administration position, it should help us counter cries for
equivalent increases in domestic programs.
For these reasons we recommend that you base your statement4 on
such a reaffirmation and that you make clear that your determination
applies to both present and future budgets (with, inevitably, less cer-
tainty—­up or down—­in future than at present). You need and should
go no further than that now. The Secretary of Defense will amplify our
defense program plans in a separate letter.5
One further point: All of us believe that the best form for your com-
munication is a letter from you to the leadership of Congress, to precede
the budget resolution debate. Certainly this, accompanied by a public
statement, will give the greatest impact and may be helpful should
circumstances later require you to point out in subsequent weeks and
months that you have made a firm commitment—­indeed one far firmer
than any the Congress as a whole has made to date. Whether or not
Congress accepts your proposals, it is important for SALT II that every-
one understand your own position on the issue.
Because your schedule is so crowded, and because the Second
Budget Resolution will reach the Senate floor no later than Wednes-
day,6 we believe you should send the attached letter to the President of
the Senate and Speaker of the House on Tuesday.7 But as soon as pos-
sible thereafter, which we understand to be Thursday, we urge that you
meet with the appropriate Congressional leadership to get their views
and reemphasize yours.8
5 Not found.
6 September 12.
7 September 11. Attached but not printed is an unsigned and undated draft letter to
be sent to Mondale (as President of the Senate) and to O’Neill.
8 Carter discussed SALT II and the defense budget with select Senators on Thursday,
Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversa-
tion of either meeting was found. According to a report in the New York Times, “Carter
told the senators he would ask for a 3 percent increase in defense spending in fiscal 1981.”
(Charles Mohr, “Carter Expected to Refuse Senators on Arms Request,” New York Times,

159.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 22, 1979
SUBJECT
Telecommunications and C3I Policy Issues (U)
Last month, you requested my reaction to five proposed objec-
tives which could serve as the basis for a national security telecom-
munications policy.2 I endorse your concept and support the objectives
you proposed. However, these objectives alone may not provide ade-
quate guidance for governmental, legislative and industry actions to
enhance telecommunications capabilities. Therefore, I have prepared
the attached alternative statement of national security telecommunica-
tions policy which, I believe, might be more useful for this effort. The
statement is unclassified, so as to allow broad discussion and dissem-
ination. I believe a policy statement along these lines, endorsed by the
President, could have a significant impact on the Congress, Executive
Branch planning efforts, the Federal Communications Commission and
the telecommunications industry as a whole.
I also agree that a meeting of the Special Coordination Committee
to discuss a national security telecommunications policy and related
C3I issues would be most desirable.
Harold Brown

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense3
Washington, undated
NATIONAL SECURITY TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY
It is essential to the national security of the United States to have a
telecommunications capability to meet the needs of the Nation during
and after any national emergency, including nuclear war. This capability
marking.
2 See Document 149.
is required in order to gather worldwide intelligence, conduct vital dip-
lomatic functions, execute command and control of the military forces,
provide for continuity of essential governmental functions, and recon-
stitute the political, economic and social structure of the Nation. It is
National policy that the telecommunications resources of the country
shall have inbeing attributes to ensure the flexibility, adequate residual
capacity and restorability to fulfill these needs.
In support of national security policy and strategy, the Nation’s
telecommunications must provide:
—Connectivity between the National Command Authority and
the Strategic forces to support a flexible execution of retaliatory strikes
during and after an enemy nuclear attack.
—Support for the vital functions of worldwide intelligence gather-
ing and diplomatic affairs.
—Responsive support for operational control of the armed forces,
even during an extended nuclear war.
—Support of mobilization in all circumstances including nuclear
war.
—Continuity of government and all essential government func-
tions and services before, during, and after a nuclear war or natural
disaster, to include those functions essential to life support, weap-
ons construction, and the survival or reconstruction of the industrial
complex.
—Recover of the political, economic, and social structure of the
Nation during and after a nuclear war or natural disaster.
The following objectives are established:
—Telecommunications requirements for national security, conti-
nuity of government, and government functions vital to the national
survival should have priority in the restoration of services and facilities
in national emergencies.
—Interstate common carrier networks (including specialized com-
mon carriers and domestic satellite carriers) shall be interconnected
and capable of interoperation in emergencies at selected, proximate,
breakout points outside of likely target areas.
—Outside of likely target areas, the backbone facilities of inter-
state common carriers should be situated to avoid collateral damage
from nuclear attack. The Government will make available the necessary
information to allow such siting.
—The Government shall plan for emergency use of industry pri-
vate line communications that have significant capabilities.
—All functionally similar government telecommunications net-
works shall be capable of interchange of traffic in emergencies.

—A national telecommunications control system is required to
manage the restoration and reconstitution of the national telecommu-
nications system following an emergency.
—All private line and public communications which carry infor-
mation vital to the national security or which is otherwise important
to the national interest shall be protected from exploitation by hostile
powers.
—The Government will place substantial reliance upon the private
sector for advice and assistance in achieving national security and pre-
paredness goals.
—Common carrier communications should be used to the maxi-
mum extent feasible. Government owned and operated facilities will
be used where necessary to ensure availability of vital communications
under all conditions in support of functions vital to national security.
160.	 Letter From the Director of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (Macy) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 22, 1979
Dear Dr. Brzezinski:
In your memorandum of January 26, 1979, to the Director, Federal
Preparedness Agency, you requested that he undertake, at the direction
of the President, a major review of the Continuity of Government Pro-
gram.2 This review has been conducted under the guidance of the ad
hoc group established in your memorandum and in accordance with
the Terms of Reference specified in Colonel Odom’s memorandum of
The initial draft of the review was completed on September 29,
1979,4 and copies were distributed to the Departments of State and
Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the members of the
ad hoc group for comment. The draft review recommended that the
bers, Vance, Harold Brown, Turner, McIntyre, Press, Beaman, Dinneen, and David Jones.
2 See Document 112.
3 Not found.
4 Not found.

President approve fundamental changes and improvements to the cur-
rent program which would:
• Be tailored to the strategic environment of the 1980’s and contrib-
ute to the deterrent and defense posture of the United States. (C)
• Assure, with a high degree of confidence, the survivability of the
Presidency and the preservation of a capability to perform the Presi-
dent’s roles as Chief of State, Commander in Chief, and Chief Executive
during any national emergency. (S)
• Focus on the need for civil/military development of plans, tele-
communications, and other support capabilities to respond to and deal
with such emergencies and to recover from their effects. (C)
• Abandon the current concept of departmental and agency func-
tions to be conducted from fixed, known locations in the National Arc
during the transattack and immediate postattack phase, in favor of: (a)
more extensive direct support to the Presidency during that phase and
(b) greater delegations of responsibility to Federal regional and State
organizations for carrying out essential survival and recovery phase
functions. (C)
• Charge Federal departments and agencies to expand execu-
tive branch regional level capabilities to provide for dispersed exec-
utive branch survival and recovery, and to assist and coordinate State
and local development of “all hazard” civil emergency preparedness
Comments received from the Departments of State and Defense
and the Central Intelligence Agency were, in general, very supportive
of these recommendations and other findings of the review but urged
further study and analysis of alternative measures to correct deficien-
Assuming your concurrence with the basic redirection of the pro-
gram outlined above, I propose to proceed, within my own authority
and in consultation with Colonel Odom of your staff, with its imple-
mentation to include, as recommended by the Secretaries of State and
Defense, studies of alternative means of carrying out certain aspects
of the program. In this latter context, I welcomed your memorandum
of August 10, 1979,5 to the Secretary of Defense and have joined with
him in addressing the concerns expressed in that memorandum. (C)
Sincerely yours,
John W. Macy, Jr.
5 See Document 149.

161.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 7, 1979
SUBJECT
Telecommunications Policy
I am submitting for your signature a directive on telecommunica-
tions policy. It is greatly needed for two reasons:
First, you have sent a message to the Hill supporting deregulation
of the telecommunications industry. If deregulation is written into law,
the requirements for the Defense and other agencies in the National
Communications System (NCS) to prescribe national security criteria
to common carriers will increase significantly. They will also need the
authority in new legislation to develop and ensure national security
and emergency preparedness capabilities. The directive proposed by
the NCS and Harold Brown provides a combination of long-­term objec-
tives and specific operating principles for dealing with common carri-
ers to achieve the C3I capabilities we need.
Second, the National Communications System (the Secretary of
Defense is the Executive Agent), which integrates all national security
communications systems, has relied almost exclusively on AT&T for
voluntary hardening interoperatibility, and creating a sufficiently dense
network to make it impossible for the Soviets to prevent “connectivity”
for SIOP purposes. A recent SAC connectivity study and some Defense
studies2 have thrown doubt on the survivability of the AT&T system
under stress today. By deregulating and forcing Defense to give more
guidance to industry, we shall be taking Defense from under AT&T’s
protective wing and making its analysts determine more precisely what
capability we have and what we may need to add or relinquish.
The absence of national objectives and guidance has allowed the
C3I concerns to become fragmented and unfocussed. The directive at
Tab A3 will not cause major improvements at once, but it will place
responsibility more precisely and provide directions which are neces-
sary for improvements.
Harold Brown, as Executive Agent of the NCS (his memo is at
Tab B),4 supports this directive. Its substance has been staffed through
2 Not further identified.
3 Not found attached. The directive is printed as Document 165.
4 Not found attached.

the NCS with Defense, State, Interior, Commerce, Energy, GSA, FAA,
NASA, CIA, and FEMA. All agencies concurred.
RECOMMENDATION: Sign the Presidential Directive at Tab A.
162.	 Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
FY 81 Defense Budget
PARTICIPANTS
The Vice President’s Office
Capt Ralph Crosby
uation Room. The Summary of Conclusions of the meeting is ibid. Brzezinski forwarded
the detailed minutes and the Summary of Conclusions to Carter under cover of a Novem-
ber 13 memorandum. Carter wrote on the first page of Brzezinski’s covering memoran-
dum: “Noted only, J.” (Ibid.)
OSD
Secretary Harold Brown
W. Graham Claytor, Jr.
Deputy Secretary
Ambassador Robert Komer
Under Secretary of Policy
Mr. Russell Murray
Assistant Secretary, Program
Analysis and Evaluation
OMB
Mr. James McIntyre
Dr. John White
Deputy
Mr. Randy Jayne
Associate Director for National
Security and International Affairs
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Mr. David Aaron
JCS
General David Jones
Lt General John Pustay
Assistant to the Chairman
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Mr. John Koehler
Deputy to the DCI for Resource
Management
OSTP
Mr. Ben Huberman
ACDA
Mr. George Seignious
Mr. Spurgeon Keeny
Deputy
NSC
Maj Gen Jasper Welch
Dr. Victor Utgoff

DETAILED MINUTES
Harold Brown presented a summary of how the defense budget
increases in the proposed 5 Year Defense Program (relative to the FY
80 real spending level) are allocated among major mission areas. The
$116B cumulative increase over these five years that results from the
“basic” budget real rate of increase of between 4 and 4½ percent, would
provide $34B additional dollars for Naval forces, $30B for improve-
ment force and $6.2B for intelligence. (S)
In response to questions by Dr. Brzezinski, Secretary Brown noted
that his assessments of the effects of these defense increases assume
that our NATO Allies will match our defense spending rates of increase
or decrease. He also noted that he has not attempted to accelerate the
MX program in this proposed defense plan. (S)
Gen. Jones remarked that there are few new programs in this bud-
get, outside the RDF, but that he was not looking for new starts, pre-
ferring to place emphasis on improvements in readiness. Jim McIntyre
supported this emphasis and remarked on how infrequently programs
are stopped once started. Several remarks were made to the effect that
Congress tends to reduce defense budgets by making cuts in readiness
funding rather than in acquisition, and that the effect of arbitrary cuts
in defense spending can often only be accommodated with cuts in read-
iness related purchases. (U)
In response to questions by Secretary Brown, all agreed that the allo-
cations of increased dollars among the various mission areas seems cor-
rect, particularly given the fact that some funding counted under naval
forces and NATO yields capabilities that are applicable to the RDF. (C)
In discussing proposed improvements to the RDF, Secretary Brown
pointed out that at the basic budget level he proposes to begin purchase
of commercial ships that would be loaded with Marine equipment and
forward deployed to increase the speed of response of the RDF. He also
noted that in the basic level, the RDF would get 20 additional KC–10
cargo tanker aircraft and initial development of a large new interthe-
ater transport aircraft (“CX”) would be begun. Russ Murray noted that
enough of the new RDF ships would be available to support a brigade
by 1983, with further additions coming shortly thereafter. He also noted
that the RDF needs aircraft carriers and asked what we might do to free
a few of them from their current commitments. (S)
David Aaron remarked on the importance of the various RDF pro-
grams that DOD proposed to buy at the enhanced level and even at the
basic budget levels and said that these programs would be needed even
if the budget were to come in at or somewhat below the basic level.
He noted that programs such as reengining the KC–135 cargo tanker

aircraft could improve our RDF capability in the short term, whereas
efforts such as development of the CX transport would have an effect
only much later. Gen. Jones supported the notion that reengining the
KC–135 would help our RDF capabilities. Secretary Brown said that Aar-
on’s point concerning short term versus longer term improvements in
the RDF is a legitimate concern, but also noted that the new interthe-
ater transport he proposed to develop would increase our capability to
carry outsized cargo. (C)
Reggie Bartholomew noted that the effectiveness of the RDF can be
enhanced through arrangements with other governments for overflight
and basing rights. He suggested a study of the objectives of the RDF in
order to understand where we should be making diplomatic efforts to
gain such rights. He noted that an understanding of our RDF objectives
would be important as we entered into negotiations next year with
Spain and Portugal over basing rights. (TS)
Harold Brown responded by saying that studies of such issues were
already going on in DOD, and that the President would be receiving a
memorandum today on some of the questions involved.2 He agreed,
however, that State should be involved in these studies. (U)
David Aaron noted the dangers that would be involved if we let
the notion get out that defense programs trade off against base and
overflight agreements. Finally, Stan Turner remarked that the RDF
would probably be the most significant feature determining how the
budget is perceived in other countries. He noted that the Allies will
probably like the RDF, provided they don’t see it as challenging NATO
improvements—­the Soviets clearly won’t like it. (S)
Harold Brown opened the discussion on shipbuilding by noting that
the central issue is numbers, and more specifically, should we reduce
the number of AEGIS ships that provide air defense capabilities that the
Navy says are its greatest need in favor of more frigates, which can be
bought in greater numbers and may provide more presence? (S)
Reggie Bartholomew noted the fact that the decreasing size of the
Navy will create pressures for reducing the numbers of ships that are
committed to NATO. He also noted that many people in the world are
impressed by fleet size—­a measure of naval capability that even influ-
ences our own debates. (S)
David Aaron remarked that he was in favor of improving per-
ceptions of our military strength, but that he was not willing to trade
off real military capabilities to meet the most worrisome threat to the
Navy, just to get ship numbers up. He noted that there are other ways
2 See Document 163.

to increase the presence value of our Navy, such as increasing steaming
hours and numbers of exercises. (S)
Secretary Brown noted that the effect of increased POMCUS in
Europe is to reduce the demand for convoys, and thus to reduce the
requirement for ASW capabilities. He also remarked that if more ASW
capability were required, he thought additional buys of P–3 aircraft
might be a better idea than additional frigates.
Stan Turner said that, provided we had enough AEGIS ships to
escort our carriers, he was in favor of purchases of additional frigates.
He remarked that the air defense problem will not be solved by AEGIS
alone, but by a combination of measures—­land based air defense,
greater ship numbers to increase the number of targets that the Soviets
would have to attack, etc. Secretary Brown noted Stan Turner’s caveat
that our carriers should be protected by AEGIS, and remarked that
emphasizing numbers of ships at the expense of buying AEGIS ships,
reflects a great underestimate of the Backfire threat. He noted Admi-
ral Train’s remark that whether a submarine or an aircraft shoots at
you, the threat comes through the air and you need something to stop
it. Stan Turner noted that many submarines are not armed with cruise
missiles. (S)
Stan Turner went on to note that the building rates assumed for
the 500 ship Navy Harold had presented were not realistic. In prac-
tice ship life times were considerably shorter than the 30 years Harold
has assumed. Gen. Jones said that in terms of warfighting capabilities,
1 AEGIS ship was a much better idea than 3 frigates. He noted that we
are fairly rich in frigates already, and that the Navy’s proposed mix of
ship types looked about right to him. (S)
Randy Jayne remarked that frigates provide some useful military
capabilities. He also remarked on the complexity of the AEGIS air
defense system, suggesting a slower initial rate of construction would
be prudent. Harold Brown responded by saying that the AEGIS system
had been very thoroughly tested, and that any implied comparison
with the Tartar, Terrier, and Talos air defense systems was inappropri-
ate. Finally, Russ Murray noted that the budget includes a proposal to
begin the design of a newer, cheaper, smaller frigate, suggesting that
this ship might be bought to get ship numbers up. (C)
Harold Brown opened discussion of the question of whether we
should proceed with construction of a pilot binary chemical weapons
plant in 1981 by noting that there are two issues: what are the politi-
cal implications of such an action, and what are the military needs for
an improved CW capability particularly as a deterrent to Soviet use of
chemical weapons? (C)

David Aaron noted that proceeding with construction of a CW
plant will create political problems in Europe. He noted the upcoming
FRG elections, and said that while he was not questioning the need
for this plant on its merits, we don’t need to open up another political
debate right now. He also noted the possibility that such a debate could
create problems on the Hill, particularly given the possibility that the
TNF and CW modernization issues might get aggregated. Reggie Bar-
tholomew said that it was important to get past the long range theater
forces modernization issue before opening up the CW question, and
that it might be appropriate to consider the binary CW plant early next
year, perhaps with a supplemental appropriation. (TS)
Harold Brown noted the importance of having a CW capability
that would deter Soviet use of CW, and the enormous disadvantage
that results if the Soviets can force us to try to fight in CW protective
gear, while our lack of an offensive CW capability lets the Soviets fight
without being similarly encumbered. He asked however, how we could
answer the strong political questions that had been raised about the
wisdom of going forward with the CW plant now? (S)
George Seignious remarked that the idea of building a new CW pro-
duction plant had been around as long as he could remember and that
he had never heard a really good case for it. He said that if the deterrent
argument is a good one, we should build a good case for the plant that
develops that argument. He also noted that we should have a better
understanding of the potential effect of starting with a new plant on the
CW negotiations. He suggested that we carry out a study of these two
questions and go forward only after a strong case had been developed.
All agreed. (S)
Secretary Brown opened discussion of the last question: Is develop-
ment of a ballistic missile defense system for MX justified as a hedge
against loss of the SALT fractionation limits? (S)
Randy Jayne remarked that the Army appeared to be planning a
major $1B deployment program for this purpose. Reggie Bartholomew
noted that critics of the MX might take the program as an indication
that the MX system “needed a crutch.” (S)
Jasper Welch noted that the Congress has had this idea explained to
it before, in the course of consultations on the MX. Harold Brown said
that it had been presented as an alternative to building additional shel-
ters. He also noted that if this system is ever really needed, it will only
be one among many things that we will have to do to improve our
strategic posture. (S)
Reggie Bartholomew said that the proposal might play in a reason-
able way, but that was not certain, and in light of the risk, is it really

necessary to begin this year? Harold Brown responded yes, if we want
an option for this system to be available as the MX comes on line. (S)
There was a short discussion of the consistency of this system with
the ABM treaty. It was noted that development of components such as
missile launchers and radars was permitted provided that they were
not mobile. It was also noted that the Soviets are making an effort to
develop small ABM components, that though fixed, had the potential
of being made mobile.
George Seignious suggested that we should redirect our ABM
research in this direction, but that we should not advertise it. We can
clarify the potential value of such efforts, perhaps two years from now,
if that became necessary. All appeared to agree with this proposal. (TS)
Harold Brown then asked all but Jim McIntyre to express their opin-
ions on the appropriate level of the budget from a foreign policy point
of view. All responses were in the range from “a strong increase in
excess of 3% is needed” to a program “at the basic level or perhaps a bit
There were a few remarks on the importance of making the
increase in straightforward and easily understood terms. Jim McIntyre
responded that the calculations of the sizes of the increases we have
made in the past have been straightforward. Stan Turner noted that
some parts of the public have seen past claims about the sizes of our
budget increases as less than straightforward. (C)
Finally, David Aaron remarked that increases stated in terms of total
obligation authority may play better in the public perception. He also
remarked that it was important that the defense program we settled on
be politically sustainable for years to come—­that it not be something
designed to respond solely to the current debate which will collapse
after SALT II is behind us. (C)

163.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, November 8, 1979
SUBJECT
U.S. and USSR Capabilities to Project Power
(S) A recent net assessment addressed US and Soviet abilities to
project military power and examined related means such as friendship
treaties, aid, advisors and proxies which have been used to achieve
strategic objectives beyond national borders. The utility of this com-
parative study to me was primarily in three areas: defining the growth
in Soviet intervention capabilities, showing that US capabilities need
broad reexamination, and suggesting some specific approaches that
might be fruitful.
(S) Early in this Administration we recognized a competitive
Soviet strategy of jockeying for position while avoiding undue risks,
especially of directly confronting the US. We identified several features
of Soviet style including:
—Choosing areas where the US is inhibited from responding.
—Seeking invitations by a government or faction.
—Providing equipment rapidly to clients.
—Using proxies.
—Cementing relationships by continuing arms aid, building mili-
tary facilities and concluding treaties of friendship.
(S) The net assessment highlighted another development which
has been overshadowed so far by more obvious Soviet activities. We are
seeing a big shift in Soviet thinking about, and capabilities to project,
military power into areas distant from the USSR. For example,
—Training manuals have appeared containing material on previ-
ous Russian or Soviet use of military forces beyond Soviet borders.
—Capabilities have been developed that allow them to project and
support forces at a distance—­e.g., a new class of amphibious assault
ships, several classes of cruisers, V/STOL carriers, large underway
replenishment ships, etc.2
right corner of the memorandum. In a November 30 memorandum entitled “U.S. and
USSR Capabilities to Project Power,” Brzezinski wrote Brown: “Attached is a copy of
your memorandum to the President of November 8 on the above subject, together with
the President’s comments and notations.” (Ibid.)
2 Carter drew a checkmark in the right margin next to this paragraph.

—Command, Control & Communications (C3) capabilities to man-
age distant operations have been improved by incorporating sophisti-
cated long-­haul systems in naval ships and by establishing C3 facilities
in places such as South Yemen, Vietnam, and Angola.3
—An overseas base structure has been established although Soviet
access to certain overseas facilities may be tenuous and even reversible.
These trends strongly indicate real trouble ahead for us, especially
when they are coupled with the other features of Soviet strategy in the
third world with which we have become familiar.
(S) In light of this I believe that, in addition to our programs for
improving our rapid deployment forces, we must look to some broader
approaches. These include designing a counter-­strategy and ensuring
continued management attention to this problem within DOD. Obvi-
ously, developing a strategy that effectively counters Soviet power
projection cannot be done by DOD alone. Indeed, competing with the
Soviets in a way that raises the costs that they perceive (in terms of
risk, resources expended, and the effect on their image) will require a
wide range of political, military and economic activities and policies.
For example, the effectiveness of our MAP and IMET programs and our
covert action capability (or absence thereof) will have a large effect on
whether, or at least at which point in the conflict spectrum, DOD would
have to be able to intervene in the future.
(S) Finally, examining US and Soviet capabilities to project power
suggest two problem areas for US military forces that require correction.
—With respect to rapid deployment forces, being able to deploy a
battalion on day 1 may be more important than being able to deploy
a larger force on day 10. This may be crucial to preempting a coup
or threat to our friends, or to deterring the Soviets from intervening
by making the risks of escalation clear. Accordingly, I have directed
the JCS to consider how to improve our ability to get small, effective
forces into a crisis area early. In particular, I have asked the CJCS and
CMC to consider whether the Marines should have a larger role in such
planning.4
—A major factor that will influence our ability in the long term
to react quickly as I have just described is specialized weaponry. We
are looking at options for arming light, highly mobile US forces of
the type that may be needed for rapid insertion into crisis areas. New
designs would take a long time to reach inventory. In some cases, exist-
ing non-­military (or non-US military) equipment may be best. After the
3 Carter underlined “Yemen, Vietnam, and Angola,” and wrote beneath this para-
graph: “Afghanistan?”
4 Carter wrote “ok” in the right margin next to this paragraph.

technical possibilities have been defined, we can then judge whether
practical programs for reequipping some of our forces can be devised.5
Harold Brown
5 Carter drew a checkmark in the right margin next to this paragraph.
164.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 15, 1979
SUBJECT
FY 81 Defense Budget Review
Attached is Harold Brown’s memorandum to you on the OMB
Defense budget book.2 In addition, I wanted to give you my own views
on the program that I believe is required to meet our strategic military
and political requirements. I strongly believe that whatever “percent-
age” increase results should be derived from our programs and not vice
versa.
The Program
A zero based budget is a major accomplishment of your Admin-
istration, but it is important to recognize that it is biased against inno-
vation and new investment. This is because overhead, O&M and
continuing activities are always protected in a minimum program.
This year, Harold is trying to protect crucial new nuclear programs
such as LRTNF and, in particular, MX by placing them well within the
minimum program. As a consequence, procurement for general pur-
pose forces has been pushed to the margin where you must decide
among a welter of programs and activities whose military importance
may not be immediately self-­evident.
OMB’s answer is to push for less capable systems (e.g., FFG in
place of AEGIS ships) and cut back procurement programs directly
the upper right corner of the memorandum.
2 Not found.

related to our allies’ support for the NATO emphasis of our general
purpose forces—­war reserve stocks and items we would buy in the
two-­way street program.
To help you through this thicket, these are the programs I consider
it essential to include and the reasons therefor:
(1) Basic nuclear modernization—MX, LRTNF, strategic cruise
missiles, TRIDENT.
(2) Adequate naval power. In particular, we should go forward
with two AEGIS ships to guard against the greatest threat to our navy—­
the Backfire bomber. To drop one AEGIS and substitute three additional
FFG’s (whose main mission is ASW where we are in good shape) makes
no military sense, and carries the “perceptions” argument too far.
(3) Continued procurement of major military items—­particularly
fighters—­close to the FY 80 projected level. You should be aware that
apart from a few modest increases, Harold’s “Basic” FY 81 program
will generally slow the rate of procurement below what we asked for
in the FY 80 budget.
(4) War reserve stocks. There must be an adequate program to
reduce what is the major vulnerability and weakness in our NATO pos-
ture recently underscored by NIFTY NUGGET. Real capability to fight
requires a better balance between our weapons systems and the ord-
nance and spare parts they consume.
(5) AV8B (U.K. HARRIER) and ROLAND (French air defense sys-
tem). Substantial procurement is essential for survival of the NATO
two-­way street, one of your key contributions to a more rational allied
defense effort.
(6) Rapid Deployment Force programs. In particular, we need to
go forward with pre-­positioned Marine Corps stocks on ships, more
KC–10 tankers and begin R&D on new CX long-­range, large-­size cargo
aircraft.
(7) Procurement of the EF–111 to cope with the extremely inten-
sive Soviet air defenses in East Germany which protect their blitzkreig
capability.
The Alternatives
I have directed my staff to look hard at alternatives.
—We could cut back military construction, but most of it is directly
related to needed force modernization.
—We could hold down readiness; however, this has been one of
your highest priorities.
—We could postpone new starts in ships, guns and aircraft and
reduce production rates in ongoing programs. But is is essential to
acquire adequately capable systems. Whether in NATO, at sea or in

the Third World, we now confront either Soviet forces equipped with
the most modern weapons or other nations so equipped by the Soviet
Union. In the Middle East, Soviet clients are now receiving their most
advanced equipment—T–72 tanks and MIG–25 aircraft. As our anal-
ysis of our options in the Persian Gulf make clear, without continued
modernization we will have difficulty meeting these threats let alone
the test of the central front in Europe. (For example, there are questions
whether some of our most modern equipment, such as TOW, can even
penetrate the armor of the T–72.)
The Budget Level
Both Harold and Jim have kept their personal positions close to
their vests and rightly so. But it is our clear impression that the OMB
staff is pushing for Band 1 which, in our judgment, would kill SALT
outright; and DOD is pushing for Band 4 or 5 which is clearly excessive.
The program I recommend involves an expenditure in the area of Band
in outlays. This presumes Jim McIntyre is correct that he can squeeze
$3 billion out of a vigorous budget scrub.
In my judgment, any less will not make clear our determination to
reverse recent military trends and over the next decade eliminate the
most important deficiencies and imbalances. As Harold points out, this
is where OMB’s analysis is most deficient. It is these trends that have
fueled the political pressure for a more vigorous program to modernize
our military posture. If we go for less, I do not believe we will have the
broad consensus to support both SALT and an adequate yet prudent
defense program—­a consensus that has eluded us since the war in Viet-
nam and which you have an opportunity to forge, not only for FY 81
but for the difficult decade ahead.

Attachment

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter3
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
FY81 Presidential Review, Department of Defense
I am concerned that the OMB paper, subject as above, does not
by itself provide an adequate basis for your consideration of the FY81
DoD budget and FY81–85 program. In particular, the first two sections
(“Overview” and “Issue #1: Level of the Defense Budget”) represent a
perception so different from my own, and bear upon matters of such
fundamental importance to the security of the nation, that I believe you
are entitled to these additional views as a matter of fairness to you in
the decision-­making process.
It is of course true that the level of the Defense budget always
has been, and always will be, decided in the light of other demands
that compete for our national resources. But, it is just as true that the
choice—­unlike much of the rest of the federal budget—­must also reflect
demands over which we have little control because they are imposed
on us by the Soviet Union and its allies. In my opinion, the treatment in
the OMB paper of this latter factor—­the Soviet threat, the balance, and
the trends in that balance—­is inadequate and misleading.
The situation we face today is the result of 15 years or more of
failing to match a steady, resolute, and comprehensive growth in the
Soviet Defense program. During each of those years, when the bud-
get was being formulated, similar arguments to those contained in this
week’s OMB analysis could be and were made. They were made suc-
cessfully, and the present situation is in part the result. While we were
spending hundreds of billions of dollars in Vietnam at the expense of
building our forces for the future, the Soviet Union was building the
unprecedented force we face today. While we have stopped the decline
in Defense spending and—­much to your credit—­have even turned it
around to real growth, it is important to understand that the results
of a 15 year trend cannot be repaired in one, or even five years. In my
view, the OMB paper does not address that key point satisfactorily; the
3 Secret. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the memorandum.

problem did not start last year or the year before, nor will it be cured in
the next five. We must broaden the horizon from such a narrow concen-
tration on this budget year.
The situation in Europe, in my opinion, is far from satisfactory.
The OMB paper, on the other hand, states that the military balance
will show continued improvement even at the Minimum budget level.
That is correct but—­because it deals only with trends in the balance,
rather than the balance itself—­is seriously misleading. The trend in
the balance—­now badly adverse—­will improve; the balance itself
will remain adverse and by many measures will not improve. In the
material we prepared for the PRC last week on the Defense budget4—­
which I take to be the source of the OMB’s statement—­there was only
one indicator in which NATO showed a superiority in 1985, given the
Minimum level program. That was in the maximum number of air-­to-­
ever, under the same conditions, we would also be outnumbered in
survivability of our superior number of air-­to-­ground aircraft, and the
significance of that sole area of superiority in Europe.
In all the other measures we calculated, the Warsaw Pact would
have an advantage over NATO: a slight advantage in total number of
tactical aircraft, a 10% faster rate of tactical aircraft modernization, a
70% advantage on the ground on the Southern Flank, a 100% advantage
on the Central Front, a 180% advantage on the Northern Flank, and a
face in 1985, in spite of the “improvements” that the OMB has high-
lighted. In my opinion, they are seriously unfavorable.
I also caution you not to be misled by OMB’s table showing that
“our projections of Soviet forces’ readiness against NATO has declined
sharply as more and better intelligence has become available.” What
you see there is not a marked reduction that has occurred in the readi-
ness of Soviet forces, but a marked increase that did not occur. Actually,
part of that is because we have changed our counting rules. The OMB
comparison also fails to note that in 1970 we predicted that the effec-
tiveness (i.e., measured in Armored Division Equivalents) of a Soviet
division would increase by about 15%; now that 1979 is here, we find
that it has increased by twice that much. But all of that is quite beside
the point. No matter who predicted what how long ago, today NATO is
at a disadvantage on the ground in Central Europe at M+10 by a factor
4 See Document 162.

concern.
Another example that I consider seriously misleading—­even if
literally correct—­is the statement that our projections show continued
improvements in the ratio of ROK/US ground forces versus North
Korea in the next decade even at the minimum level. At the minimum
Koreans. In 1977 (when in PD–18 you directed a policy of no further
degradation in that or other such balances), we had thought the ratio
was 1:1, or slightly better. But now, at the current rate, the balance will
balance is improving should not be allowed to obscure the fact that
it is currently unsatisfactory and likely to remain so for some time to
come.
And in one final geographical assessment, I consider the treat-
ment of the Persian Gulf area totally inadequate. The PRC material,
which the OMB has, points out that if we had to counter the Iraqis
alone—­quite apart from any Soviet or Cuban forces—­today, we
would be at more than a 2:1 disadvantage on the ground (measured in
Armored Division Equivalents) for at least 3 weeks, even if we could
devote our whole current mobility force to the deployment. If there
were also to be a simultaneous NATO crisis (perhaps orchestrated by
the Soviets), the 3 weeks would grow to 5. Our capability for inter-
vention with more than a token force in that area of the world today,
therefore, depends on 1) weeks of advance warning, 2) immediate
action on that warning, and 3) no simultaneous crisis elsewhere—­far
from an impressive capability and, in my opinion, quite unsatisfac-
tory. The OMB paper gives no inkling of that, but I think it must enter
your deliberations.
Beyond the question of specific military balances, there is the far
larger issue of US leadership. The OMB paper cites a decision by the
FRG to limit its real growth in defense spending to 1½–2% (we feel
that a higher figure is likely for 1980 before that year ends), points out
that the Japanese have been reluctant to increase the allocation of their
resources to defense, and notes that the US allocates more to defense
on a per capita basis and as a percent of GNP than Japan, Germany, the
UK, or France. Though perhaps not intended, one possible inference—­
the most likely one, I think—­to be drawn from all that is that if our
allies are devoting less to the common defense than we are, we should
cut back.
We must press (and we will) for greater efforts on the part of
our allies. But I urge you not to abandon our position as leader of the
free world’s military alliance. If we elect to cut the burden we bear to
no more than that borne by any of our allies, we will have become a

follower rather than the leader. We will have said that our alliance is
like a convoy in which the speed of all is set by the speed of the slowest
member. We must continue to lead and continue to spend what is truly
required if we are to maximize the incentive for our allies to hold up
their end. If we fall back, there is, in my opinion, no chance that they
will carry on without us.
We must not look at this issue as making sure that no slacker takes
advantage of the United States. Rather, we must continue to recognize
that the common defense is not only in our own interest—­even if we
should have to bear an extra measure of the load—­but is actually a
matter of the survival of our world. I urge that you not let recitations of
our allies’ performance distract you from the real issue. We will work
on our allies, and have been far more successful during the past thirty
months in pushing them to greater efforts than ever before. But we
must maintain our leadership to be able to do so, or for there to remain
any point in our even trying.
I mentioned that we held a PRC meeting last week on the Defense
budget and program. With the exception of Jim McIntyre, whom I did
not press because I recognize that doing his job requires him to take
a different perspective, every participant at that meeting agreed that a
growth in defense significantly higher than the earlier projected 3 per-
cent per annum is needed. I think that view has also become a consen-
sus of the country at large. It clearly is shared by some key members
of the Congress and other persons of influence. Yet the position rec-
ommended by the OMB staff in this paper is wholly at odds with such
a view. I recognize that the OMB has its own responsibilities to you,
and that they must play the Devil’s advocate. But the contrast between
their position and the vast majority of other responsible voices, my
own included, is very great. Moreover, I remain concerned that we will
be correctly seen as justifying inadequate defense program growth by
using questionable arithmetic.
I feel quite sure, were you to adopt anything like the OMB staff’s
recommended analysis, budget level or program, that all chance for
the ratification of SALT II would vanish. The consequences, political,
military, and international, would be many and damaging. As one of
them, I have no doubt that in the aftermath our requirements for stra-
tegic forces would rise. We would then face the choice between paying
for them by cutting back on our general purpose forces, or increasing
the defense budget, or some combination thereof. Given the unsat-
isfactory nature of our general purpose force balances as outlined
above, the former would, in my opinion, be unacceptably risky. The
latter would face you with a far greater economic problem than the
one before you now.

But the need for a larger defense program—­considerably greater
than suggested by the OMB staff—­is not merely or even principally a
question of the ratification of SALT II. The need in terms of our national
security is, in my judgment, absolute—­and absolutely critical—­in and
of itself. The ratification of SALT II will only prevent an even greater,
and perhaps insurmountable problem.
Let me summarize by noting that the trends in the military balance
between the free and the communist worlds have been deteriorating
for well over a decade. Over the past five years or so, the analysis has
developed a familiar ring: the balance is still all right, but the trend
is unfavorable, and we’ll be in trouble soon if we don’t do something
about it. I’ve said it often enough myself, and meant it. But then when
we get down to deciding on a particular defense budget for a partic-
ular year—­when we come to the hard choices and the actual bottom
line—­we have cut some things out on grounds that delaying for a year
won’t hurt, and others because their immediate worth is not analyti-
cally demonstrable, and we have cut funding in the hopes that offset-
ting efficiencies will somehow be found later. In that process of putting
off the day of reckoning, the point when the balance will finally be no
longer tolerable has been moving closer and closer.
That procedure has gone as far as—­and possibly further than—­is
prudent. It must stop now. We cannot risk even one more year of tem-
porizing. We must face the serious military imbalances that have grown
so large, and resolve to remedy them starting now. The United States
has come to a cross-­roads, and the world is watching.
Harold Brown

165.	 Presidential Directive/NSC–531
Washington, November 15, 1979
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Attorney General
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Transportation
The Secretary of Energy
The Director, Office of Management & Budget
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs & Policy
The Director, Office of Science & Technology Policy
The Administrator, General Services Administration
The Director, Federal Emergency Management Agency
SUBJECT
National Security Telecommunications Policy
I have reviewed the report of the National Communications Sys-
tem on the need for a national security telecommunications policy.2
It is essential to the security of the United States to have telecommu-
nications facilities adequate to satisfy the needs of the nation during
and after any national emergency. This is required in order to gather
intelligence, conduct diplomacy, command and control military forces,
provide continuity of essential functions of government, and to recon-
stitute the political, economic, and social structure of the nation. More-
over, a survivable communications system is a necessary component of
our deterrent posture for defense. In support of national security policy,
the nation’s telecommunications must provide for:
—Connectivity between the National Command Authority and
strategic and other appropriate forces to support flexible execution of
retaliatory strikes during and after an enemy nuclear attack.
—Responsive support for operational control of the armed forces,
even during a protracted nuclear conflict.
—Support of military mobilization in all circumstances.
—Support for the vital functions of worldwide intelligence collec-
tion and diplomatic affairs.
—Continuity of government during and after a nuclear war or nat-
ural disaster.
—Recovery of the nation during and after a nuclear war or natural
disaster.
In order to achieve adequate capabilities for these objectives, the
following principles are established as national security telecommuni-
cations policy:
—National security and continuity of government telecommunica-
tions requirements have priority in restoration of services and facilities
in national emergencies.
—To the maximum extent feasible, interstate common carrier net-
works, including specialized common carriers and domestic satellite
carriers, should be interconnected and capable of interoperation in
emergencies at breakout points outside of likely target areas.
—The National Communications System will make available
information necessary to allow interstate common carriers to locate
backbone facilities, where possible, outside of likely target areas.
—Functionally similar government telecommunications networks
shall be capable of interchange of traffic in emergencies.
—The Federal Emergency Management Agency, in coordination
with the National Communications System, shall plan for emergency
use of industry private line communications that have significant capa-
bilities (e.g., pipeline, railroad, and airline).
—There must be a capability to manage the restoration and recon-
stitution of the national telecommunications system following an
emergency.
—The National Communications System will consult with the Fed-
eral Communications Commission on implementing these principles
and will place substantial reliance upon the private sector for advice
and assistance in achieving national security and preparedness goals.
The National Communications System will amend and revise
these principles as security needs dictate and submit them to the Spe-
cial Coordination Committee for approval, as required by E.O. 12046.
Nothing in this directive amends or contravenes Presidential
Directive/NSC–24.3
Jimmy Carter
3 See Document 40.

166.	 Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom)
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 16, 1979
SUBJECT
Brezhnev Message on the NORAD Alert
I am attaching TASS comments on the missile threat assessment
I believe you will recognize the line as straight from Brezhnev’s
message to the President.3 As I suspected from the tone, it was not a
serious communication but an opening shot in a propaganda cam-
paign designed to take advantage of the President and what the Soviets
believe they know of his attitude toward nuclear weapons. That is why
my proposed reply to Brezhnev was sharp. I still believe it would be
wise to send that version. Otherwise we are going to be in second place
throughout this exchange, and we may see the Soviets succeed in work-
ing up public support in the U.S. and Europe for a major investigation.
Soviet operatives in the U.S. and Europe will undoubtedly try to get the
“no nukes” groups into the streets on this issue. (S)
Marshall Shulman did not like the idea of a reply at all. He would
not give me a comment on the Gates’ version.4 There is no reason, he
argued, to overload the circuits with another protest now.5 (S)
Defense, Komer and his staff, thought the Gates’ version was much
too soft. They were trying to toughen it. (S)
I provide this background so that you may, if you wish, get Brown
to support you on a response that will preempt this Soviet campaign
which could possibly affect adversely the LRTNF decisions next
tion. A stamped notation at the top of the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.”
2 Attached but not printed is an FBIS report entitled “TASS Comments on Recent
Malfunction at NORAD Headquarters,” dated November 15.
3 On November 14, Dobrynin called on Vance to deliver a message from Brezhnev
to Carter: “Reports have been received that recently, due to some erroneous actions, the
US technical systems gave a signal of a nuclear missile attack on the United States which
resulted in putting appropriate means on alert,” and that “according to reports the inci-
dent was reported neither to you nor to the Secretary of Defense, nor to any responsible
officials.” For the full message, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union,
Document 233.
4 Not Found.
5 Brzezinski wrote in the margin: “he is right!!”

167.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, November 20, 1979
SUBJECT
NORAD False Alarm (C)
(TS) On 9 November 1979, a spurious missile attack warning was
inadvertently introduced into the computer system at the NORAD
Combat Operations Center (NCOC) in Cheyenne Mountain. As hap-
pened in this case, the system design properly and automatically
transmits such warnings to appropriate national and regional com-
mand centers in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom.
Understandable concern over this event by those unfamiliar with the
technical and procedural safeguards in our strategic warning system
has raised questions both here and abroad concerning the potential for
precipitous action in a real or simulated crisis. The following report
summarizes the genesis of the false alarm, the actions taken as a result,
and my conclusions regarding the reliability of the warning system.
(TS) The immediate cause of the incident was the inadvertent
introduction of a test attack scenario into the automated NCOC mis-
sile warning system display. To the NCOC operations staff, the attack
indications were not immediately identifiable as spurious when the
display appeared, and they properly initiated alerting and verification
procedures appropriate to indications of a mass missile raid. Concur-
rently, a Threat Assessment Conference (TAC) was called by the Dep-
uty Director for Operations in the National Military Command Center
(NMCC) to evaluate the threat. The TAC is an emergency conference
one level below the Missile Attack Conference; the latter includes the
National Command Authorities. As a result of this conference and the
many quickly identifiable anomalies, the threat was clearly, correctly,
and conclusively evaluated as spurious in less than six minutes of the
first alarm. Because of this evaluation and the earlier recognition of the
many anomalies before the official assessment of the threat as spurious,
a Missile Attack Conference was deemed unnecessary.
right corner of the memorandum: “Harold, This was a serious mistake and should have
been reported to me immediately. J.” Brzezinski sent the memorandum to Carter under
cover of a November 21 memorandum, which Carter initialed. (Ibid.) Odom sent both
Brown’s memorandum to Carter and the covering memorandum to Brzezinski for his
signature under cover of a November 21 memorandum. Aaron wrote on Odom’s memo-
randum to Brzezinski: “ZB, This is an unbelievable fuzzy-­ball. It is not possible to figure
out what happened. I think Harold should be told to give us an explicit statement of what
happened.” (Ibid.)

(TS) Within less than sixty seconds of initial alert, system redun-
dancy and direct paths of critical warning information from sensors to
users had enabled responsible officials at SAC Headquarters and the
NMCC to detect anomalies in warning indications which could not have
been present had an actual mass attack been underway. Inconsistencies
also began to emerge at NORAD Headquarters in about one minute. For
example, Defense Support Program (DSP) satellites and transmission
systems were operating normally but were producing no displays to
corroborate the missile launches depicted on the NORAD warning dis-
play. Similarly, our radar sensors were operating normally, but detected
no SLBM activity even though the NORAD display depicted over 200
SLBMs en route. Assessment of these and other anomalies raised seri-
ous questions regarding the validity of the NORAD-­generated display
and avoided any precipitous reaction involving nuclear forces. (No
nuclear armed aircraft were activated and no increased alert measures
were ordered for any US nuclear forces.)
(TS) However, this incident deserves close attention, causes me
real concern, and requires corrective actions.2 There are two issues. The
first involves the technical and procedural causes of the false alarm,
the scrambling of the air defense aircraft, and the launch of NEACP. As
to the cause, the possibility of recurrence of such an incident has been
eliminated by prohibiting connection of the test computer to the main
system in the future without advance coordination and warning to all
concerned. Action is also underway to review, clarify, and refine proce-
dures governing launch of air defense and command and control air-
craft. In short, mistakes were made and imperfections brought to light
which have been and are being corrected.
(TS) But there is a higher order of concern. It involves the broader
issue of the reliability, responsiveness, and human control over both
our strategic warning system and our nuclear forces. In these terms,
the events of 9 November appear to me to provide, overall, consider-
able reassurance on all counts. Despite a freak incident which severely
stressed our warning and assessment procedures, the systems worked
as designed, the redundancy of warning paths provided the basis for
correct decisions and eliminated the risk of precipitous action. Most
important, the people involved at every level acted responsibly and
with good judgment, based on the information available to them. Under
the demanding situation of conflicting information, a narrow decision-­
time window, and the natural stress accompanying such circumstances,
I believe that the following were amply and creditably demonstrated:
a high degree of responsiveness; safeguards against precipitate action;
2 Carter drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this paragraph.

and a system design that places human judgment in a position to over-
ride computer mistakes.
(TS) My overall assessment of the lessons learned is that the
mechanical, procedural, and human elements of our strategic warn-
ing and control system are fundamentally sound and should be sup-
ported as such in response to questions or assertions to the contrary.
The key point is that the system corrects errors before they cascade in
a dangerous way. However, I do not want to minimize the fact that we
had several errors in the system and we still have considerable work to
do to improve strategic command and control and connectivity across
the board. For example, there are still some bugs to be worked out in
NORAD’s Command and Control Computer System (427M). These and
other problems will receive our priority attention in the days ahead.
(U) In case this incident raises further questions in the Congress,
the media, or among allies, I believe that the following points should
be stressed:
1. At no time were the strategic nuclear forces activated—­the
incident was completely contained within the command and control
community;
2. The malfunction was very quickly identified and acted upon;
3. The overall way in which the system worked after the initial
malfunction is reassuring with respect to the redundancy of indicators,
responsible human judgment and adequacy of safeguards in a very
short decision time frame.3
Harold Brown
3 Brzezinski returned the memorandum to Brown under cover of a November 23
memorandum that reads: “Attached is a copy of your memorandum to the President of
November 20 concerning the NORAD false alarm. Please note the President’s comment
on the first page.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject

168.	 Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth and Jasper Welch of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 23, 1979
SUBJECT
US and Soviet Defense Expenditures—Growth Rates and Cumulative Results
We have continued to examine the consequences of various US
and Soviet total defense growth rates in terms of cumulative defense
expenditures for the two sides in the decade 1980–1990. The following
are some salient points, all referenced to constant dollars.
Background Data
—Currently, the USSR is spending about 50% more on defense
than the US, according to CIA dollar costing.
—During the decade 1968–78, the Soviets spent cumulatively
about 10% more than we on defense; or about 30% more than we if US
Southeast Asia expenditures are extracted as “wasted.”
—On the basis of physical indicators, the CIA projects that the
Soviet defense effort will continue to grow at past rates of about 3% per
annum, at least until the mid-1980s. A steady Soviet defense growth rate
Implications
—If Soviet defense grows at 3% through the 1980s, a US defense
growth rate of 3% will perpetuate the present 50% advantage of the
Soviet side in annual effort. At these growth rates, the Soviets will spend
cumulatively over the decade 50% more than the US, as ­compared to
the past decade in which they spent 10–30% more than the US.
—If the Soviet effort grows at 3% per annum, a US growth rate of
about 5.5% would be required to “duplicate” the experience of the last
decade, i.e., a 30% Soviet advantage in cumulative outlays, not count-
ing US Southeast Asia expenditures. Of course, the absolute magnitude
of this disparity will be larger at the higher spending levels of the 1980s.
A US growth rate of 6% would narrow the cumulative gap to a 25%
Soviet advantage.
the System. Sent for information.

—To equal the cumulative expenditures the Soviets would achieve
at a steady 3% growth rate through the 1980s, the US total defense effort
ing remained constant (zero growth rate) for a decade, it would still
require an average annual US growth rate of 6.5% to match the cumu-
lative Soviet effort because of the gross disparity of the two sides at the
Conclusions
—The outlook for the return on various defense growth rates to the
two sides in terms of cumulative expenditures is dominated by their
vastly different starting positions.
—Even if a 25–30% disparity in total effort is deemed tolerable
during the 1980s (because of Allied contributions, technological advan-
tages, etc.), US growth rates of 5–6% per annum appear to be rock-­
bottom for a competitive US effort when there is no evidence that the
growth of the Soviet effort must taper off.
—A US commitment to growth rates of no more than 3–4% either
means that a roughly 50% Soviet advantage in cumulative effort is tol-
erable (because of vastly increased NATO contributions) or it means we
are convinced that Soviet defense spending must decline significantly
in the next decade.
The purpose of this memo is to assure that you have a good sum-
mary of the relationship between defense growth rates and cumulative
results. While a very significant perspective on the defense growth rates
we must aim for, it is not to be seen in isolation from other factors, e.g.,
Allied efforts, China, technology, and non-­military counters to Soviet
military power.

169.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, December 6, 1979
SUBJECT
Readiness, Mobilization and NIFTY NUGGET
At our meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the FY 1981 budget,2
we discussed readiness, mobilization and Exercise NIFTY NUGGET. I
am not sure that we were precise enough in distinguishing between the
readiness of our forces and our ability to mobilize. This memorandum
summarizes what we learned about the nation’s mobilization capabil-
ity in NIFTY NUGGET. That exercise did not improve our insights into
readiness of our units, nor was it designed to do so.
Readiness is a term the Department of Defense uses to describe a
military unit’s ability to carry out its mission in military operations. The
readiness of each military unit is estimated by comparing the number
of people assigned to a unit, the extent of their training, and the amount
of their equipment with the people, training and equipment required
for that unit in wartime. The term readiness is sometimes used more
broadly to include as well our ability to deploy units and to sustain
them once in combat. In this latter usage readiness overlaps somewhat
with mobilization but, in general, the mobilization process comple-
ments readiness.
In mobilization we would make it possible for active and reserve
units to be deployed rapidly to an area of conflict, and to be sustained
with trained replacements, ammunition, equipment and other sup-
plies. During mobilization, the private sector must augment Defense
resources. Commercial airlines, the shipping and trucking industries,
and current Defense suppliers would be the first to be called upon. If
the emergency continues, the entire nation would become involved in
the mobilization effort.
wrote in the upper right corner of the memorandum: “cc Harold—(a) I should have
been more thoroughly informed earlier (b) when would it be feasible to have another
similar exercise? J.” Brzezinski returned the memorandum to Brown under cover of a
­December  10 memorandum in which he noted: “The President notes that he should
have been more thoroughly informed earlier and asks when it would be feasible to have
another similar exercise.” (Ibid.)
2 Carter met with Brown, Brzezinski, Claytor, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff at Camp
David the morning of November 24. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s
Daily Diary) No record of the discussion was found.

The mobilization process cannot be fully tested because it involves
the private sector. In Exercise NIFTY NUGGET, conducted in October
1978, we made the first attempt since World War II to test, in a com-
bined mobilization exercise, military and civilian agency plans and
procedures. Although many mobilization activities went well, there
were serious shortcomings.
Recognizing the need to correct the shortcomings identified in
NIFTY NUGGET, we established a DoD Mobilization and Deployment
Steering Group chaired by my Under Secretary of Defense for Policy.
The charge to this Steering Group is to provide high-­level direction
and coordination throughout Defense as well as foster military-­civilian
cooperation.
The areas of general weakness discovered in NIFTY NUGGET and
follow-­up activities are:
—Mobilization Planning
—Our planning relied on an assembly of old, unconnected, and
inconsistent emergency orders, policies, regulations and procedures.
For example, you have statutory authority to recall Regular Army and
Air Force retirees, while all other retirees cannot be recalled until after
a declaration of national emergency. In addition, the existing plans
were too general for decentralized execution to proceed without major
blockages.
—We are now preparing a Defense Mobilization Plan that assigns
responsibilities, identifies tasks and provides guidance for my staff, the
Military Departments, and Defense Agencies. That planning activity
will help coordinate and decentralize the mobilization process.
—Deployment Planning
—The exercise identified shortcomings in our planning to trans-
port military units and equipment overseas. For example, we found
that many Army units required more cargo airlift than plans had allo-
cated to them. We also found that airlift was underutilized because we
did not have a good mechanism for adjusting schedules.
—To improve deployment planning we created within existing
manpower a Joint Deployment Agency that reports to the Joint Chiefs
of Staff. This agency is revising deployment planning so that it is more
flexible. It is also more accurately calculating air and sealift require-
ments for unit movement.
—Interagency Coordination
—NIFTY NUGGET showed that we need better coordination
between Defense and other Federal agencies. One example was the
difficulty experienced in the reception and relocation of the large num-
ber of noncombatants assumed to be evacuated from the war zone.
Both Defense and the civil agencies had made incorrect planning

assumptions about the others’ responsibilities and capabilities. As a
result evacuees would not have received adequate care nor would they
have been screened by customs or immigration officials.
—In May, you directed a comprehensive review of mobilization
planning. An interagency group under the National Security Council
was formed. This group has representatives from seventeen Federal
Departments and Agencies. The efforts of the interagency group are
beginning to pay off in the identification and resolution of mobiliza-
tion jurisdictional issues. This group will develop mobilization plan-
ning guidance for all agencies and the means for periodic assessment
of capabilities. In addition, the formation of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in mid-1979 has already had a positive effect on
mobilization planning and coordination at the interagency level.
—Resources
—We also learned that our operation plans need to be adjusted
to take into account current resource limitations. For example, our
plans were developed on the basis that we would have ample stocks
of ammunition and equipment in Europe and that trained manpower
would be available to fill all units to wartime strength and replace casu-
alties. Moreover, as NIFTY NUGGET unfolded, the demand for trans-
port aircraft in the several theaters far exceeded those available. Some
of these resource limitations will be cured in the next several years,
but operation plans should be based on current resource levels and
changed when resource levels are improved.
—We have already informed our Unified Commanders that fewer
cargo aircraft are likely to be available. We are developing revised guid-
ance for military operations planning that would specify resource lim-
itations for major contingencies.
NIFTY NUGGET heightened concerns about critical resource
shortfalls. These deficiencies come to my attention and yours during
our annual program and budget reviews. During the NIFTY NUGGET
exercise these same shortfalls were portrayed for our senior military
and civilian Defense officials for the first time in a simulated crisis.
Because our Five Year Defense Program is designed to provide the
means to respond to a crisis not unlike that simulated in NIFTY NUG-
GET, the exercise has strengthened our desire to achieve the improve-
ments contained in that five year program.
In sum, readiness and mobilization are separate but complemen-
tary elements of military preparedness. We are taking actions necessary
to maintain the readiness levels of our active forces, to improve readi-
ness in our reserve forces, and to continue improving and testing our
mobilization plans and procedures.
Harold Brown

170.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, December 10, 1979
SUBJECT
Taking Stock of the Defense Program
As we approach the final quarter of the Administration’s first term,
I would like to take stock of the major developments in the Depart-
ment of Defense during the past three years. Though we face severe
challenges in the form of military capabilities of potential adversaries,
there have been tremendous accomplishments, of which we, our mili-
tary leadership, and the Nation can be proud. I have summarized some
of the most significant of these below.
Four general developments, which will be remembered long after
the individual decisions are forgotten, stand out from a review of this
period in the Department’s history.
First, and by far the most important, we have without question
entered a new era in the establishment of a strong national defense.
This is not an expression of judgment; it is a finding of fact. The defense
programs of this Administration have reversed the adverse trends and
the neglect characteristic of the prior decade. We have made U.S. stra-
tegic and conventional forces more modern, more ready, and more
capable.
Second, forceful U.S. leadership has been instrumental in revi-
talizing NATO’s defense efforts. Not only have we invested heavily
in upgrading our own NATO contribution, but we have brought our
Allies along in making similar efforts.
The third overriding theme that emerges from a review of the
past three years is that this Administration has been scrupulous in
recognizing cost as an important consideration in all defense deci-
sions, large and small. We are not buying inferior products, but we are
insisting that precious tax resources only be spent for cost-­effective
programs.
randum to Carter under cover of a December 18 memorandum in which he wrote: “The
memorandum is unclassified and provides a very useful recapitulation of an impressive
record, which you initiated with your PD–18 of August 1977, and which we have strongly
backed from here.” (Ibid.)

Fourth, the last three years have been characterized by a willing-
ness on the part of your Administration to take on the responsibility of
actually managing the Department of Defense—­a willingness to sug-
gest innovative solutions to old problems and to make tough decisions
about defense priorities. The result has been not only stronger defense
programs, but also a renewed sense of purpose and confidence within
the Department.
A Program for Strategic Security
When this Administration took office, our Nation’s ability to main-
tain the unambiguous strength of its strategic deterrent was being
eroded by two alarming trends: the first was the massive buildup of
Soviet strategic forces over the past fifteen years, and the second was
the progressive obsolescense of our own strategic forces, most of which
had been deployed in the 1960s.
Ratification of the SALT II Treaty will represent a major step for-
ward in restraining the continued growth of Soviet strategic forces.
Because SALT II reduces superpower competition in its most danger-
ous manifestation, this Treaty is the single most important bilateral
accord of the decade.
To guarantee our strategic deterrent further, this Administration is
implementing a comprehensive program to modernize all three legs of
our strategic triad. Three years ago, we took a hard look at our major
strategic programs, and found serious problems: the B–1 bomber was
vulnerable to the new Soviet air defense systems already under test;
the TRIDENT submarine program was bogged down in schedule and
contract litigation problems; and the proposed design for basing the
M–X missile system in closed trenches was found to be too vulnerable
to single nuclear explosions. We have taken decisive action to correct
these problems.
Our first major action was to substitute the air-­launched cruise
missile for the B–1. Not only is the cruise missile less expensive, but
because of its small size and large numbers, it renders the Soviets’ new
air defense system obsolete even before that system is deployed. We
put the cruise missile under accelerated development, are now well
into the competitive flight test program, and will begin serial produc-
tion in 1980.
Our second major action was to institute management control of
the TRIDENT program. We settled the contract dispute, and the pro-
gram is now back on track. The first submarine was launched this year,
and six more are under construction. The TRIDENT I missile is on
schedule and is now being backfitted on POSEIDON submarines.

Our third major action was the design of a basing mode for the
M–X that would survive a surprise attack by Soviet ICBMs, be ade-
quately verifiable under SALT II, and have a minimal impact on the
environment. After intensive study of alternatives, a mobile M–X based
in a complex of horizontal shelters was selected. The M–X missile is
designed to have military capability equal to that of the Soviets’ SS–18,
even though it is half the size. Full scale development of the missile and
basing system began this year.
In the aggregate, these programs will double the spending on stra-
tegic systems compared to the early ’70s, but will still be far less than
we spent in the early ’60s. In fact, improved technology will allow us to
build the new missiles at less cost (in constant dollars) than the systems
they are replacing.
These strategic programs have also contributed to the develop-
ment of two new weapons to strengthen our theater nuclear forces. The
ground-­launched cruise missile is a derivative of one of the compet-
ing air-­launched cruise missile designs. It will be deployed one year
later than the ALCM. The PERSHING II missile uses the same solid fuel
technology developed for the TRIDENT I missile, which allows each
of them to have greater range than their predecessors. The PERSHING
uses advanced technology terminal guidance systems, which improves
accuracy ten-­fold over previous systems.
Our new systems will enable U.S. strategic forces to maintain their
equivalence in the face of the mounting Soviet challenge. Even more
important, all of these systems have been designed to have high inher-
ent survivability, thus discouraging any hopes the Soviets might have
for a successful disarming surprise attack. In addition, the high sur-
vivability of these new systems will make it possible for us to reduce
significantly the total number of nuclear weapons in our force, while
preserving national security interests, if the Soviet Union can be per-
suaded to make similar reductions in SALT III.
Leading the NATO Alliance
From its very outset, this Administration launched several major
initiatives to strengthen NATO’s deterrent and defense capabilities,
which had languished during and after the Vietnam conflict. At the
May 1977 NATO Summit in London, you called for a stepped-­up long
term effort, implementation of selected short term readiness measures,
and greater armaments collaboration.
Within a year, NATO heads of government personally endorsed at
a May 1978 Washington Summit a bold Long Term Defense Program
backed up by pledges of 3% real annual growth in defense spending.

This far-­reaching step reflected common Allied recognition that only
through greater cooperation and mutual burdensharing could NATO
meet the security challenges of the 1980s.
Our efforts are also breathing new life into collaborative design
and production of new weapons such as the F–16, ROLAND, 120 mm
tank gun, and the Multiple Launch Rocket System. The December 1978
agreement on joint funding and operation of a $2 billion NATO air-
borne early warning fleet is especially noteworthy. The U.S. has also
proposed an innovative concept of jointly developing “families” of
new systems, where Europe would take the lead in some and North
­America in others.
Under U.S. leadership, the Alliance is spurring the modernization
of NATO’s theater nuclear forces, through a proposed force of longer
range theater ballistic and cruise missiles. Adoption of this program by
NATO will close an emerging and serious gap in the Alliance’s spec-
trum of deterrence.
In addition, the U.S. is greatly accelerating its ability to reinforce
Western Europe with massive ground and air forces in a crisis. We are
prepositioning additional U.S. equipment, but counting on our Euro-
pean allies to provide adequate facilities and host nation logistic sup-
port, as well as the bulk of the ground and air forces that would engage
in a conflict in Europe. This “transatlantic bargain” will markedly
enhance NATO’s military posture.
Confidence in Our Conventional Forces
Your Administration has taken vigorous measures to modernize
our conventional forces, which experienced a severe decline in capa-
bilities during the prior decade. We have laid particular stress upon
achieving a higher state of readiness, largely through overcoming
maintenance backlogs and increasing initial supply stocks.
Rapid Deployment Forces. We are systematically enhancing our
ability to respond rapidly to non-NATO contingencies wherever
required by our treaty commitments, or in response to requests from
friends and allies. These rapid deployment forces can range in size
from a few ships or air squadrons to formations as large as 100,000
men, together with their support. We are giving priority at present to
the Middle East and Persian Gulf contingencies, but our forces stand
ready for rapid deployment to any region of strategic significance, like
the Caribbean.
We are taking two specific initiatives to help us respond in a crisis
outside of Europe. The first is the development and production of a
new fleet of large cargo aircraft with intercontinental range; the second

is the design and procurement of a force of Maritime Prepositioning
Ships that will carry heavy equipment and supplies for three Marine
Corps brigades. These aircraft and ships will permit us to move combat
forces over vast distances quickly enough to deter conflict or, failing
that, to turn the tide of battle in our favor.
Ground Forces. We have substantially increased our ability to rein-
force NATO. Primarily by prepositioning equipment, we will be able by
1984 to double our ground forces in Europe, and triple our air forces,
in less than two weeks. Our ground forces now include more tank and
infantry battalions, and more artillery tubes—­an augmentation that
will continue through the next several years.
We have enhanced readiness and combat endurance by improving
the Reserve Components. Some reserve personnel are now equipped
with new equipment and all reservists are assigned to units structured
to complement and provide needed depth to our active forces.
The opening of a new National Training Center by the Army, and
the introduction of new equipment—XM–1 tanks, armored personnel
carriers, helicopters, and better artillery and air defense weapons—­
have, together with the contributions of our allies, strengthened our
ability to meet any threat.
Naval Forces. We are emphasizing U.S. naval forces that are able
to maintain the sea lanes to Europe, protect other essential sea lines of
communications, project force ashore, and support allied forces on the
flanks of Europe, in the Western Pacific, and elsewhere—­in the face of
Soviet challenge. To accomplish these missions we have procured mod-
ern, guided-­missile equipped surface ships, such as the DDG–47 class;
we have begun deployment of ship-, air- and submarine-­launched
HARPOON cruise missiles; and we have continued improvement of
our anti-­submarine warfare capability with actions such as procure-
ment of new towed array sonar ships and development of a new class
of attack submarines. Equally important to our strength at sea have
been our success in reducing the chronic backlog of ship overhauls,
and our resolution of $2.7 billion in long-­standing shipbuilding claim
disputes, some dating as far back as the 1960s.
Air Forces. Our program for the FY 80–84 period will field an active
Air Force of 26 fighter and attack wings and will modernize—­and in
some cases enlarge—­the active and reserve components of Air Force,
Navy, and Marine Corps tactical aviation. This constitutes the first full-­
scale modernization of U.S. tactical air forces since the 1960s.
Over the next few years we will procure about 1700 fighter, attack,
electronic warfare, surveillance and support aircraft. This will include
the first KC–10s, which will be delivered in 1981, and allow very long
range deployments of tactical air forces.

We have maximized the cost/effectiveness of our aircraft pro-
curement programs by using a mix of high and low cost aircraft—­each
possessing good mission performance characteristics. Procurement
of lower cost alternatives such as the A–10 and F–16 allows our force
modernization to proceed, while purchase of F–15s, F–14s, dual pur-
pose F/A–18s, and E–3As improves our capability to maintain air
superiority.
Managing the Department and its Resources
Departmental Reorganization and Resource Management. Upon assum-
ing office, I concluded there were significant obstructions to efficient
management of the Department: headquarters were too large, lines of
authority were confused, and there was a clear need to integrate bet-
ter some activities. To correct these problems, we initiated a number of
structural changes, which have:
—Eliminated, since January 1977, five Assistant Secretary and
approximately 31,000 other civilian positions, reduced the size of
Departmental headquarters staffs by approximately 20%, and closed
or substantially reduced operations at a number of installations. Esti-
mated annual savings from these actions alone are over $375 million.
—Strengthened policy and planning functions (through, for exam-
ple, the creation of an Under Secretary for Policy) to insure that individ-
ual, detailed decisions on force structure and weapons will support our
overall national security objectives.
—Consolidated support-­related activities (under a single Assistant
Secretary for Manpower, Reserve Affairs and Logistics) to provide inte-
grated direction of DoD manpower and material resources.
—Strengthened the programming and budgeting process (through,
among other innovations, the establishment of the Defense Resources
Board) to provide a more integrated approach to resource allocation
decisions and to streamline the budget decision process.
Weapons Acquisition Management. Procedures have been revised to
insure consideration of logistic and manpower planning requirements
at the same time that performance objectives are addressed. As a result,
some high-­rate production decisions have been deferred until support
questions have been resolved—­resulting in substantial cost savings.
We have also required a more precise understanding of manpower and
skill-­level requirements related to the introduction of new systems—­
resulting in additional economies. This increased attention to support
problems before a system is fully operational is helping avoid readiness
and manning problems like those experienced during the 1960s.

In related actions, to assure the highest return for each dollar
spent, we are also pursuing such actions as: increased contracting out,
wage board pay reform, improved depot-­level maintenance efficiency,
realignment of the material distribution system, and increased procure-
ment of commercial products (where these are less expensive than, and
as suitable as, those built to military specification).
Combatting Fraud and Waste. The Department’s steering group on
combatting fraud, waste, and mismanagement has programs under
active review to avoid computer fraud, provide audit and inspec-
tion safeguards, and investigate allegations of fraud. Project teams
are addressing other areas that need improvement, such as property
accountability, and auditor and investigator training.
Energy Conservation. The Department of Defense has aggressively
pursued energy conservation through a restructured energy manage-
ment program. Since the base year of 1975, energy use has been reduced
almost nine percent; in FY 78 alone, DoD’s energy consumption was
2.2 percent less than the year before. To maintain combat readiness, we
are making greater use of simulators and increasing the fuel efficiency
of our weapons systems. To provide for future needs, we are arranging
to procure more than 500,000 barrels of shale oil for testing in military
equipment, and carefully examining in cooperation with DoE the use
and supply of synthetic fuels.
Personnel Resources. A major accomplishment of the Department of
Defense since 1977 has been the increased use of women in the uni-
formed services, both in terms of numbers of women serving and in the
expanded occupational fields and career opportunities open to women.
In FY 76 women constituted 5% of total military strength. Women today
are 7% of our uniformed workforce and, as a direct result of our policy
initiatives, will be 11% of our military population in FY 83. Parallel suc-
cesses have been achieved in the civilian workforce.
As one example of our commitment to assuring equal opportunity,
we have revitalized the Department’s equal opportunity management
training program for race relations instructors. We are now providing
the kind of equal opportunity specialists that our civilian managers and
military commanders need to pursue dynamic, successful programs.
Planning for the Future
It is clear that 1980 will be a watershed year for U.S. national secu-
rity programs. Stimulated by the national debate on SALT II and by
events abroad, Americans are recognizing that we must pay greater
attention to our military capabilities if we are to play a constructive and
stabilizing role in the international arena. The FY 1981 defense budget
and the five year program for FY 81–85 have been carefully developed

to accomplish this. Generally, the program has been designed to assure
four major objectives:
—That our strategic nuclear forces will be essentially equivalent to
those of the Soviet Union.
—That the military balance between NATO and the Warsaw Pact
will continue to deter the outbreak of war—­conventional or ­nuclear—­in
Europe.
—That our ability to come quickly to the aid of friends and allies
around the globe will be clear.
—That our Navy will continue to be the most powerful on the seas.
Since taking office, this Administration has deliberately and
steadily achieved increases in defense resources. But three years is
not sufficient time to arrest and reverse the cumulative result of fif-
teen years of intense Soviet investment in military capability, during a
period that American investment declined. The budget and five year
defense program we will submit to the Congress next January will pro-
vide for a real and substantial growth in defense capabilities over a
sustained period. It will deal directly and effectively with a problem
that the Nation has put off for over a decade.
I have summarized above some of the most significant initiatives
we have undertaken in the Department of Defense during your first
term. The list by no means includes all of the important developments,
but is intended to identify the general areas where we have focused our
attention and the successes we have achieved thus far.
The Department of Defense has shown measured and impressive
progress during the past three years. Our management reforms have
resulted in a more efficient organization that is more responsive to our
Nation’s defense needs. We have begun a thorough modernization of
our strategic and conventional programs, which has already led to a
demonstrable increase in the military strength of the U.S.
I look forward to building on this solid foundation.
Harold Brown

171.	 Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 21, 1979
SUBJECT
NORAD Computer System Failure
I have attached at Tab A a MFR from the JCS which explains what
happened during the NORAD 18-­minute failure on December 19th.
The warning system worked during the 18 minutes, DSP East and
West. The information went directly to SAC and the NMCC. The major
loss was speed in processing the information, a delay of approximately
two minutes.
Tab A
Memorandum for the Record2
Washington, December 20, 1979
SUBJECT
NORAD Computer System Failure (U)
tem experienced an eighteen minute failure which required NORAD to
manually process missile warning information.
2. (S) There are two primary computers which process missile
warning communications in and out of NORAD. They are backed up
by a third, older computer, called the Digital Information Processor
(DIP). At the time of the failure, one primary computer was online and
in use; one was undergoing program testing and was not committed
to automatic take over. The DIP was undergoing corrective mainte-
nance and was not operational. Under those conditions, when the pri-
mary computer failed (cause unknown) it was necessary for NORAD
information.
2 Secret. Prepared by Brigadier General George Stotser, NMCC Deputy Director for
Operations.

to bring up the other computer manually. This action required eigh-
teen minutes.
3. (S) SAC, the NMCC and the ANMCC all receive information
directly from DSP ground processing stations. This information is pro-
cessed in computers at those three locations as soon as it is available.
Washington principals, during the NORAD system outage, would have
received missile warning information from DSP–E and DSP–W with-
out delay. All FSS–7 SLBM radar information and NORAD assessments
would have been delayed by the manual processing time (voice tell) of
approximately two minutes.
George R. Stotser
Brigadier General, USA
Deputy Director for
Operations (NMCC)
172.	 Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Claytor)
to President Carter1
Washington, January 9, 1980
SUBJECT
Civil Defense Program Funding (U)
(U) In accordance with your instructions that my Department and
the National Security Council exercise oversight responsibility for Civil
Defense programs and policies, my staff took part in the Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency’s formulation of the FY81 Civil Defense
program. Our aim throughout was to insure that the program meets
the letter and intent of your Civil Defense policy (PD–41).2
(C) We have examined the details of FEMA’s proposed FY81 pro-
gram and concur with FEMA Director John Macy’s assessment that it
represents a start on the first year of a seven year effort and, as such,
is minimally consistent with your policy as defined in PD–41. Defense
had budgeted for a start in FY80, but Congressional reductions have
precluded that course. We would have preferred a larger level of effort
in FY81, but recognize the constraints of fiscal reality.
Welch, Box 210, Civil Defense. Secret.
2 See Document 91.

(S) Nevertheless, we must point out that this is the second consec-
utive year in which a civil defense budget ceiling has been imposed
which calls into question realistic achievement of a credible capability
for crisis relocation of our civil population.
that such a credible capability for crisis relocation was needed, and that
when achieved, it would enhance deterrence and stability, contribute
to favorable perceptions of the Soviet-American strategic balance, and
reduce our susceptibility to Soviet coercion in time of crisis. In 1978, we
developed a specific program to realize such a capability. This program,
known as D-Prime, called for a crisis relocation capability to enhance
population survival, in-­place fallout protection, and emergency oper-
ating centers in host areas. During the examination of a range of costs
to implement each of the candidate programs, we estimated that such
a capability could be achieved over a five to seven year period with an
average annual funding of $230 million, an initial outlay of $136 million
and progressively greater levels of funding in the outyears.
(S) We still believe that it is necessary to acquire a nationwide cri-
sis relocation capability at the earliest practical date, and that program
D-­prime is the surest and most cost-­effective way to meet the require-
ments of your policy. This is the program that FEMA will begin to
implement in FY81. If, however, annual funding for FY82 and beyond
continues to be held to the previous year’s level, a credible capability
for crisis relocation on the scale necessary to achieve the objectives of
PD–41 may never be attained. This issue should be resolved before the
FY81 budget hearings.
W. Graham Claytor, Jr.
3 See the attachment to Document 72.

173.	 Memorandum From Victor Utgoff of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 8, 1980
SUBJECT
M–X Basing Vulnerability
In response to your question as to which is less vulnerable—­the
racetrack or multiple holes—I think the sheltered road mobile basing
system is less vulnerable overall, because it can be made as resistant to
nuclear attacks as the multiple holes system, but is far less vulnerable
to loss of missile location security.
Making the horizontal shelters of the road mobile system as resis-
tant to nuclear attack as the vertical holes does cost more for several
reasons.
First, the portions of any shelter that are exposed to the over-­
pressures produced by a nuclear blast must be particularly strong,
and much more area is exposed to blast overpressure by the horizontal
shelter.
Second, the suspension system used to isolate the missile from
the ground motion associated with the blast is more complex for the
horizontal shelter, and more “rattle space” is required—­resulting in a
bigger shelter.
The purpose of hardening the MX shelters is to make sure the Sovi-
ets would not find it advantageous to go to warhead placements and
yields that would allow them to kill more than one shelter with a single
weapon. Given this purpose, we have the choice of building somewhat
softer shelters if we space them farther apart. In fact, at this point it
appears that minimizing the cost of achieving an equally survivable
MX basing system using horizontal shelters will mean going to some-
what softer but more widely spaced shelters than we would have used
had we elected to go with the multiple hole system.2
stamped notation indicates Brzezinski saw the memorandum.
2 Attached but not printed is a January 28 Evening Report from the NSC Defense
Policy Coordination Cluster to Brzezinski. Next to the section on the M–X missile, Brzez-
inski wrote: “Which is less vulnerable: the ‘race track’ or the multiple holes?”

174.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 16, 1980
SUBJECT
Defense Production Priorities (U)
Deputy Secretary Claytor has requested (Tab B) that you designate
the XM–1 tank and the MX and PERSHING II missiles as “Programs of
Highest National Priority” to ensure that they are given priority over
other DOD and all commercial programs in the competition for compo-
nents, materials and other resources.2 (U)
I support Claytor’s request:
—Essentially all DOD programs already enjoy priority over all
commercial programs by virtue of the Defense Production Act of 1950;
the action Claytor recommends simply realigns priorities among the
various defense programs. (U)
—DOD, DOE, Commerce and the Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency (FEMA) have surveyed each of the affected prime and
sub-­contractors and suppliers and found that the action will not
adversely affect any member of the production community, and that it
will, indeed, help prevent production slippages. (U)
—DOD, DOE, Commerce and FEMA also assure me that the action
will have no adverse impact on the economy. (U)
—And I feel that the signals you would send to the Congress, the
public and our NATO allies by the action would have a positive polit-
ical impact. (C)
There are currently ten other DOD programs on the “Highest
National Priority” list: three sensitive programs concerning space
reconnaissance, anti-­submarine warfare and airframe design; the
Cruise Missile; TRIDENT; the Fleet Ballistic Missile program; two anti-­
ballistic missile programs; MINUTEMAN III; and the M–60 tank.3 DOD
is reviewing the list (especially the last five programs, above) and will
Carter wrote: “Zbig. J.” Stebbins and Welch sent the memorandum to Brzezinski for his
signature under cover of a February 15 memorandum in which they noted: “The package
was delayed while we sought interagency advice on the DOD request, since it had the
potential to affect the programs of other agencies.” (Ibid.)
2 Carter underlined “XM–1 tank,” “MX,” and “Pershing II missiles” in this sentence.
3 Carter underlined “space reconnaissance,” “anti-­submarine warfare,” “Cruise
Missile,” and “TRIDENT” in this sentence.

come to you later this year with recommended adjustments as appro-
Lastly, your reply to Claytor’s request provides an opportunity
for you to lend emphasis to the development of our rapid deployment
capabilities. I suggest that you task DOD to consider ways to minimize
delays in production of the new CX cargo aircraft—­to include assign-
ment of the “Highest Priority” and, perhaps, streamlined management
procedures. Since no aircraft production program has yet been assigned
the “Highest Priority,” DOD, Commerce and FEMA will have to do
some thinking to find ways to smooth the production process.4 (C)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the memo at Tab A that grants Claytor’s request and
directs consideration of ways to minimize CX production delays.5 (U)
Tab B
Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Claytor) to
President Carter6
Washington, January 10, 1980
SUBJECT
Request for Presidential Approval of the XM–1 Tank, PERSHING II and M–X Mis-
sile Systems as Programs of Highest National Priority
(U) Highest priority for industrial resources is essential to meet
development/procurement and deployment schedules for the above
systems.
(U) Your approval will allow assignment of a Brick-Bat (DX) indus-
trial priority rating to our contracts with industry. This priority will
assure the three weapon systems will receive materials, components
and other resources first in the event of conflict with other Defense or
commercial contracts.
4 Carter drew a question mark in the right margin next to this paragraph.
5 Tab A was not attached. Carter approved the recommendation and wrote at the
bottom of the memorandum: “Retype memo, J.” In a February 19 memorandum to
Brown, Carter wrote: “I approve your request to assign the highest national priority to
the XM–1 tank and MX and PERSHING II missile programs. Additionally, I would like
you to consider ways to minimize delays in production of the XC cargo aircraft. Please
provide me your recommendations as soon as possible.” (Carter Library, National Secu-
6 Secret. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the memorandum.

(C) Industrial experience has shown lengthy leadtimes for many
materials and components utilized on these systems. Failure to apply
this highest priority rating to these programs could make it necessary
to resolve individual resource bottlenecks and conflicts on a case-­by-­
case basis, possibly causing costly delays. Further, elevation of their
priority would serve as a signal of U.S. intent and resolve with respect
to the defense of our NATO allies. Additional pertinent information is
set forth in Enclosure 1.7
(U) I recommend your approval of the three systems as programs
of Highest National Priority. Enclosure 28 contains the text of a sug-
gested reply.
W. Graham Claytor, Jr.
7 Attached but not printed are additional details about the manufacture of the XM
tank as well as the MX and PERSHING II missiles.
8 Attached but not printed is a draft reply.
175.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 26, 1980
SUBJECT
The Nuclear Weapons Stockpile (U) (Annual Update)
DOD and DOE have submitted their recommended FY 1980–82
Nuclear Weapons Stockpile Plan (Tab B)2 for your approval. The Plan
consists of suggested ceiling levels for each of the sixty-­one types of
nuclear warheads held in the stockpile, and, for information only,
­projected levels for each of the warheads for the extended period FY
For the period FY 1980–82, there are no changes of any consequence
from last year’s projections:
NSC–56. Top Secret; Formerly Restricted Data. Sent for action. The date is handwritten.
2 Not found attached.

—The continuing success of the TRIDENT warhead production
line, coupled with DOD’s decision to keep a seventeenth POSEIDON
boat on-­line during the 1980s, will permit earlier retirement of POLARIS
warheads than was anticipated last year. (S/RD)
—Production, technical or fiscal problems have caused some
delays in modernizing the MINUTEMAN III warheads, as well as cer-
tain strategic and tactical bombs, tactical missile warheads, and artil-
lery shells, but the delays do not appear excessive and the “get well”
schedules seem adequate. (S/RD)
—[3 lines not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified]
For the extended period FY 1983–87, however, there are some fairly
substantial changes over last year’s projection. [4 lines not declassified]
—DOD and DOE display a sizeable number of older strategic and
tactical bombs in the Stockpile after their modernized replacements
—New, approved warheads begin to appear in the inventory,
including MX, ALCM, GLCM, and PERSHING II. (S/RD)
—New systems that have not been approved also appear, includ-
ing SLCM, HARPOON, the new 155mm artillery projectile, and the
Navy’s Standard Missile II. (S/RD)
Ordinarily, we would pay scant attention to the out-­year projec-
and (2) they are unconstrained, and, therefore, probably inflated. How-
ever, this year for the first time the out-­year projections have had near-­
term impacts: DOE sought FY 1981 funding to begin reactivating the
N-­reactor/PUREX plutonium production facility because they felt they
would not have enough special nuclear materials (SNM) to build all the
weapons in the out-­year projections. OMB turned down DOE’s initial
funding request, and, although DOD lent its support to the request,
DOE did not appeal the OMB decision. However, since the issue was
raised, it will undoubtedly be a subject of debate during the forthcom-
ing authorization hearings. (The agreed interagency position on this
matter is that we have sufficient SNM for the next five years, that pro-
jections beyond five years are difficult to make, but the Administra-
tion has long-­term SNM requirements under review and will act if and
when necessary.) (S/RD)
The lack of coordination between DOD and DOE on the SNM issue
and the fact that the White House was not drawn into the matter until
after the FY 1981 Budget was finalized, are the latest manifestations of
the rather serious communications problem that exists between DOD
and DOE on nuclear-­related programs. We have held informal discus-
sions with DOD, DOE, JCS, OSTP and OMB in an effort to find ways to

get decision makers to focus on problems like SNM availability ratio-
nally and sufficiently early to impact the budget process. Two reme-
dial steps have been taken: (1) DOD and DOE have begun an extensive
joint examination of the warhead acquisition process and of warhead
requirements through FY 2000; and (2) DOD and DOE have agreed
informally to submit next year’s Stockpile Memorandum to you for
approval by September 1, 1980. NSC and OMB will closely monitor the
former and ensure compliance with the latter. We are pursuing further
remedial steps, with OMB’s collaboration, to ensure better procedures
in formulating the FY 1982 budget. (S/RD)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve my signing the Presidential Directive at Tab A3
to future policy and programming decisions; (2) notes but does not
uation of standard production, retirement, custodial and, transfer
­procedures for nuclear weapons and parts; and (4) directs DOD and
DOE to submit the FY 1981–83 Stockpile Plan for your approval not
3 Not found attached. See Document 176.
4 Carter underlined “does not approve,” drew a line to the bottom of the memoran-
dum, and wrote “J.”
5 Carter approved the recommendation.

176.	 Presidential Directive/NSC–561
Washington, February 27, 1980
SUBJECT
FY 1980–1982 Nuclear Weapons Stockpile (U)
The proposed Nuclear Weapons Stockpile Plan for FY 1980–1982 is
approved subject to future policy and program/budget decisions. The
stockpile levels represent authorized ceilings, not to be exceeded except
as provided below or otherwise approved by me. (U)
For the period FY 1980–82, the following are authorized:
—The production and retirement of those quantities of nuclear
warheads and nuclear warhead parts necessary to achieve and main-
tain the approved stockpile, as well as the production of additional
parts of nuclear weapons necessary for transfer to the United Kingdom
pursuant to the Agreement for Cooperation. (S/FRD)
—DOE, in coordination with DOD, to initiate production of such
long lead time nuclear warhead parts as may be necessary to prepare
for FY 1983–84 production of warheads required to support approved
DOD forces. (This does not apply to production of parts for the W80–0,
W81 or W82 warheads.) (S/FRD)
—DOE to produce and transfer to DOD parts of nuclear weapons,
not containing special nuclear materials, as may be agreed by DOE and
DOE. These parts may be used in nuclear weapons, training programs,
research and development, and production. (U)
—DOE, in coordination with DOD, to make such changes in the
production and/or retirement of nuclear warheads during FY 1980–82
as may be necessary to reflect changes in DOE materiel availabilities,
production/retirement capabilities, or quality assurance requirements;
or as necessary to reflect changes as may be required by DOD because
of adjustments in military requirements or delivery assets, provided the
changes do not exceed plus or minus 10 percent in each year in strate-
gic offensive, strategic defensive, tactical, or fleet warhead totals. (Any
such changes which indicate a significant shift in defense requirements
or DOE production capabilities will be submitted to me for approval.)
—DOD to designate as retired and, in coordination with DOE, to
retain custody of nuclear warheads for a period of up to 18 months
from the designation date, if necessary to reduce DOE requirements for
weapons storage during periods of high production workloads at DOE
assembly facilities. (C)
The FY 1983–1987 Stockpile Projection which was submitted with
to reflect policy and programming decisions and used as the point of
departure for the development of future Stockpile Plans. (U)
1988 Stockpile Projection should be submitted to me for approval not
budget deliberations. (U)
Jimmy Carter
2 Carter underlined the phrase “has been noted” and wrote in the right margin next
to it: “noted only.”
177.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Mobilization Planning (U)
I have indicated to you several times over the past year that US
mobilization planning has been in a state of considerable disarray for
many years, due primarily to a lack of authoritative planning guidance
and to poor interagency communication. (S)
Last summer, I commissioned an interagency mobilization plan-
ning study under NSC sponsorship and assigned it three ambitious
objectives: (1) develop draft Presidential guidance that will ensure con-
sistency and coordination in all US civil and military mobilization plan-
ning; (2) establish a process for assessing our mobilization potential
top of the memorandum Carter wrote: “Zbig. C.”

and for rectifying any deficiencies in it; and (3) achieve mobilization
planning commonality with our allies. (C)
The first objective and part of the second have now been completed:
—The interagency mobilization planning structure that lay dor-
mant for thirty-­five years has now been substantially revitalized. (In the
process, several very sticky, long-­standing interagency jurisdictional
disputes that, for example, plagued the DOD/FEMA NIFTY NUGGET
large-­scale mobilization exercise last year, were settled.) (S)
—Fifty-­six major Presidentially-­directed emergency actions that
will determine the extent of US mobilization in a crisis have been iden-
tified (e.g., evacuate citizens abroad, surge defense production, assume
control of civil telecommunications, etc.), as have the agencies respon-
sible for planning the execution of each of the 56 actions and the Presi-
dential authorities required to actually carry them out (e.g., Presidential
Proclamation, declaration of National Emergency, etc.). (C)
—Additionally, 29 major peacetime preparedness activities that
contribute directly to our ability to take the 56 major emergency actions
have been identified (e.g., prepare military contigency plans, pre-­
identify wartime civilian and military personnel requirements, stock-
pile critical materials, etc.), along with the agencies responsible for the
activities. (C)
—And five politically bland but broad, representative crisis scenar-
ios have been developed to serve as the basis for the creation of plans
by the responsible agencies for the 56 emergency and 29 preparedness
actions. (C)
We are now ready to begin the next phase of the NSC Study effort:
the actual development of plans for the emergency and preparedness
actions, plus a comprehensive assessment of our mobilization poten-
tial. For at least two reasons, I feel it is important that you endorse the
interagency effort at this time: (1) the mobilization community has been
essentially ignored for three decades and badly needs a shot-­in-­the-­arm
to boost its morale and productivity; and (2) the planning resources that
the departments and agencies will have to commit to the next phase of
the effort are quite substantial. (C)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve my signing the Presidential Directive at Tab A,
which would:
—Recognize the fundamental importance of mobilization plan-
ning and your support for it;
—Endorse the NSC Mobilization Study effort to date and direct
that it be used as the principal basis for future US mobilization plan-
ning, subject to whatever changes are necessary to ensure its continued
relevance;

—Direct FEMA to oversee the drafting of plans for the 56 emer-
gency and 29 preparedness actions against the five scenarios, but with
enough flexibility built into the plans to permit their use over a wider
range of scenarios where possible. (The plans would be based on funds,
personnel and other physical resources expected to be available in FY
1980);
—Direct NSC to oversee the assessment of the US mobilization
potential. This will involve: (1) conducting a net assessment of US/
Soviet and, eventually, NATO/Warsaw Pact mobilization capabilities;
and (2) assessing the “goodness” of FEMA’s planning effort, including
tailoring future DOD and FEMA mobilization exercises (e.g., NIFTY
NUGGET II) to test various aspects of FEMA’s plans. (S)
State, Treasury, Defense, Justice, Interior, Agriculture, Commerce,
Labor, HEW, HUD, Transportation, Energy, OMB, JCS, CIA, OSTP,
GSA, Post Office, FCC, Selective Service and FEMA concur. This is a
significant initiative: your Administration will be the first since World
War II to conduct a comprehensive mobilization planning effort at the
highest level of government.2 (U)
Tab A
Presidential Directive/NSC–573
Washington, March 3, 1980
TO
2 Carter approved the recommendation and initialed the bottom of the memorandum.
3 Confidential. Carter wrote in the upper right corner of the directive: “ok, JC.”
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Attorney General
The Secretary of Interior
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Labor
The Secretary of Health, Education
and Welfare
The Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development
The Secretary of Transportation
The Secretary of Energy
The Director, Office of Management
and Budget
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Director, Office of Science and
Technology Policy
The Administrator of General Services
The Postmaster General
The Chairman, Federal Communica-
tions Commission
The Director, Selective Service System
The Director, Federal Emergency
Management Agency

SUBJECT
Mobilization Planning (U)
I. Policy. It is of fundamental importance to the national security
that the United States maintain the capability to mobilize its national
resources in a timely and efficient manner in order to respond effec-
tively to crises that might arise. (U)
Such maintenance requires consistency and coordination within
the United States government in all civil and military mobilization
planning activities. Accordingly, the President directs: (1) that the
broadly-­defined crisis scenarios, emergency actions and preparedness
activities developed in the NSC Mobilization Study are to serve as the
principal basis for future US civil and military mobilization planning;4
and (2) that all such future planning is to be fully coordinated among
all interested Federal agencies. (U)
II. Implementation. The Director of the Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency (FEMA) will ensure that all existing and pending Exec-
utive Orders pertaining to mobilization are made consistent with this
directive. (U)
Implementation plans for each emergency action identified in the
NSC Mobilization Study will be developed by the designated responsi-
ble and coordinating agencies based on the funds, personnel and other
physical resources expected to be available in FY 1980. The implemen-
tation plans should be based on the NSC Mobilization Study crisis
scenarios, but should also be sufficiently flexible to facilitate their use
over a wider range of scenarios where possible. The Director of FEMA
will arbitrate among the responsible and coordinating agencies wher-
ever necessary to eliminate overlap among individual implementation
plans, to conserve resources, and to resolve any jurisdictional conflicts.
The implementation plans pertaining to Continuity of Government,
the Selective Service System, and US Telecommunications Facilities
are to reflect the policies and guidance resulting from the ongoing
Presidentially-­directed studies in these areas. (C)
The Director of FEMA will combine the completed individual
implementation plans into a Federal Master Mobilization Plan and
ensure that necessary standby legislation is drafted and execution pro-
cedures are promulgated to facilitate use of the plan during crises. The
initial Master Plan should be provided to the Assistant to the President
for National Security Affairs for NSC review by June 1, 1980. (U)
The following tasks are to be added to the NSC Mobilization Study
charter:
4 Not found.

—­with the Intelligence Community, provide the Assistant to the
President for National Security Affairs by April 1, 1980 terms of ref-
erence for a comprehensive comparison of NATO and Warsaw Pact
mobilization capabilities and historical levels of effort. (C)
—­provide the Assistant to the President for National Security
Affairs by June 1, 1980 a detailed plan for assessing the adequacy of
the newly developed Federal Master Mobilization Plan. To assist in the
assessment and to help refine the Master Plan, the Secretary of Defense
and the Director of FEMA are to ensure that, to the maximum extent
practical, mobilization-­type exercises over the next few years (e.g.,
NIFTY NUGGET/REX) are designed, conducted, and evaluated in a
manner that supports the NSC Study. (C)
—­adjust the crisis scenarios, emergency actions, and prepared-
ness activities as necessary during development of the Master Plan
to ensure their continued relevance and appropriateness; and seek
ways to improve the mobilization planning and implementation
­processes. (U)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
178.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 7, 1980
SUBJECT
Contingency Plans for Increased Strategic Capability (U)
(S) Last year’s NIE raised the prospect that the Soviets could pull
ahead of us in warheads in the early 1980’s.2 That conclusion was partly
because of inconsistent rules for counting U.S. and Soviet SSBNs on
sea trials. Furthermore, in the event Soviet deployments of highly frac-
tionated SLBMs and ICBMs have progressed more slowly than the NIE
predicted, [1 line not declassified] It now appears unlikely that we will
lose our lead in warheads in the early 1980’s. Nonetheless, I share your
belief that we must be prepared to take further actions. If SALT II col-
lapses, our planned forces may be inadequate, particularly in the mid-
1980’s before MX can be deployed in numbers.
2 See Document 111.

(S) My staff has examined a number of options, as illustrated by
the attached table. The shortest and cheapest path to a real increase
in our strategic and theater nuclear capabilities would be to accelerate
deployment of cruise missiles—ALCM, GLCM, and perhaps SLCM.
[2 lines not declassified] We have also examined the option of converting
POLARIS submarines to SLCM launchers with 80 or more per boat. It is
not necessary to choose among ALCM, GLCM, or SLCM now, however,
in part because these missiles share so many components. My staff is
examining actions we can take to cut the lead time for increasing pro-
duction; I will let you know our plans in the near future.
(SRD) One other problem that could limit our response to a break-
down in SALT is the supply of special nuclear material. According to
sified] Therefore, if we want to prepare for this contingency, we should
soon increase production of special nuclear material.
Harold Brown
3 For the final version, see the attachment to Document 184.

Attachment

Table Prepared in the Department of Defense4
Washington, undated
Table 1. Summary of Quick Fix Options
WHDS
Cost (FY 81 $M)
Option
IOC
FOC
FOC
Acquisition
Annual
O&S
Comments
100 MN III missiles in
silos
Little increase in survivable
capability.
Full bomber weapon
load-­out
Poses operational problems
All MN III to MK–12A
Little increase in survivable
capability
200 mobile MM III
Needs strategic warning to
survive
4 Secret.
5 Adherence to SALT I or SALT II would require retirement of other systems, resulting in smaller increases in warheads. [Footnote is in the original.]
6 Adherence to SALT I or SALT II would require retirement of other systems, resulting in smaller increases in warheads. [Footnote is in the original.]
7 Adherence to SALT I or SALT II would require retirement of other systems, resulting in smaller increases in warheads. [Footnote is in the original.]
8 Adherence to SALT I or SALT II would require retirement of other systems, resulting in smaller increases in warheads. [Footnote is in the original.]

WHDS
Cost (FY 81 $M)
Option
IOC
FOC
FOC
Acquisition
Annual
O&S
Comments
Trident I on Polaris
Lifespan of Polaris is
uncertain
SLCM on Polaris
No firm option exists
Increase ALCM
­production (B–52
G&H)
SAC’s recommendation
CMCA (B–1 variant
Requires a second ALCM
­production line
Subsonic variant possible for
¾ the cost
FB–111H (210 UE)
9 Adherence to SALT I or SALT II would require retirement of other systems, resulting in smaller increases in warheads. [Footnote is in the original.]
10 Adherence to SALT I or SALT II would require retirement of other systems, resulting in smaller increases in warheads. [Footnote is in the original.]
11 Adherence to SALT I or SALT II would require retirement of other systems, resulting in smaller increases in warheads. [Footnote is in the original.]
12 Adherence to SALT I or SALT II would require retirement of other systems, resulting in smaller increases in warheads. [Footnote is in the original.]
13 Adherence to SALT I or SALT II would require retirement of other systems, resulting in smaller increases in warheads. [Footnote is in the original.]

179.	 Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom)
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 15, 1980
SUBJECT
Threat Assessment Conference Call on Missile Warning
The NMCC convened a “Threat Assessment Conference Call” last
night at 2132 hours. Launches from the Kurile Island site were detected,
not unusual, but the “fan” of one of the missile tracks included Alaska,
Canada, and the tip of Oregon. At that point, NORAD and the NMCC
convened the Threat Assessment Conference. It was terminated five
minutes later when the impact of both missiles were determined to be
in Kamchatka. (S)
The procedures worked well within the White House. I was in the
call by one minute after it was convened. The duty officers at NORAD
and the NMCC sorted out the “anomalies” in the computer displays
quickly. They might have avoided the Threat Assessment Conference,
but I heard enough on the line to realize that convening it was prudent.
(S)
Other procedures went as well. SAC readiness changed at 2130
hours. The NEACP began rolling at 2132 hours. (S)
Daily Report Item
The National Military Command Center convened a Missile
Threat Assessment Conference Call at 2132 hours on March 14. Soviet
launches from the Kurile Island site were detected, not unusual, but the
“fan” of one of the two missile tracks included Alaska, Canada, and the
tip of Oregon. At that point, NORAD and NMCC decided that a threat
assessment was appropriate. The conference terminated five minutes
later when the impact of both missiles were determined to be in Kam-
The procedures within the White House worked well. The duty
officers at NORAD and the NMCC sorted out the anomalies in the mis-
sile attack displays quickly. Other procedures also proceeded smoothly.
SAC readiness changed at 2130 hours. The NEACP began to roll at 2132
indicates Brzezinski saw the memorandum.

180.	 Memorandum From the Under Secretary of Defense for
Research and Engineering (Perry) to Secretary of Defense
Brown and the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Claytor)1
Washington, March 31, 1980
SUBJECT
M–X Status Report—INFORMATION MEMORANDUM (U)
1. M–X Steering Committee (U)
(S) The M–X system is facing formidable opposition from a variety
of sources and for a variety of reasons—­some real, some imagined, and
some politically inspired. We have established a Steering Committee
to correct the real problems, dispel the imaginary problems, and cope
with the politically-­inspired problems. The committee, which I chair,
consists of Gen Bob Mathis, Toni Chayes, Robin Pirie, Tom Ross and
Jack Stempler. We had our first meeting last Monday2 and will meet
about once a week to plan strategy and coordinate tactics on actions
bearing on substantive program issues and public/congressional rela-
tion issues.
2. Program Issues (U)
(S) The focus of the engineering effort is to effect a design simplifi-
cation so that we can reduce cost. We have dropped the dedicated rail-
road track which connects the valleys in favor of a dedicated road, which
is significantly cheaper. We are exploring a variation of the horizontal-­
dash (racetrack) system in which the transporter is detachable from
the erector launcher and only the latter goes into the horizontal shelter.
This design is several billion dollars cheaper, but permits only road-­to-­
shelter dash instead of shelter-­to-­shelter dash. We are working on an
operational plan for this design which maintains the high confidence in
survivability we had in the baseline (horizontal-­dash) system.
(S) We continue work on the Environmental Impact Statement,
focusing on the “narrowing” issue. We are eliminating a number of
regions for operational or geotechnical reasons but are not eliminating
regions for reasons of increased basing costs. As a result, we will prob-
ably end up with two acceptable regions—­the Nevada/Utah basin,
and the Northern Texas/New Mexico plateau. That means we have
to Brzezinski and Vance via Alpha Channel under cover of an April 3 memorandum, on
which Brzezinski wrote: “JW/your reaction? ZB.”
2 March 24. No minutes of the meeting were found.

three alternatives—Nevada/Utah, Texas/New Mexico, or split basing,
with the first one preferable, the second one more expensive (and with
greater public impact); and the third most expensive (by $2 to $5 bil-
lion). While these results will clearly indicate the desirability of sticking
with Nevada/Utah basing, I don’t believe the EIS study should reach
that conclusion; rather, that decision gets bucked to SECDEF and—­if
we were to decide to propose the split basing at the extra cost-­to the
President for approval and Congress for appropriation.
3. Congressional/Public Interface (U)
(S) The FY 81 M–X request will be supported by the HASC without
crippling amendments. HAC is still an unknown, but could be a prob-
lem. Gunn McKay is taking a real position of leadership here. He held
a constructive hearing last week which cleared up a lot of misinforma-
tion on M–X basing. I will be meeting with him tomorrow morning (at
his request) to plan a strategy for getting the bill through the house
and for interfacing with State Officials. I will seek his advice on how
to handle the split basing issue (clearly Nevada and Utah would prefer
this, but the Congress probably would not accept the additional cost).
b. Senate (U)
(S) SASC will probably support the FY 81 request, but may be look-
ing for restrictive language. I see Sen Nunn as the focal point on the
Democratic side and will meet with him to discuss strategy. Sen Warner
has offered to take the leadership in bringing around the Republicans,
whose opposition is partially state oriented (Sen Garn) and partially
politically inspired. Sen Warner will argue that a bipartisan approach is
indicated for this important national security program, and that Repub-
lican opposition to M–X “because its the wrong design” is transparent
and could backfire on them. He is planning an additional M–X hearing
this Wednesday3 at which he will invite some dissident Senators, not
on the committee, to give them a chance to get onboard. Additionally,
I plan to meet one-­on-­one with Sen Garn to see if I can determine how
much of his objection is a real concern with the system (which we can
deal with) and how much is Utah politics.
c. State Leadership (U)
(S) I met with Gov Matheson and Gov List last week4 and gave
them a chance to express their concerns. I explained in detail why other
basing options (air mobile, SUM, etc.) are unattractive. We talked about
the split basing option; I assured them that the Air Force EIS study
would not foreclose the split option, but that the extra cost would be a
3 April 2.
4 No minutes of this meeting were found.

significant negative factor in considerations of OSD, the President, and
the Congress. I will be visiting them on a monthly basis from now on,
and will invite them to join me in some M–X site visits. Gov ­Matheson
is sponsoring a two hour TV debate that will be nationally broadcast
(PBS) on 24 April. I proposed that Dave Aaron, Toni Chayes and I
represent the Administration’s position (Policy, Public Interface, and
Military/Technical). Bill Moyer will be the moderator and will select
three “Doves” and three “Hawks” to round out the debate. Sounds
interesting.
d. Public Information (U)
(S) We also are coordinating through the Steering Committee a
series of public speeches with local groups in Nevada and Utah. I’ll
have a schedule for your review soon. Also, Tom Ross is preparing a
schedule for one-­on-­one interviews with influential journalists.
4. Tactics (U)
(S) I believe that we should take the initiative with our design
changes. We should be able to settle on them when the Defense Science
Board review is completed (in a few weeks). At that time, we should
brief the committees and be sure that the FY 81 language is consis-
tent with this design. Ichord and McKay in the House, and Nunn and
­Warner, in the Senate, will probably take the lead in reviewing and val-
idating that these actions are desirable and responsive to the Stevens
Amendment.
(S) I don’t have a plan yet on dealing with the split basing prob-
lem. I feel that the initiative on that should come from the Congress
through language in the 81 bill. I will discuss this further with McKay
and Nunn. If we were to ultimately go with split basing, there would
be some “credit” which probably should go to Gunn McKay and
shared somewhat by the governors. If split basing were ultimately to
be rejected on cost, it is better not to raise expectations and to put this in
the clear perspective of something to which we are giving a fair hearing
but about which we are not optimistic.
William J. Perry

181.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, March 29, 1980
SUBJECT
The U.S.-Soviet Military Balance
I have reviewed my recent public characterizations of the U.S.–
Soviet military balance, as well as my testimony before Congressional
committees and responses to questions from Members on this subject.
In the course of this review I have also examined media reporting to
see how accurately my assessments have been quoted and in what
context; I recognize that we have to take some responsibility for what
we are perceived as saying, as well as full responsibility for what we
actually say.
The products of this review are attached. On reflection, I think my
characterization has been accurate—­neither alarmist nor inappropri-
ately comforting.
The basic elements of my explanation of the balance are:
Soviet Union; in 1980 we will spend 30% less. The turnaround is the
result of a doubling of Soviet defense spending, while U.S. defense
spending remained level.
• The Soviet Union has, for over two decades, spent vast sums of
money in a determined effort first to equal, and then to surpass, the
United States in military strength. That they have not yet succeeded in
surpassing us is not a reflection on their determination or, indeed, on
their achievements. It is partly because we were well ahead when they
began their build-­up, partly because our allies and their adversaries
must also be weighed in the balance, and also because we remain ahead
in a number of important technological areas.
• In strategic nuclear forces, the Soviets have come from a position
of substantial numerical inferiority 15 years ago to one of parity today.
Their forces have improved in quality as well as numbers. The Sovi-
ets have a potential for strategic advantage if we fail to respond with
Only, Jan–June 1980. Confidential; Eyes Only. Carter wrote in the upper right corner of
the memorandum: “I have read this carefully. It is a good analysis—­and your presenta-
tions seem balanced. It is difficult to include NATO v. W. Pact, PRC border, air defense etc
in every statement. My concerns are not fully alleviated because in general, the impres-
sion is that we & our allies are inferior—­now—­seriously we still need to work on this
problem—­with $ and with words—Thanks, J.C.” A stamped notation on the first page of
the memorandum indicates Brown saw Carter’s note.

adequate programs of our own. But we are responding, by moderniz-
ing each leg of our Triad, to prevent that from happening.
• In Central Europe, NATO will be much more nearly in bal-
ance with the Warsaw Pact within the next few years, provided that
the Allies proceed with the modernization of their forces and other
increased defense efforts, and provided that our programs for rapid
deployment of reinforcements are brought to fruition. Even with these
improvements, however, we will not have as high a level of confidence
as I would like of containing a large attack against NATO launched by
the Pact with little preparation and warning.
• The disparity between U.S. annual defense expenditures and the
dollar cost estimates of annual Soviet expenditures has continued for so
long and grown so great that it has begun to bring the credibility of our
defense posture into question. A prolongation of the past 15 year trend
for another 10 or even 5 years would clearly consign us to inferiority.
• To prevent us from falling behind, or from appearing to, our
efforts devoted to defense must increase in real terms. If we do not
respond now to the sustained expansion of Soviet military power by
increasing our own, we will condemn the United States to an inferior
military position. We need a steady, sustained, and significant increase
in effort. This Administration has set that in train.
• What needs to be done is to set a pattern of growth and then sus-
tain it over a period of years—­rather than have a large growth in one
year and then assume that the problem has been solved. The program
that the Administration has proposed will arrest and then turn around
the relative disparity in momentum between the Soviet and U.S. pro-
grams. This will require not only the projected growth in our defense
efforts, but greater efforts by our allies, more effective coordination of
U.S. and allied defense programs, higher efficiency in our own defense
program, and correct choices on our own part to take advantage of our
technological lead.
• The Administration has responded to the adverse trends in the
military balance and to increased dangers to U.S. interests through
steady increases in defense budgets, culminating in substantial growth
projects continued real growth in defense spending through FY 1985.
• In the first year of this Administration, we placed the major
weight of our efforts behind improving NATO’s early conventional
combat capability, primarily through the LTDP and the three percent
real growth commitment. We next turned to the problem of modern-
izing our strategic TRIAD. Most recently, we have taken steps to mod-
ernize our theater nuclear forces in Europe. Thus, programs in each of
these areas are underway and have momentum. We can now concen-
trate special attention and resources on improving our capabilities to

deal with threats and crises around the world and, in particular, we are
acting to expand the improvement (begun two years ago) in our ability
to get men and equipment quickly to potential areas of conflict and to
retain our preeminence at sea in an era of new technologies.
These comments represent the situation as I judge it. Most others
with comparable experience take a more pessimistic view. I believe that
much of the difference comes from their failure to distinguish between
the present balance and the balance to be expected if past trends con-
tinue, that is if the Soviets continue their build-­up and we do not imple-
ment the defense programs that this Administration has adopted and
those we have urged on our Allies. For that reason, I have tried to make
the distinction in my own statements between the present balance,
about which we can do little, and the future balance, which we will
affect by our decisions. I also think that getting the American people to
understand this distinction is the most responsible and practical strat-
egy for sustaining confidence in American strength while assuring an
adequate military balance in the future through the necessary growth
in our capabilities.
In general, I am satisfied that the media have reported my assess-
ment accurately. I’ve said pretty much the same things on scores of
occasions—­and you have heard me say them a number of times at
Congressional briefings at the White House. If after your review of the
attached quotations, you believe that my assessment of the balance
(present and future) raises problems, please let me know.2 Otherwise, I
will continue to sing from essentially the same sheet music.
Harold Brown
2 Attached but not printed is a collection of public statements and press coverage.

182.	 Memorandum From Jasper Welch of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 7, 1980
SUBJECT
M–X Status Report by Bill Perry
You asked for my reactions to Bill Perry’s memo to Harold Brown
which was recently transmitted to you via ALPHA channel.2 (U)
Bill provided a nice summary of where things stand, all of which
was familiar to me. If you have not scanned the memo, the following
points were made: (U)
—Bill is chairman of an M–X steering committee to get on top of
current opposition. (U)
—Design simplifications to reduce cost proceed. The dedicated
railroad track has been dropped. They are exploring a variation of the
horizontal dash in which the transporter is detachable from the erector
launcher and only the latter goes into the horizontal shelter. It is several
billion dollars cheaper but constrains some of the dash options. Perry
is waiting for completion of the Defense Science Board review (in a few
weeks) before reaching his recommendation. (The fact of this variation
has been reported in Aviation Week.) (S)
—The environmental impact statement will eliminate certain
regions for operational or geotechnical reasons, but not for cost. That
means they will have three alternatives: Nevada/Utah, Texas/New
Mexico, or split basing, with the first one preferable, the second one
more expensive (and with greater public impact), and the third most
expensive (by $2–5 billion). Perry expects that the Congress may well
be the forum for this decision. (S)
—Perry expects support for the FY–81 M–X request from both
Armed Services Committees perhaps with some restrictive language
on location on the Senate side. He is unsure with regard to the Appro-
priations Committees. (S)
—Perry reports an active series of consultations by him with Con-
gressman McKay, and Senators Garn and Warner. (S)
—Perry has also met with Governor Matheson and Governor List.
Perry plans to be on the PBS TV debate on 24 April. (S)
—The Steering Committee is coordinating a series of public
speeches with local groups in Nevada and Utah. Tom Ross is schedul-
ing one-­on-­one interviews with influential journalists. (S)
On the whole Bill is doing right things, but much more is required.
I will be working with Bill under the guidance developed at the recent
VBB. I will keep you informed of progress and problems. (U)
183.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, April 30, 1980
SUBJECT
FB–111B/C Proposal (U)
(S) General Ellis, Commander of the Strategic Air Command,
longer range strategic bomber called the FB–111B/C. He argues that
this would strengthen our strategic forces during the “vulnerability
window” i.e., during the period after Minuteman becomes vulnerable
(1982) and before M–X becomes operational (1986). Key to this pro-
posal is the belief that the FB–111B/Cs is relatively cheap, could be
available quickly, and would be an effective penetrator of Soviet Air
Defense.
(S) Unfortunately, none of these beliefs is correct. The Air Force
Systems Command has made a careful analysis of General Dynamics’
proposal and concluded that the program to modify 150 aircraft would
more importantly, the FB–111B/C does not solve the B–52’s penetra-
tion problem. The B–52 actually will continue to be a capable penetrat-
ing bomber until the SU deploys in quantity an effective low altitude
­Carter wrote in the upper right corner of the memorandum: “CC: Harold—Gen Ellis
should quit lobbying for this unacceptable proposal or resign if not able to work it out
with you—JC.” In a May 1 memorandum, Brzezinski wrote Brown: “Attached is a copy
of your memorandum to the President on the FB–111. We might have been able to sup-
port you on this issue had the paper come through normal staffing channels.” (Ibid.)

defense consisting of several hundred SA–10s and a new “lookdown
shoot-­down” interceptor (a modified MIG–25 with AA–X–9 missile).
These Soviet systems will begin deployment in the early 80’s, will erode
the B–52s penetrating capability by the mid-80’s and make it untenable
by the late 80s. The solution to this problem is the cruise missile which
becomes operational in 1982, and reaches a deployment of 1800 mis-
siles by the mid-80s. The cruise missile by virtue of its low detectability
and large numbers will be able to penetrate the new Soviet air defense
system. On the other hand, the FB–111B/C, which is well behind the
cruise missile’s schedule, is almost as vulnerable as the B–52s to the
new air defense system. Its radar cross-­section, only slightly lower than
the B–52s, is 100 times as great as the cruise missile.
(S) The FB–111B/C cannot fly supersonic during low altitude pen-
etration, when its speed is only Mach .8 to Mach .85. While this is faster
than the B–52 (which penetrates to about Mach .6), it is not fast enough
to degrade the effectiveness of the new Soviet air defense systems.
Because of these limitations the only chance of either the FB–111B/C or
the B–52 successfully penetrating these new defenses is for them to have
an effective ECM system. Neither the B–52 or FB–111B/C has a modern
ECM system in which we could have much confidence. An improved
system (designed for the B–1) could be installed on the B–52s for sev-
eral billion dollars. A similar additional expense would be needed for
the FB–111B/C, but because of space limitation, it is doubtful if the full
ECM capability could be installed on that plane. At best, a new ECM
set would give us only a fair confidence of penetrating the new Soviet
air defense system because of that system’s extreme use of monopulse
radars which are highly ECM resistant—­this was a principal reason for
deciding not to produce the B–1 aircraft.
(S) There are other, less important, problems with the FB–111B/C.
It is short-­legged, requiring two tankers to give it full target coverage. If
we dedicate these aircraft for the strategic forces, we deflect them from
the valuable function they perform for our conventional forces. In fact,
during the several years of airframe modification (during the peak of
the so-­called “window of vulnerability”) they will not be available for
either tactical or strategic forces.
(S) We already have underway significant programs to strengthen
our strategic forces before M–X is deployed. We will be deploying
about 300 TRIDENT I missiles and 1800 cruise missiles during that
period. If it is necessary to augment further our strategic forces prior to
M–X deployment, we have two alternatives available to us much more
attractive than the FB–111B/C proposal. First, we could increase the
production and deployment rate of our cruise missiles (60 per month
instead of 40 per month) giving us 1000 more cruise missiles deployed
by 1986, at a cost of about $2B. Second, we could deploy sea launched

cruise missiles on the retired POLARIS submarines, giving us initial
deployment by mid-1983 and 600 cruise missiles deployed at sea by
1985 at a cost of about $2B. Either of these forces has greater military
effectiveness than the FB–111B/C program at substantial less cost.2
Harold Brown
2 At the bottom of the memorandum Brown wrote: “P.S. You are also aware of
another factor that I mentioned to you on the phone. So is Jim Wright. But Bob Carr is
not. HB.” No other record of Brown’s telephone conversation with Carter was found.
184.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 12, 1980
SUBJECT
Strategic Balance in the 1980s
Stan Turner has issued the latest NIE on Soviet strategic nuclear
forces. Harold Brown has at the same time circulated recent Defense
studies of the strategic balance. You should read as much of the NIE
Summary Volume I as possible (Tab D). I am summarizing very briefly
for you here the essence of what is said about static and dynamic trends
and what can be inferred about Soviet programmatic intentions. (TS)
The Static Trends
The chart at Tab A simply compares numbers of U.S. and Soviet
RVs and bomber weapons on the left and the megatonnage on the right
[7 lines not declassified] (TS/U)
The Dynamic Trends
Another view of comparative capabilities is gained by assuming
that one side strikes the other first. The chart at Tab B shows the NIE
results of such a comparison of U.S. and Soviet SALT-­limited forces.
[7 lines not declassified]
restriction not declassified]. Sent for information. In the upper right corner of the memo-
randum, Carter wrote: “Zbig—we need clearer charts showing comparisons to a) with/­
without SALT b) with/wo MX. For use w/ Congress—J.” Tabs A–C were not found
attached.

Harold Brown has sent us a JCS analysis that is somewhat more
elaborate in its attempt to be militarily realistic (Tab C).
[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
Omitted Factors
Neither static nor dynamic analyses provide a confident basis for
predicting the outcome of a conflict. At best they are artificial compar-
isons which yield limited information about the possibilities for war
outcomes. Taken alone, they could be very misleading. This caveat has
much greater significance when forces on both sides are near parity
than when one side has vast static advantages. As noted at the bottom
of the chart at Tab B, all the military intelligence chiefs dissent from this
analysis. They do so because they believe that such abstract compari-
sons understate U.S. weakness in C3I, civil defense, and other factors
critical to conflict dynamics. Although their argument is cogent, static
and dynamic comparisons have become a net assessment practice, not
only in the U.S. Government but also by private defense analysts like
Paul Nitze. Thus, they have become part of the basis for public percep-
tions and public debate. (TS/U)
Soviet Programmatic Intentions
The NIE judges that the Soviet purpose in this comprehensive
buildup in strategic forces is to provide “a more favorable backdrop
than before to the conduct of an assertive foreign policy and to the pro-
jection of Soviet power abroad.” The evidence from Soviet programs
leads Stan to believe that the Soviets are striving to acquire capabilities
to:
—­launch crippling counter force strikes;
—­survive large-­scale nuclear attack;
—­be employed flexibly against a wide range of targets;
—­limit damage substantially to the USSR. (TS/U)
He sees growing counterforces capable weapons (improving accu-
racy), improving survivability, added capability for flexible employment
(C3I, hardness, mobility, exercises), and strategic defense which contrib-
utes to limiting damage (civil defense, ABM research, ASW, and ASAT
activities). (TS/U)
Conclusion
1. The military intelligence chiefs’ dissenting viewpoint seems con-
cerned more with who has the authority to make “net assessments”
than with the actual intelligence estimate of Soviet forces. They hold
that only DOD can render judgments on U.S. capabilities. (TS)
2. Both the balance and the trends reported in the NIE make it clear
that we have serious problems in the early and mid-1980s. (TS/U)

3. Soviet apparent views on the political utility of strategic forces
are disturbing and not compatible with several assumptions we have
tried to get Soviet leaders to accept. (S)
4. SALT limits help considerably, but they cannot remove the Soviet
growing edge in several comparative indicators. (S)
5. Both the NIE and Harold Brown’s analysis are consistent with
the adverse trends initially projected in PRM–10, Comprehensive Net
Assessment2 and updated in Comprehensive Net Assessment-1978
which you reviewed about a year ago.3 (TS)

Tab D

National Intelligence Estimate4
Washington, March 17, 1980
Soviet Capabilities for Strategic Nuclear Conflict Through the
1980s
Volume I—Summary
SUMMARY5
1. During the next few years, Soviet strategic capabilities will con-
tinue to grow relative to those of the United States and NATO. The
Soviets have pursued steady, persistent strategic programs for many
years, while new Western programs remain largely in planning and
development phases. We believe that important aims underlying these
3 See Document 95.
5 The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence,
Department of the Army, the Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy, the Assis-
tant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force, and the Director of Intelligence,
Headquarters, Marine Corps, disassociate themselves from this volume and its characterization
as a Summary of the Estimate. In general, they believe the Summary is not representative of the
intelligence analyses developed in the Estimate. In their judgment, it concentrates on quantitative
information at the expense of intelligence concerning Soviet doctrine, policy, capabilities, future
programs, and possible initiatives. In their view, the extensive use of comparative force analysis
in the Estimate drives and distorts the Estimate’s judgments, especially in this Summary volume.
 The holders of this view also consider the judgments outlined in the Summary as unduly
shaped by US perceptions and strategic thinking and not properly reflective of Soviet strate-
gic objectives. The Summary should emphasize that the Soviets are pursuing strategic nuclear
capabilities for motives quite different from those of the United States. Because of this misplaced
emphasis, the Summary fails to explain satisfactorily the comprehensive nature of Soviet strategic
planning involving both offensive and defensive systems. The very great political and conven-
tional military consequences of the asymmetries in strategic forces and doctrine are not adequately
addressed. [Footnote is in the original.]

Soviet programs are to strengthen the USSR’s deterrent, to support its
foreign policy, and to foster strategic stability through Soviet advan-
tage. In these efforts, however, the Soviets would face less favorable
strategic trends over the longer term if additional and more formidable
weapons now in prospect are deployed by the United States and NATO
in the middle and late 1980s.
2. Throughout the 1980s, with or without SALT limitations, the
retaliatory capabilities of US and Soviet forces surviving even a sur-
prise attack would be very large. In the early 1980s, when Soviet forces
would have greater capabilities than today to reduce US surviving
weapons in a surprise attack, the Soviets would still have to expect the
United States to retain the potential to destroy a large percentage of the
USSR’s economic and military assets. Similarly, despite the improve-
ments planned for US forces in the late 1980s, the Soviets could expect
to retain the potential for massive retaliation against US economic and
military facilities, even under circumstances of a US surprise attack.
This Soviet potential, however, would be less than in the early and mid-
dle 1980s, and such a prospective decline is cause for Soviet concern.
3. In seeking to meet the challenges posed by prospective US and
NATO force improvements, we believe that the Soviets would hope to
avoid substantial further increases in the costs of their strategic pro-
grams. We believe that principal Soviet aims will be to slow or halt the
Western programs through a combination of threats, inducements, and
arms negotiations and, at the same time, to continue to develop force
deployment options that could counter these programs. The Soviets
would have more latitude to develop and deploy such counters if they
were not bound by the limits of SALT II or if those limits were to lapse
in 1985. If Western strategic programs proceed as planned and SALT II
limits are not changed, the Soviets could find it increasingly difficult to
reconcile their strategic force objectives with their desire to continue the
SALT process.
4. We do not expect immediate, irreversible responses by the USSR
to US deferral of the SALT Treaty. We believe the Soviets will wish, at
least initially, to avoid visible changes in strategic programs that could
seriously jeopardize the chances of eventual US ratification. They could,
however, take measures designed to pressure the United States, with
the idea of reversing them later if the Treaty were eventually ratified.
A US rejection of the Treaty, particularly in light of prospective US and
NATO force improvements, would probably result in a combination of
actions by the Soviets that would increase their forces and capabilities
beyond those they could have under the SALT II agreement.

A. Soviet Strategic Planning for the 1980s
5. The Soviet leaders view their strategic requirements in the con-
text of persistent long-­term struggle between social systems, continu-
ing rivalry with the United States for global power and influence, and
concern for the policies and forces of countries on the Eurasian periph-
ery, especially NATO and China. Within this framework, the Soviets
seek strong and growing strategic capabilities to provide:
—A powerful deterrent against nuclear attack by any adversary.
—Along with other military forces, the prospect of greater freedom
of action in the world arena while minimizing the risk of nuclear war.
—An improvement in the chances that, if nuclear war should
occur, the USSR could survive and emerge in a better position than its
adversaries.
6. The Soviets have made substantial progress toward these goals
over the past 15 years. Their strategic forces are generally acknowledged
to be equal to those of the United States, and are superior to those of
all their other adversaries combined. Despite Soviet progress, however,
powerful US retaliatory capabilities would survive even successful
Soviet initial strikes, and active and passive Soviet defenses could not
prevent the devastation of the USSR. From their statements and writ-
ings, it is clear that the Soviet leaders perceive the present US-Soviet
strategic relationship as one in which each side could inflict massive
damage on the other side under any circumstances. The Soviets would
prefer a relationship in which deterrence and strategic stability were
assured by Soviet possession of superior capabilities to fight and sur-
vive a nuclear war with the United States.
7. The Soviets probably view their improved strategic position as
providing a more favorable backdrop than before to the conduct of an
assertive foreign policy and to the projection of Soviet power abroad.
They probably do not see the present situation of approximate strategic
nuclear parity as providing them with the latitude to safely confront
the United States directly in areas where they perceive US vital interests
to be involved. However, in areas that they believe the United States
regards as less central to its interests, particularly in regions where the
USSR enjoys a preponderance of conventional forces and the advan-
tage of proximity, such as Afghanistan, the current strategic relation-
ship probably enhances Soviet confidence that the risk of a US local or
escalatory military response would be negligible.
8. There is an alternative view which holds that the increasing
aggressiveness of Soviet foreign policy will expand as the Soviet Union’s
advantages in strategic nuclear forces become more pronounced. The
Soviets may now perceive that they have nuclear superiority. As they
see this superiority increase during the next three to five years, they
will probably attempt to secure maximum political advantages from

their military arsenal in anticipation of US force modernization pro-
grams. Moreover, the holders of this view sense that the Soviet leader-
ship remains uncertain about the bounding of US national interests and
American resolve to meet challenges to these interests. If such uncer-
tainties continue, there is the distinct danger that the USSR may grossly
miscalculate US reactions during a regional crisis and thus set the stage
for a serious military confrontation between the superpowers.6
9. This year the Soviets find themselves at what they may well
regard as a critical juncture in their planning for future strategic forces.
They are nearing the end of large ICBM and SLBM deployment pro-
grams and the beginning of a new five-­year economic plan. They
confront growing internal economic problems, which could be com-
plicated by a transition in leadership some time soon. External prob-
lems include deteriorating relations with the United States and China,
uncertainty about US ratification of the SALT II Treaty, and a grow-
ing Western determination to counter improvements in Soviet military
forces. Further, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the international
condemnation that it incurred probably indicate that, in their present
planning, the Soviets are not counting on much benefit from detente.
10. The Soviets must now plan for the middle and late 1980s, a
period that they almost certainly perceive as posing major challenges.
US Trident submarines and air-­launched cruise missiles will make it
even harder for them to overcome their insufficiencies in antisubma-
rine warfare and in air defense. Planned new NATO long-­range the-
ater nuclear forces could reduce the large Soviet advantage in forces for
peripheral attack; long-­range cruise missiles in the European theater
would be of particular concern to the Soviets. Finally, the Soviets would
see deployment of an MX/MPS system as giving the United States the
potential in the late 1980s to destroy the bulk of their ICBM silos and as
restoring a measure of survivability for the US ICBM force. The Sovi-
ets interpret these Western programs as attempts to regain a strategic
advantage rather than as countervailing responses to Soviet initiatives.
11. SALT considerations will figure heavily in Soviet decisions
about how to deal with these challenges. As would be expected, the
Soviets negotiated the SALT II Treaty so as to protect program options
they considered crucial to their strategic needs during the period of
the Treaty. The Soviets do not appear to have strategic requirements
so pressing as to cause them to make major visible alterations in their
strategic programs in the coming months, while US ratification of the
Treaty is deferred. They have indicated their willingness, if the Treaty
6 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency; the Assistant
Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence,
Department of the Air Force; and the Director of Intelligence, Headquarters, Marine Corps. [Foot-
note is in the original.]

is ratified, to proceed promptly to negotiate further reductions and
limitations, but their aims would be complicated by the new Western
programs. Moreover, the Soviets might find it difficult to accept con-
tinuation beyond 1985 of the SALT II limitations on new ICBMs, ICBM
fractionation, and perhaps total numbers of launchers. These provisions
would limit their options for increasing the counterforce capabilities
and survivability of their land-­based missile forces in response to the
US MX/MPS and other programs. We are, therefore, uncertain whether
the Soviets would be willing to extend such limits beyond 1985.
12. Economic considerations are also a factor in Soviet planning
for strategic forces in the 1980s. Energy, demographic, and productivity
problems are adding to Soviet economic difficulties. To help ease these
difficulties, the Soviets might consider reducing the rate of growth of
military spending. However, the evidence available to us on current
and planned Soviet programs leads us to conclude that growth in total
defense spending and in spending for strategic programs over the next
few years will be at or near the historic long-­term rate of 4 to 5 percent a
year. If the Soviet leaders should perceive economic pressure so severe
that they had to consider a moderation of the rate of growth in their
defense spending, we believe they would not single out strategic pro-
grams for a major reduction in growth.
13. Several major factors lead us to believe that the Soviets are not
likely to alter significantly their commitment to long-­term strategic
force improvements. These factors include the following:
—Continued progress toward the achievement of Soviet objectives
for strategic nuclear forces remains a priority element in leadership
planning.
—A cutback in Soviet strategic forces would have only a limited
effect on the USSR’s most serious economic problems.
—The momentum of Soviet strategic programs would be hard to
arrest, particularly in a period of leadership transition.
—New signs of Western determination and the deterioration of
detente probably will contribute to continued Soviet determination to
seek to shift the correlation of forces in the USSR’s favor.
—The possibility, however remote, of large-­scale nuclear war will
continue to support efforts to improve Soviet war-­fighting capabilities.
Thus we believe that, while seeking to slow or halt US and NATO
weapon programs, the Soviets will at the same time initiate and con-
tinue programs designed to overcome current weaknesses, especially
in their strategic defenses, and to give themselves options to counter
the prospective Western programs.
B. Main Current Trends in Soviet Programs
14. Much evidence on past and present Soviet strategic programs
leads us to believe that the Soviets have been striving to acquire and

maintain strategic forces and supporting elements that, in the event of
nuclear war, could:
—Launch crippling counterforce strikes.
—Survive large-­scale nuclear attack.
—Be employed flexibly against a wide range of targets.
—Substantially limit damage to the USSR.
15. The number of Soviet weapons with good counterforce capabili-
ties is increasing rapidly:
—Conversion of 820 older silos to make them capable of launch-
ing ICBMs with multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles
(MIRVs) will be completed in 1981.
—The latest MIRVed versions of the SS–18 and SS–19, now being
deployed, are considerably more accurate than earlier versions of these
missiles and have substantial hard-­target capabilities.
—Available evidence still points to Soviet programs for five new or
modified ICBMs. The characteristics of at least some of them will prob-
ably include improved reliability and even better accuracies.
ever, is not likely to occur for a few years. The Soviets have already
incorporated into their current systems major [less than 1 line not declas-
sified] modifications that we had expected to appear on the follow-­on
systems, and they are still working on other modifications.
16. The Soviets are steadily improving the survivability of their stra-
tegic forces and supporting elements. Recent developments include:
—The much greater hardening of silos as they are converted to
accommodate MIRVed ICBMs, and research and testing to make the
silos even harder.
—The continued deployment of MIRVed, mobile IRBMs and [less
than 1 line not declassified] development of two solid-­propellant ICBMs,
at least one of which could be deployed on mobile launchers.
—The further deployment of MIRVed SLBMs and an increase
in the number of SSBNs on patrol or in transit. Additional increases
are likely in the 1980s, especially with deployment of the new, large
Typhoon submarine and missile.
—The continued expansion and protection of capabilities for com-
mand, control, and communications by a combination of hardening,
redundancy, and mobility.
17. The Soviets are adding to their capabilities for flexible employ-
ment of strategic nuclear forces under a variety of circumstances:
—The deployment of MIRVed missiles and the improvement of
command and control systems are adding to Soviet targeting flexibility.
—Aerodynamic systems are being retained as part of both inter-
continental and peripheral attack forces. Backfires continue to be
deployed. A new bomber and cruise missile carrier are under develop-
ment, but we now doubt that they could be operational until after 1985.

The development of a long-­range air-­launched cruise missile (ALCM)
continues.
—The SS–20 IRBM is adding to Soviet striking power and flexibil-
ity for attacking targets in Europe, the Middle East, and Asia. A variant
of the SS–20 is being flight-­tested. Some older MRBM and IRBM sites
have been deactivated, but some of the launch-­related equipment and
missiles are apparently being transferred to remaining active sites.
—The Soviets are increasing the proficiency of their command and
control system [3 lines not declassified]
—The Soviets are improving their ability to launch their missiles
on receipt of tactical warning. They are completing large new radars
that will improve ballistic missile early warning. Their launch detection
satellite program is still in difficulty, however.
18. The capability of Soviet strategic defenses to contribute to lim-
iting damage to the USSR remains low despite large, continuing Soviet
investments. Weapon systems now being tested should bring some
improvement, notably in strategic air defenses.
—In strategic air defense, the Soviets are starting to deploy new
versions of existing interceptors, but their low-­altitude capabilities will
be limited. Modified and new interceptors with lookdown/shootdown
capabilities are being flight-­tested, and deployment of a new low-­
altitude surface-­to-­air missile system is imminent. An airborne warning
and control system (AWACS) that is being tested probably will have
capabilities over land as well as over water. These systems will have
better capabilities against low-­altitude bombers, but they probably will
have only limited capabilities against cruise missiles. There is as yet
no evidence of active development of systems designed specifically to
intercept cruise missiles at low altitudes.
—In ballistic missile defense, the Soviets are continuing to develop
an ABM system that could be deployed more rapidly than the Moscow
system. The R&D program for antiballistic missiles could give them
options in the 1980s for upgrading their present ABM system at Mos-
cow or for deploying ABM defenses more widely.
—In antisubmarine warfare (ASW), intensive efforts are under
way to improve both acoustic and nonacoustic sensors. However,
Soviet towed-­array sonar development is not as far along as we had
thought. [2 lines not declassified]
[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]
—In directed-­energy technology, the Soviets are conducting a
broadly based research program to investigate applications for strate-
gic defense. They are continuing to develop laser weapon prototypes
for testing against aerodynamic vehicles, satellites, and ballistic missile
reentry vehicles.
—In civil defense, new evidence and analysis show that the pro-
portion of urban residents that could be accommodated in blast shelters
is toward the low side of our previous estimate of 10 to 20 percent.
This reinforces our belief that the Soviets would have to rely on city
evacuation as their principal means of protecting the urban population.

The Soviets, however, could shelter a large proportion of their political
leadership and many key industrial workers.
—The Soviets have operational systems capable of attacking or
degrading some US satellites and are probably working to improve
their capabilities.
C. Future Soviet Forces for Strategic Attack
Possible Soviet Reactions to MX/MPS
19. Under SALT II. While the Soviets will try to halt or severely
limit the MX/MPS system, they can also be expected to use the time
between now and the middle 1980s to develop counters to both the
hard-­target capabilities and the survivability features of the US system.
One of the first indicators of the Soviets’ response is likely to be the mis-
sile they choose to flight-­test as the one new type of ICBM permitted
them under SALT II restrictions. They could select either of two new
solid-­propellant ICBMs [less than 1 line not declassified] a small system
that could be deployed on offroad mobile launchers but could carry
no more than a few MIRVs, and a medium system that could be fit-
ted with a large single reentry vehicle or with up to 10 MIRVs but, if
deployed in a mobile configuration, probably would be restricted to
improved roads or special deployment areas. Alternatively, the Soviets
could develop a medium-­size liquid-­propellant ICBM to carry 10 RVs,
but such a system could not easily be deployed in a mobile mode and
we have no evidence that it is under development.
20. At present, the Soviets are keeping their options open. We
assume that, under SALT II limitations, they would choose as their
new ICBM a single-RV medium solid system to replace the SS–11, and
would deploy it in silos and perhaps on mobile launchers. We think
they would also develop—­but not flight-­test—­a MIRV version of this
system and a more highly fractionated version of the SS–18. By these
actions they could minimize disruptions to their present ICBM pro-
grams and be ready to flight-­test and deploy ICBMs with greater num-
bers of RVs if the SALT II limitations expired at the end of 1985. We
do not have high confidence that the Soviets will follow this course of
little less likely than a single-RV replacement for SS–11s, especially if the
Soviets expected SALT II limitations to be extended beyond 1985 and
wanted to maximize their counterforce RVs within these limitations.
21. Under No-SALT Conditions. If the SALT limitations on offen-
sive arms were abandoned this year and the Soviets embarked on a
major program of force improvement and expansion, they would have
more options to respond to the prospect of MX/MPS deployment. They
could take full advantage of their large ICBM throw weight and their
ongoing R&D programs. Anticipatory actions could be taken gradually,

without disrupting near-­term Soviet programs. For example, we would
expect the Soviets to deploy 14 RVs on SS–18s after a brief flight test
program, and to deploy another version with still more RVs in about
1985. A MIRVed medium solid ICBM could be deployed without hav-
ing to replace existing SS–17s and SS–19s, which themselves could be
upgraded to carry more MIRVs. The smaller solid-­propellant ICBM
could also be flight-­tested and deployed. Mobile ICBM launchers as
well as additional SLBM launchers could be deployed without com-
pensatory dismantling. We believe that, through such means, the Sovi-
ets would seek to counter the US MX/MPS and other programs as they
emerged.
Soviet Intercontinental Striking Forces
22. Our projections of Soviet intercontinental striking forces reflect
our judgment that the USSR will continue its historical heavy reliance
on ICBMs, secondary reliance on SLBMs, and maintenance of a rela-
tively small force of aerodynamic systems for intercontinental attack.
The four projections we display illustrate alternative future Soviet force
levels under various assumptions about SALT. The projections are
based on observed recent trends and our best estimates of Soviet tech-
nological progress, and are made in the light of Soviet objectives for
strategic forces as well as US strategic program options. They are not
confident estimates of what the Soviets will actually do over a period as
long as 10 years ahead, especially in this period of transition in Soviet
and US programs.
23. We project two moderate SALT-­limited (Mod SAL) Soviet
forces, in which we assume that the SALT II Treaty enters into force this
year and remains unchanged through mid-1989. In the first force we
assume that the Soviets elect as their permitted one new type of ICBM
a medium solid-­propellant missile with a large single RV, and deploy it
in upgraded SS–11 silos and on mobile launchers. The second Mod SAL
force illustrates the effects of a Soviet decision to maximize the number
of ICBM RVs within SALT II limits, by replacing all SS–17s and SS–19s
with a medium solid-­propellant system having 10 RVs, deployed in
silos and on mobile launchers.
24. We project a third force (termed SAL/No-SAL) which illus-
trates the Soviet potential to develop and deploy additional forces and
to respond to the MX/MPS system if SALT II limitations are in force
through 1985, but expire at the end of that year. This projection assumes
that the USSR prepares in advance for rapid, subsequent improvements
in the counterforce capability and survivability of its offensive forces.
25. A fourth force (Mod No-SAL) illustrates Soviet development
and deployment options under circumstances in which the SALT II
Treaty is abandoned this year, the SALT process breaks down, and

US-Soviet relations deteriorate still further. In this environment, we
believe the Soviets would be motivated to compete more vigorously
with the United States by deploying additional improved systems.
Further, without SALT II constraints they probably would retain many
of the older systems that would have been deactivated under the pro-
visions of the Treaty. The projection assumes that the Soviets would
field a large force of highly fractionated ICBMs to increase their striking
capabilities, and that they would seek still further to improve the sur-
vivability of their forces by deploying larger numbers of mobile ICBMs
and MIRVed SLBMs.
Static Comparisons of US and Soviet Intercontinental Striking Forces
26. Figure 1 illustrates projected trends in the number of weap-
ons in future Soviet forces and in their explosive power, with and
without SALT II limitations. The top two charts compare the moder-
ate SALT-­limited Soviet forces, and the SAL/No-SAL force, with a US
SALT-­limited force that is based on Department of Defense projections.
The charts show that the projected Soviet SALT-­limited forces would
improve relative to the projected US force in the early and middle
1980s, but that the trends would become less favorable to the Soviets
in the second half of the decade if SALT II limits remained in effect
throughout the period. The charts also show that Soviet forces could
match or exceed those of the United States in the late 1980s if SALT II
limitations expired in 1985, the Soviets expanded their forces, and the
United States continued to develop its forces as currently programed:
—In online missile RVs and bomber weapons, the present US
lead becomes very small by the early 1980s. The United States would
regain the lead in the late 1980s under SALT-­limited conditions, unless
the Soviets deployed 10 RVs on all their MIRVed ICBMs. However,
the Soviets could achieve an advantage in the late 1980s if the SALT
II Treaty expired in 1985 and the United States did not change its pro-
gramed force.
—In online equivalent megatons, the Soviet forces maintain their
current lead in each of these assumed circumstances.
27. The bottom two charts in figure 1 illustrate the prospects for
Soviet force improvement and expansion under conditions in which
SALT II is abandoned and the Soviets begin a buildup this year. In these
circumstances, we project that Soviet forces would achieve qualitative
and quantitative characteristics that would substantially exceed those
that they would be likely to have under SALT II:
—In numbers of online missile RVs and bomber weapons, the
Soviets would be able to deploy more highly fractionated ICBMs and
SALT II. Owing to this greater flexibility, the number of Soviet missile

RVs and bomber weapons grows more rapidly and by 1989 exceeds
that of the SALT-­limited forces by a substantial margin.
—In online equivalent megatons, the Soviet No-SALT force grows
to a level greater than that of the SALT-­limited forces. The rate of
increase, however, is more gradual than that shown for missile RVs and
bomber weapons. This is because highly fractionated payloads tend to
have less explosive power than payloads with fewer RVs.
For comparison, the SAL/No-SAL projection is also reproduced
on the bottom two charts. It illustrates that by preparing themselves
to break out of SALT limitations rapidly upon expiration of a SALT II
Treaty in 1985, the Soviets could by 1989 acquire forces which, in these
indexes, approach the forces we would expect them to acquire through
a more gradual No-SALT buildup beginning this year. If the Soviets
were to delay the start of a buildup because of uncertainty over the
outcome of SALT II but began it in 1982, for example, the Soviet curves
on these graphs would probably be between the SAL/No-SAL and the
No-SAL curves.
28. A variety of possibilities exist for more threatening Soviet inter-
continental offensive forces. Even under SALT II limitations, the per-
formance characteristics of Soviet weapons might be better, or might
be improved faster than our best estimates indicate. If there were no
SALT limitations, the Soviets could deploy even more MIRVs and rel-
atively survivable launchers than in our Mod No-SAL projection. It is
highly unlikely, however, that the Soviets could substantially exceed
our best estimates of deployment and technological achievement in all
components of their forces. This would strain Soviet development and
production capacity and incur the costs and risks of very fast replace-
ment rates. Projections illustrating the upper bounds of our uncertain-
ties about Soviet technological progress and deployment rates can be
found in chapter V in the main text of this Estimate.
Soviet Strategic Forces for Peripheral Attack
29. Soviet medium- and intermediate-­range forces for strategic
attack on the Eurasian periphery have long been superior in numbers
and capabilities to comparable Western and Chinese forces. The asym-
metry is increasing with the deployment of the mobile SS–20 IRBM and
the Backfire bomber. On the basis of limited evidence of Soviet plan-
ning in the mid-1970s, and trends in production and deployment since
then, we have projected a continued, moderately paced Soviet program
to modernize peripheral strategic striking forces. The main features of
this projection are:
—Deployment of about 300 launchers for MIRVed, mobile IRBMs
by about 1985, and the replacement of the SS–20 with a follow-­on
missile.

—Deployment of some 200 Backfires to Long Range Aviation by
1989, assuming that Backfire production is limited to 30 per year and
that output continues to be shared about equally between LRA and
Soviet Naval Aviation.
—Basing of the new weapon systems to ensure coverage of all
areas on the Eurasian periphery, with mobile IRBMs divided in about
equal thirds among the western, eastern, and central USSR and Back-
fires oriented primarily to penetrate European air defenses. There is an
alternative view that the Backfire has good intercontinental capabili-
ties, and that some portion of the Backfire force would be employed
against targets in the United States.7
—Some continued deactivations of older MR/IRBM launchers,
and retirements of older medium bombers. We are uncertain, how-
ever, about whether these aging systems will gradually decline or be
retained, in part because the Soviets are probably hedging against
NATO force modernization.
30. We have no present basis for estimating how improvements in
NATO long-­range theater nuclear forces would affect Soviet peripheral
attack programs, or what specific arms control proposals the USSR may
put forward. The Soviets would have the option of expanding their
peripheral attack forces with a higher level of effort, and could take
further steps to improve tactical nuclear forces.
D. Counterforce Capabilities and Prelaunch Survivability of Soviet
­Intercontinental Striking Forces
31. The Soviets expect that intercontinental nuclear conflict would
most likely arise out of an intense US-Soviet crisis or confrontation,
probably involving a conventional theater war that had escalated.
The Soviets generally envisage strategic nuclear operations as com-
plex engagements, rather than as a single all-­out exchange. [3 lines not
declassified] the Soviets stress employment flexibility and endurance in
the development of their strategic weapons and supporting elements. A
longstanding aim of the Soviets is to improve the survivability of their
command and control system so that it could function even under cir-
cumstances in which it had suffered direct, large-­scale nuclear attacks.
32. Recent Soviet programs for intercontinental attack forces and
supporting elements include features reflecting the stress on flexibility
and endurance [6 lines not declassified] Over the years the Soviets have
acquired capabilities to employ their intercontinental nuclear forces
in initial, preemptive, or retaliatory strikes, and in recent years they
have been developing capabilities to launch their forces upon receipt of
tactical warning that an enemy attack had been launched. We believe
that the Soviet command and control system could support any of
7 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency; the Assistant Chief
of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; and the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence,
Department of the Air Force. [Footnote is in the original.]

these employment options. We also believe the system would have
good capabilities for sustained battle management following an initial
nuclear strike, but would be severely degraded if national-­level com-
mand bunkers and communication centers were destroyed.
Counterforce Capabilities
33. If the Soviets were to launch a strike on the United States, their
objective of highest priority would be to reduce the retaliatory capabil-
ity of opposing offensive forces. The Soviets would target US bomber
and SSBN bases, of which there are only a few, as well as US ICBM silos,
of which there are about 1,000. In addition, the Soviets will be faced
with a large number of MX shelters in the late 1980s.
34. Judging by present trends in the number and capabilities of
Soviet ICBM RVs, we believe that from now on the Soviet ICBM force
will be capable of destroying most US ICBM silos and still have many
warheads remaining for other purposes. An MPS system, however,
would tax Soviet counterforce capabilities in the late 1980s. The Soviet
choice of which new ICBM to deploy under SALT limitations would
influence the number of ICBM RVs available to attack MX shelters,
but the more important factor affecting the number is whether or not
SALT limitations were in effect. The table below shows our alternative
projections of total online Soviet ICBM RVs in 1989, those with hard-
­target capabilities, and the number on ready missiles in excess of those
required to attack silos. While all such excess RVs would theoretically
be available to attack MX shelters, it should be noted that the Soviets
would also have requirements to attack other kinds of targets and to
withhold ICBMs for other purposes. These requirements would reduce
the number of ICBM RVs actually available for attacking MX shelters.
35. There is a divergent view that, because of the other Soviet tar-
geting and withhold requirements for ICBM RVs, the number of Soviet
hard-­target ICBM RVs available for use against the planned US MX/
MPS system would be far fewer than the “excess” shown in the table.
As a result, the holders of this view believe the table and figure 2 over-
state the threat to the planned US MX/MPS system.8
8 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the Senior
Intelligence Officers of the military services. [Footnote is in the original.]

Soviet Hard-Target ICBM Reentry Vehicles in 1989
Moderate Force
Projections
Total Online
ICBM RVs
Hard-Target-­
Capable ICBM
RVs
Hard-Target RVs in
Excess of
Those Required
To Attack
Minuteman
Silos
SALT limitations
through 1989
New ICBM with
single RV
6,200
6,200
4,600
SALT limitations
through 1989
New ICBM with
10 RVs
8,600
8,200
6,500
SALT limitations
through 1985
Buildup begins
in 1986
11,700
11,700
9,900
No SALT
­limitations
Buildup begins
in 1980
13,800
13,800
11,400
36. Figure 2 illustrates the number of ICBM RVs remaining on each
side if the ICBMs of the Soviet SALT-­limited forces were used to attack
all US ICBMs and MX shelters. For this purpose, we assume that the
Soviets target two ICBM RVs against each US silo and one RV against
each MX shelter, and that US ICBMs ride out the attack. The figure
shows:
—In the top two charts, if the Soviets elected to deploy a new
ICBM with a single RV, a Soviet attack on all US silos and the 4,600 MX
shelters currently programmed would leave the US ICBM force with
few surviving RVs but, by 1989, the USSR would also be left with few
ICBM RVs for other missions.
—In the bottom two charts, if the Soviets elected to deploy a new
MIRVed ICBM with 10 RVs, the Soviet attack would leave the USSR
with about 2,000 ICBM RVs available for other missions in 1989.
37. If the SALT II limits were to expire in 1985 or if SALT II were
abandoned this year, the Soviets would have the flexibility to increase
their inventory of ICBM warheads far beyond what would be required
to attack all US silos and the 4,600 MX shelters currently programed.
With this US shelter program, the Soviets could have 5,000 to 6,000
ICBM RVs remaining after an attack on US ICBMs in the late 1980s

under these No-SALT circumstances. However, the Soviets probably
would expect the United States to increase the number of MX shelters
substantially. In this case, Soviet RVs remaining after a Soviet silo/shel-
ter attack would be significantly reduced.
38. We believe the Soviets are now considering some form of
advanced guidance system for their future SLBMs, but it is unlikely
that MIRVed SLBMs with hard-­target capabilities could be deployed
before the 1990s. To acquire such capabilities, the Soviets would have
to develop guidance techniques employing global positioning satellites
or terminal RV homing. This would involve more technical risk and
vulnerability to countermeasures than the Soviets have been willing
to accept in their SLBM systems to date. We cannot, however, exclude
the possibility that the MX/MPS system might motivate the Soviets
to develop such techniques and that, with a high level of effort, they
might be able to start deploying SLBMs capable of attacking MX shel-
ters in the late 1980s.
39. The Soviets have ample capabilities to destroy all US SSBN
bases as well as the bases of the US bomber force. We have no pres-
ent evidence that the Soviets are trying to minimize the flight time of
SLBMs in order to pose a greater threat to US alert bombers. In view of
the dispersal and other measures the United States could exercise, it is
unlikely that the Soviets would be able to destroy more than a few of
the bombers the United States keeps on alert.
Prelaunch Survivability
40. The overall survivability of Soviet intercontinental offensive
forces in the 1980s will remain heavily dependent on the survivabil-
ity of their fixed ICBMs. Deployment of more SLBM RVs and mobile
ICBMs would increase the relatively survivable portion of Soviet forces,
but present trends do not suggest a radical shift away from silo-­based
ICBMs. Figure 3 depicts the threat to Soviet ICBMs posed by current
and programmed US SALT-­limited forces, assuming that the United
States targeted two ICBM RVs against each Soviet silo and that Soviet
silo-­based ICBMs rode out an attack. The figure shows:
—In the top two charts, if the Soviets elected to deploy a new ICBM
with a single RV, some 3,000 Soviet RVs on silo-­based ICBMs could be
expected to survive an attack by US ICBMs through the middle 1980s.
In the late 1980s, however, the number of silo-­based RVs expected to
survive would be reduced to about 500 because of the increased coun-
terforce capability of the MX.
—In the bottom two charts, if the Soviets elected to deploy a 10-RV
new ICBM, the number of silo-­based RVs expected to survive in the late
1980s would be only slightly higher.
—In both cases, a two-­on-­one attack on all Soviet silos would leave
the United States with virtually no ICBM RVs remaining until the late

1980s, at which time, it would have unused ICBM RVs available for
other purposes.
—Soviet mobile ICBMs would be vulnerable to a US ICBM attack
if deployed at fixed support bases like those used for the SS–20 IRBM.
Their survivability could be increased if, as we think likely, the Soviets
dispersed them in a crisis. The charts show that with dispersed mobile
launchers, the Soviets could have as many as 1,500 additional surviv-
ing ICBM RVs if the USSR elected a 10-RV missile as its new ICBM
and deployed a number of them on mobile launchers. A single-RV new
ICBM would not offer this advantage because even a large force of
mobiles would carry relatively few RVs.
41. The foregoing charts indicate that in SALT-­limited circum-
stances the Soviets could expect a substantial number of their silo-­based
ICBM RVs to survive in the early and middle 1980s even if they rode
out an attack. Under No-SALT circumstances, the Soviets could MIRV
virtually all of their ICBMs, and therefore could expect a somewhat
greater number of ICBM RVs to survive a US attack in the early and
middle 1980s. In the late 1980s, however, the number of expected Soviet
ICBM RV survivors probably would still decline to relatively low lev-
els, unless the Soviets were to change their force mix more dramatically
than we believe likely even under No-SALT circumstances.
42. It should also be noted that the highly accurate US bomber and
ALCM weapons would pose an additional threat to Soviet silo-­based
ICBMs. The Soviets would be concerned about this additional capa-
bility but would be aware that the US aerodynamic systems would be
subject to attrition by Soviet air defenses and that their long flight times
would give the USSR more time to decide whether to launch its silo-­
based ICBMs.
43. With regard to the survivability of the other elements of Soviet
intercontinental striking forces, roughly 75 percent of the Soviet SSBN
force is normally in port and no bombers are kept on alert. Therefore,
both elements are vulnerable to surprise attack. [3 lines not declassified]
With [less than 1 line not declassified] warning, the Soviets could put [less
than 1 line not declassified] of their modern SSBNs to sea in combat-­ready
status. At full combat readiness, the survivability of bombers would
be increased because they probably would be dispersed and placed on
alert.
E. Quasi-Dynamic Analysis of Soviet and US Intercontinental
Striking Forces9
44. Comparisons of the aggregate size of strategic forces pro-
vide important insights into significant trends in US and Soviet
9 For the view of the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the Senior Intelligence
Officers of the military services on the validity and propriety of this analysis, see paragraph 47.
[Footnote is in the original.]

intercontinental striking power. Because such comparisons are essen-
tially static in nature, however, they cannot fully reflect differences
between the two forces and their capabilities that arise from qualita-
tive asymmetries. These differences can be better illuminated by using
an analytical technique—­quasi-­dynamic analysis—­that has been an
integral part of this Estimate for the past several years. This analysis
addresses the potential of one side’s ICBMs to attack the retaliatory
forces of the other side and then compares the residual destructive
potentials. The respective arsenals are reduced by subtracting those
ICBMs needed for the attack and those retaliatory forces destroyed in
the attack; the ICBMs of the side attacked are assumed to ride out the
attack without being launched. The residuals are on-­pad potentials, cal-
culated without considering such factors as specific targeting doctrines,
command and control degradation, attrition by air defenses, and other
operational variables.
45. The calculations in the analysis do not attempt to simulate
actual conflict outcomes. Rather, they seek to display comparative capa-
bilities and limitations in a manner most relevant to nuclear deterrence
in its most elementary form—­that is, assured destruction. The analysis
illustrates the retaliatory destructive potential that a side contemplat-
ing an attack would have to expect to survive on the side attacked. It
also compares this surviving destructive potential with the destructive
potential remaining to the attacking side, a consideration important to
both sides.
46. The measures employed in the analysis—­lethal area poten-
tial and hard-­target potential—­describe the remaining and surviving
potentials of each side to apply a prescribed overpressure over a wide
area or to attack representative hardened silos on the other side.10 The
analysis makes no estimate of which of these or other capabilities, or
what mix of them, national leaders would elect in retaliatory or second
strikes. But the comparison of the US and Soviet potentials does give
some feel for the options that would be available to national leaders,
and the composition of the residual potentials provides insights about
the suitability of the forces for rapid or delayed response.
47. There is a view in the Intelligence Community that the quasi-­
dynamic residual analysis in this Estimate produces misleading results
with respect to trends in the strategic balance, sheds little light on the
question of deterrence, and comprises a net assessment from the US
perspective which is not a proper function of intelligence. According
to this view, only analysis of comprehensive two-­sided exchanges can
10 The Soviet hard-­target potential is gauged against representative US silos hardened to
[text not declassified] The US potential is gauged against representative Soviet silos of hardnesses
[text not declassified]. [Footnote is in the original.]

convey valid and useful impressions about relative US and Soviet stra-
tegic nuclear capabilities. In this view, such analysis from the US per-
spective should be accomplished within the Department of Defense
with intelligence as a full partner, and should not be included in a
National Intelligence Estimate. Consequently, the holders of this view
believe that the analysis of residual forces in this Estimate (as summa-
rized in figures 4 and 5) should be removed. Further, the holders of this
view believe that the Intelligence Community should focus its efforts
on understanding and, if possible, duplicating Soviet analytical tech-
niques for net assessment.11
48. The Director of Central Intelligence believes that it would be a
disservice to national decision-­makers to produce this Estimate without
any interpretation of relative US and Soviet strategic nuclear capabili-
ties beyond that shown by static indicators. In his view, the inclusion
of quasi-­dynamic analysis, despite its limitations, allows the Estimate
to reach more comprehensive conclusions about relative strategic capa-
bilities and deterrent potentials and about perceptions of them. He
believes that the quasi-­dynamic analysis is important to those who see
the key ingredient of deterrence as the capability of one side to absorb a
first strike and retain enough absolute destructive potential to destroy
a broad mix of targets on the other side.
Soviet and US Residual Potentials
49. Figure 4 displays the results of our analysis of residual poten-
tials under a worst case circumstance for the side attacked—­that is, a
surprise attack when forces are on day-­to-­day alert. The SALT-­limited
forces of each side are used. In the US force, 200 MX missiles with 4,600
shelters are deployed between 1986 and 1989. The forked lines on these
charts indicate our uncertainty about whether the Soviets will deploy a
single-RV or a 10-RV missile as their one new ICBM, and show that the
trends would not be very different in either case.
50. The charts illustrate that, under SALT II limits, the potentials of
residual Soviet forces—­measured either in terms of lethal area poten-
tial or in terms of hard-­target potential—­will improve over the next
few years regardless of which side struck first. The Soviets will have a
sizable advantage in these potentials in the early and middle 1980s, but
US force improvements will erode and even reverse the Soviet gains if
SALT II limits extend beyond 1985. By 1989, Soviet residual potentials
would revert to levels equal to or less than those the Soviets would
have today, while US residuals would grow to levels substantially
larger than those available to the USSR. The Soviets could alter these
adverse trends if they deployed even larger numbers of mobile ICBMs
11 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the Senior
Intelligence Officers of the military services. [Footnote is in the original.]

and SLBMs or established high alert rates for such systems. It would
be difficult, however, for the Soviets between now and the late 1980s to
change their force mix sufficiently to reverse these trends.
51. Figure 5 compares the composition by major force element of
the residual lethal area potentials and hard-­target potentials of US and
Soviet SALT-­limited forces after a surprise attack by the other side:
—The composition of the surviving Soviet potentials reinforces the
impression that it is the continued heavy Soviet reliance on silo-­based
ICBMs that causes the adverse effects on Soviet residuals in the late
1980s if the United States deploys the MX.
—The composition of surviving US forces shows that, despite
increasing US ICBM silo vulnerability, US residuals decline only slightly
in the early 1980s because ICBMs make up a relatively small portion of
US prestrike potentials. Deployment of MX with 4,600 shelters would
not significantly increase the surviving US potentials if, as assumed in
this analysis, the Soviets were willing to expend large numbers of their
ICBMs to attack all MX shelters. The charts show that bombers and
ALCM carriers, which must be launched to survive attack and are sub-
ject to air defense attrition, would account for a large and increasing
fraction of the surviving US potentials.
52. To provide an indication of the urban and industrial destruc-
tion that could be achieved by the surviving lethal area potentials of
these SALT-­limited forces, we have compared them with US and Soviet
urban areas. We find that:
—Throughout the 1980s, the area over which surviving US forces
could theoretically create overpressures sufficient to destroy reinforced
concrete buildings would be equivalent to the [less than 1 line not declas-
sified] square kilometers. Even the relatively few surviving US ICBM
RVs would have the potential to destroy a large share of Soviet eco-
nomic value.
—In the early and middle 1980s, the Soviet surviving lethal area
potential would be equivalent to [less than 1 line not declassified] kilome-
ters. By the late 1980s, the surviving Soviet potential would have been
reduced to less than one-­half of this amount. Even then, however, the
Soviet potential would exceed that required to destroy most of the US
economic value.
53. We have also examined the surviving hard-­target potential of
each of these forces in relationship to the missile silos, shelters, and
hardened command and control bunkers of the other. We find that:
—Surviving US ICBM warheads would have the potential to
destroy only a small number of Soviet ICBM silos, but a large propor-
tion of the Soviet national- and intermediate-­level command and con-
trol bunkers. Surviving US bomber weapons would have the potential
to destroy a substantial portion of Soviet ICBM silos, although they
have relatively long flight times and would be subject to air defense
attrition.

—Surviving Soviet ICBM warheads, on the other hand, could
destroy a substantial number of US silos, as well as US hardened com-
mand and control facilities in quick-­reaction retaliatory strikes. They
could destroy only a small fraction of the US MX shelters available in
1989, however.
54. Finally we have examined the surviving potentials of the SALT-­
limited forces of each side to destroy nonsilo military targets, which
vary widely in area and hardness. Throughout the 1980s under SALT
circumstances, each side would have the surviving potential to destroy
a large percentage of these targets on the other side. For the United
States, the bulk of this potential would reside in either its surviving
SLBM warheads or its bomber weapons. For the USSR, the potential
would reside in either its surviving ICBM or SLBM warheads.
Implications
55. With regard to absolute residual capabilities the quasi-­dynamic
analysis indicates that, throughout the period of the Estimate, the SALT-­
limited forces of each side could devastate the other side in retaliation
after absorbing a first strike.
56. With regard to relative residual capabilities:
—The analysis shows that, if they struck first with SALT-­
constrained forces, the Soviets could have a substantial advantage in
residual potentials through the middle 1980s. The United States would
begin to narrow the gap thereafter and, in the late 1980s, would achieve
residual potentials about equal to those of the USSR. Thus, the United
States is at a disadvantage through the middle 1980s and the situation
then improves.
—From the point of view of Soviet concern about the possibility
of a US first strike, again with SALT-­constrained forces, the analysis
indicates that Soviet residuals would be the greater in the middle 1980s,
but would fall well below those of the United States by the late 1980s.
57. With regard to the very broad trends under SALT II conditions:
—The analysis shows a substantial Soviet improvement in the next
few years, reaching a plateau in the early and middle 1980s or peaking
in the middle 1980s. It shows a slight US decline in the early 1980s and
a sharp improvement in the US position in the late 1980s.
—These trends are caused by the combined effects of heavy Soviet
reliance on fixed land-­based ICBMs, US force diversity and planned
modernization, and SALT II limitations if extended through the decade.
F. Capabilities of Soviet Strategic Defenses
58. In light of the improving Soviet intercontinental offensive
capabilities, the extent to which Soviet strategic defenses—­air and mis-
sile defenses, antisubmarine warfare forces, and civil defense—­could
reduce the damage to the USSR from US retaliatory strikes is becom-
ing even more important. Currently, Soviet strategic defenses would

be unable to reduce significantly the weight of a large-­scale US nuclear
attack on the USSR.
Air Defense
59. At present the massive Soviet air defense forces, if undegraded,
would probably perform well against aircraft at medium and high alti-
tude, but they have little capability to intercept targets at low altitudes.
The graphs in figure 6 reflect our projections that:
—New interceptors, the majority of them equipped with modern
lookdown/shootdown capabilities, and a new low-­altitude surface-­to-­
air missile system will be deployed in substantial numbers during the
1980s.
—The percentage of the area of the western USSR covered by air
defense warning and control systems capable of vectoring lookdown/
shootdown fighters will grow gradually. Significant gaps in coverage
will remain, however.
—With the deployment of AWACS aircraft in conjunction with
longer range interceptors, the Soviets in the middle and late 1980s
would be able, for relatively brief periods (during a crisis, for example),
to mount forward defenses along the approach routes to the western
USSR. Such defenses would be designed to intercept US bombers and
to force ALCM carriers to launch their missiles at considerable dis-
tances from Soviet borders.
60. We are unable to quantify the attrition that Soviet air defenses
would be able to inflict on US low-­altitude aircraft and cruise missiles,
in part because of uncertainties about key technical characteristics
of future Soviet systems, and in part because we cannot quantify the
effects of important operational factors and interactions that would
bear heavily on actual air defense performance. Accordingly, there is a
view in the Intelligence Community which holds that graphs showing
the gross area of theoretical coverage of air defense systems, particu-
larly when standing alone, can be misleading as measures of Soviet air
defense potential. Because such graphs cannot incorporate important
deployment and operational considerations, this view concludes that
the graphs are not useful.12
61. The estimates that follow represent our best judgments about
the capabilities of Soviet air defenses against programed US aerody-
namic forces over the next decade:
—In the early 1980s, improved Soviet air defense systems will not
be available in numbers large enough to markedly improve defense
against bombers and cruise missiles at low altitudes.
—In the middle and late 1980s, Soviet air defenses will probably
have reduced the USSR’s vulnerability to US defense avoidance tactics
12 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the Senior
Intelligence Officers of the military services. [Footnote is in the original.]

and, if undegraded, will have the potential to inflict considerably higher
attrition against US bombers of current types. They will probably have
little or no effective capability against in-­flight US short-­range attack
missiles (SRAMs) carried by bombers.
—The Soviets will gradually develop the capability to defend some
key areas against currently programed US cruise missiles. Because
of technical and numerical deficiencies, however, their capability to
defend against a large force of US cruise missiles will probably remain
low.
—In addition, precursor missile attacks, defense saturation and
suppression, and electronic warfare would degrade the overall effec-
tiveness of Soviet air defenses.
—Thus, the actual performance of the defenses against combined
attacks involving large numbers of US bombers, SRAMs, and cruise
missiles will probably remain low during the period of this Estimate.
ABM Defense
62. Soviet R&D activities in ballistic missile defense continue. In
our view, these efforts represent hedging against an uncertain future
and are aimed at deterring the United States from abrogating the ABM
Treaty and developing options for ABM system deployment in the
1980s. There continues to be no evidence to suggest that the Soviets
have decided to deploy ABM defenses beyond Moscow.
63. Within the provisions of the ABM Treaty, the Soviets could use
the systems they have under development to improve their limited
ABM defenses at Moscow. Such improvements could provide better
capabilities to defend a few selected targets in the Moscow area, such
as command and control facilities, but could not provide more than
minimal defense against a large US missile attack.
64. The Soviet ABM R&D program could give the USSR options
to deploy additional ABM defenses beginning in the early or middle
1980s. If the ABM Treaty is abrogated, these options would include: fur-
ther expansion of the Moscow ABM defenses; relatively rapid deploy-
ment of an ABM system with aboveground launchers to protect other
key area targets; and slower paced deployment of a system with silo
launchers for defense of key area targets or for hard point defense of
selected military targets. The ABM system available for such deploy-
ment in the middle or late 1980s would be able to intercept US missile
RVs of all current types, including those accompanied by chaff. The
effectiveness of these defenses would depend most importantly on US
reactions, such as the deployment of penetration aids and the adapta-
tion of tactics.
65. For the past several years, we have expressed concern that, in
addition to ballistic missile early warning (BMEW), the four large radars
that are being built along the periphery of the USSR could also have or
be given the capability to perform ABM battle management. With such
a capability, these radars could constitute long-­leadtime preparations

for future ABM deployment. In terms of size and power, they have the
inherent potential for ABM battle management.
67. There is a divergent view in the Intelligence Community that
the available evidence is subject to alternative interpretation as to the
capabilities and intended use of the new radars, and is insufficient to
conclude that they are only for BMEW and space surveillance. Accord-
ing to this view, the fact remains that these long-­leadtime items possess
a significant potential for future ABM battle management and could
provide data accurate enough for such employment.13
Antisubmarine Warfare
68. Soviet forces with ASW capabilities are not now an effective
counter to US SSBNs. The critical problems confronting the USSR are
limitations in sensors and signal data processing. Major R&D programs
are under way to develop improved sensors for submarine detec-
tion. The number of nuclear-­powered attack submarines (SSNs) with
improved but still limited ASW capabilities will probably increase from
number of Y-­class SSBNs are converted to SSNs. We believe new classes
of Soviet SSNs will incorporate more effective noise reduction methods
than those in existing submarine classes. New types of surface ships
and long-­range patrol aircraft with somewhat improved capabilities for
ASW are likely. As a result:
—During the period of the Estimate, the USSR is likely to acquire
somewhat better capabilities to detect, track, and attack SSBNs that are
operating near the USSR or in confined waters, are leaving ports, or are
transiting choke points.
—Despite increasing numbers of ASW-­capable forces and
improved ASW sensors, we believe the Soviets have little prospect over
the next 10 years of being able to detect and track US submarines in
broad ocean areas.
—Moreover, longer range US SLBMs are significantly increasing
the ocean area within which US SSBNs will be able to operate and
remain within missile range of targets in the USSR.
—We therefore believe that, throughout the period of this Esti-
mate, the Soviets would be unable to prevent US SSBNs on patrol in
broad ocean areas from launching their missiles.
Directed-Energy Weapons
69. As part of a long-­term development effort in technologies
applicable to air, missile, and space defense, the Soviets are conduct-
ing extensive research in the advanced technologies of lasers, particle
13 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency; the Assistant Chief
of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; and the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence,
Department of the Air Force. [Footnote is in the original.]

beams, and nonnuclear electromagnetic pulse generation. The mag-
nitude, scope, and variety of these programs suggest that the Soviets
are actively exploring ways by which they might use directed-­energy
technology to overcome or alleviate major weaknesses in their strategic
defenses.
—The Soviets may now have a ground-­based laser capable of dam-
aging some satellite sensors and may have a space-­based antisatellite
weapon under development. With a successful high-­priority effort, the
Soviets might be able to have ground-­based laser air defense weapons
ready for operational deployment to strategic air defense forces in the
middle-­to-­late 1980s. The Soviets evidently are also investigating the
feasibility of a laser weapon for ballistic missile defense. We believe
that such a weapon, if feasible, could not be ready for operational
deployment before 1990.
—The Soviets probably have the capability to develop, by the mid-
dle 1980s, a ground-­based nonnuclear electromagnetic pulse weapon
designed to disrupt or destroy the electronic circuitry of enemy deliv-
ery systems.
—Soviet research programs applicable to particle beam weapons
(PBW) may permit the USSR to determine the feasibility of such weap-
ons several years before the United States. If feasibility is proved, the
Soviets probably could begin testing a prototype short-­range (about
3 km) PBW system for air defense by about 1990. There is an alternative
view that Soviet research in technologies applicable to PBW could be
sufficiently advanced to allow the USSR to begin prototype testing by
the middle 1980s, if feasibility is proved.14 All agree that development
of long-­range PBW weapons would take much longer.
Civil Defense
70. We have reassessed the ability of Soviet civil defenses to reduce
casualties from a US retaliatory attack following a Soviet first strike.
Casualties and fatalities would vary greatly depending on the extent of
civil defense preparations. Our findings indicate that, at present.
—Prompt Soviet casualties would be about 120 million (including
85 million fatalities) in the case of little or no preparation, about 100
million (60 million fatalities) if urban shelters were fully occupied, and
about 40 million (15 million fatalities) if both sheltering and evacuation
plans had been fully implemented.
—With a few hours warning, a large percentage of the Soviet lead-
ership at all levels of government probably would survive. With several
additional hours for preparation, about one-­fourth of the work force in
key Soviet industries probably would also survive.
—Civil defense could not prevent massive damage to the Soviet
economy.
14 The holder of this view is the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air
Force. [Footnote is in the original.]

71. In the late 1980s, prompt casualties and fatalities among the
general Soviet population would be somewhat greater than in 1979. At
present rates of shelter construction, the projected increase in shelter
capacity would be more than offset by increases in Soviet urban pop-
ulation and by improvements in US forces. Mass evacuation of cities
would still be necessary to save a substantial portion of the urban pop-
ulation. An even larger percentage of the leadership and essential per-
sonnel will probably have shelter protection, but the Soviet economy
will remain about as vulnerable as at present.
72. Given their belief that all aspects of society contribute to a
nation’s military capabilities, the Soviet leaders probably view civil
defense as contributing to their strength in the US-Soviet strategic bal-
ance. They almost certainly believe their present civil defenses would
improve their ability to conduct military operations and would enhance
the USSR’s chances of surviving a nuclear war. Our latest analyses of
the effects of civil defense, however, provide additional support to our
previous judgment that present and projected Soviet civil defense pro-
grams would not embolden the Soviet leaders to take actions during a
crisis that would involve deliberately accepting a high risk of nuclear
war.
73. There is an alternative view that the Soviet Union’s capabil-
ity to protect its extensive leadership infrastructure at all levels, even
under conditions of limited warning, enhances its ability to conduct
military operations, improves its crisis management, and promotes
postwar recovery. The continuing Soviet investment of major resources
in the civil defense program clearly demonstrates the confidence the
Soviet leaders have in its value. This confidence could contribute to
Soviet resolve in a future crisis environment. According to this view,
the Soviet civil defense program—­through its potential for influenc-
ing political perceptions, providing leverage for coercion during a cri-
sis, affecting nuclear exchange outcomes, and contributing to postwar
recovery—­impacts on both the reality of the strategic balance and on
perceptions of the balance in the USSR and elsewhere.15
15 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the Senior
Intelligence Officers of the military services. [Footnote is in the original.]

185.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 22, 1980
SUBJECT
Nuclear Employment Policy (C)
The basic strategy document of your Administration, PD–18,2
called for a follow-­on review of our nuclear employment policy. Two
major studies, one on targeting and one on secure reserve forces, were
the SCC accepted most of the recommendations, it also called for addi-
tional work. (S)
At the same time, Harold Brown began implementing the SCC
accepted recommendations. In January, 1979, as part of his annual
Defense Report, Harold laid out publicly the rationale for our evolv-
ing employment policy and gave it a name, “countervailing strategy.”
Together with the Joint Chiefs, Harold has been working out a detailed
implementation directive that he would issue. In the past few weeks,
the few outstanding issues have been resolved. (S)
Harold and I have discussed next steps, and we believe that it is
wise to codify these changes in a Presidential Directive as originally
intended by PD–18. The text of such a directive, which would replace
the extant NSDM–242, is at Tab A.4 Harold has edited it personally
and has discussed it with the Joint Chiefs of Staff because it largely
concerns military contingency planning. (S)
The directive marks a significant step in employment doctrine. Its
main features are:
—Maintenance of a strong thread of continuity with our past deter-
rence doctrine to include nuclear support for our allies.
—New emphasis on flexibility, which will make us better able to
adjust to any surprises that growing Soviet capabilities could present
us in operations. This is to be achieved through better staffing capabili-
ties, a gradual increase in reserve forces, and better targeting of mobile
and soft military targets as well as C3I.
written. Carter wrote next to it: “Zbig J.”
2 See Document 31.
3 See Document 118.
4 Printed as Document 208.

—Renewed emphasis on C3I as a more and more critical element of
an effective deterrent capability.
—A requirement for exercises to validate and improve our doc-
trine and capabilities. Your participation in IVORY ITEM exercises in
1978 gave a much needed check of our plans. The new directive calls
for two exercises annually. (TS)
In addition to the requirements for an integrating directive on
employment policy within the military services and the intelligence
community, there are two other compelling reasons for this docu-
First, Harold can use references to it in public and private state-
ments which are intended to complicate Soviet planning and to con-
vince them, and our allies, that we will not be paralyzed in a crisis
between cataclysmic options and capitulation. This is particularly criti-
cal for the next few years while a number of our strategic programs are
not yet fully deployed. (S)
Second, it may help blunt sharp criticism that we are not dealing
adequately with the changing requirements for deterrence in the face of
growing Soviet forces and capabilities. (S)
As for interagency handling, Harold prefers no further discussion.
(See his memo at Tab B). I agree and suggest that we treat it the same
way we do the SIOP. It is, after all, sensitive military contingency plan-
ning. Furthermore, it contains references to [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] Cuba, SRV, and North Korea as well as the Soviet Union, and how
they relate to the SIOP, information not known in such explicitness out-
side the DOD and the White House. Harold suggests that we discuss
the PD with Ed Muskie and work out an approach for presenting the
substance to the allies. (TS)
I propose two alternatives. First, that you sign the PD and instruct
Harold to prepare a version for use with both Ed Muskie and Stan
Turner. From that version we can develop the briefing approach to the
allies. Second, you can hold a short NSC meeting on the sanitized ver-
sion and then sign the PD. The approach to briefing the allies would be
the same. (TS)
RECOMMENDATION
Sign the directive at Tab A and instruct the Secretary of Defense to
prepare a sanitized version for interagency use,
OR
Convene a NSC meeting5
5 Carter struck-­through “NSC” and wrote after “meeting:” “to brief me & VP on
what is changed re targeting, flexibility, C3I, etc & proposals for briefing others & guide-
lines for public statements.”

Tab B

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)6
Washington, May 20, 1980
SUBJECT
PD on Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy
With your April 22 draft, modified as recorded in Walter Slo-
combe’s May 2 memo for General Welch,7 we have, I believe, a text for
a good directive on our nuclear employment policy. I think the next
step should be for the two of us to discuss it with Ed, given the obvious
foreign policy and alliance implications of the issue. I do not, however,
think any further interagency discussion is necessary or appropriate,
given the nature of the subject and the prior interagency discussion of
the underlying issues.
When we discuss the PD itself with Ed, we should also talk about
how best to present it to the Allies. One possibility would be a presenta-
tion at the forthcoming NPG. We will also need to discuss what (if any)
public statement should be made about it.
Harold
6 Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only.
7 Not found.

186.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Director of Central
Intelligence Turner1
Washington, May 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Crisis Management
As you perhaps know, Bill Odom, Bob Gates, and Carl Smith con-
vened to discuss your memorandum of May 7 on improving commu-
nications and other support for managing such incidents as the recent
rescue mission. The following improvements will be made:
—Two additional secure voice terminals will be installed in the Sit-
uation Room. One already exists.
—A program for increasing the number of secure lines into the
White House has been in progress for some time. As it is completed in
the coming year, the number of secure lines into the Situation Room will
increase above the present five by several. We have recently installed a
new dial directory with a capacity for four additional lines. In emergen-
cies we can divert circuits to use them now.
On your recommendation that an additional private circuit from
NSA be installed in the White House, we do not have the space and
personnel to support it in a mode separate from the present terminal
in the Situation Room. In crises, therefore, we shall continue to use the
present arrangement.
On maps, graphics, and other support, we shall be delighted with
any additional resources you are willing to commit to this purpose. A
secure video link in the Situation Room Conference Room allows us at
present to look at maps, charts, and other graphics in the NMCC. When
we have time, however, our procedures call for requests for actual maps
and graphics from either CIA or DOD.
On the occasion of the rescue mission2 we did not take advan-
tage of the extant facilities in the Situation Room Conference Room,
but I believe that was an exception, not the rule. With those capabilities
and planned improvements, the next occasion should prove easier to
handle.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
held hostage by Iranian revolutionaries since November 1979.

Attachment

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)3
Washington, May 7, 1980
SUBJECT
Crisis Management
1. During the long meeting of the NSC the night the rescue mission
aborted, vital communication with the Pentagon, State and CIA was
carried out by Harold Brown and Cy Vance using the President’s secure
telephone in the Oval Office and through Bob Gates passing informa-
tion to me that he had received via the secure telephone in your office.
I think you will agree that at a time when we were so dependent on
real time information from the Pentagon, CIA and NSA, these arrange-
ments did not serve us well. They were neither efficient nor, as it turned
out, particularly accurate.
2. I know that you have had Bill Odom working to improve White
House crisis management procedures, particularly with respect to
nuclear conflict and other large scale operations. Nevertheless, in keep-
ing with our conversation the week of the rescue attempt, I believe sev-
eral inexpensive, easy to implement changes can be made to improve
substantially communications to and from the SCC and the NSC during
crises of a lower order of magnitude—­such as the rescue attempt. These
might include:
—Installing a secure voice conference call capability in the Situa-
tion Room conference room. This would enable all of us to receive infor-
mation directly and simultaneously from the NMCC, CIA and NSA,
thus saving time and improving the accuracy of information received.
—Providing for permanent direct secure voice channels from the
Situation Room to the NMCC, the CIA Operations Center, and the State
Department Operations Center. These would be helpful at any time,
but I think you will agree could prove especially useful during a crisis
situation. This would also leave available two or three or more regular
secure voice channels for principals or staff to use.
—Installation of another direct link between NSA and the Situ-
ation Room. The existing link is used for the transmission of routine
NSA traffic. A second channel could be used for passage of information
in extremely close hold situations (such as the rescue), bypassing staff
3 Secret. Brzezinski wrote in the upper right corner of the memorandum: “WO.

both at NSA and, if you deemed appropriate, at the White House as
well.
—Arrangements should also be considered to improve CIA sup-
port to the Situation Room in terms of rapid provision of maps, graph-
ics and satellite photography.
3. I recommend that you name a small, informal working group to
look into these and perhaps other modest changes that might be made
to improve communications into and out of the Situation Room during
crises. Such a group might include those who are most familiar with
the arrangements and could effect the changes without a lot of bureau-
cratic red tape. Obviously, your representative (presumably Bill Odom)
should chair the group; Bob Gates would be my representative and per-
haps it would be worthwhile to include Harold’s assistant, Carl Smith,
and others you might deem appropriate. The group should act, in my
view, as quickly as possible. If you think this idea has merit, please ask
Bill to be in touch with Bob.4
Stansfield Turner
4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this paragraph and
wrote: “WO proceed. ZB.”
187.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 4, 1980
SUBJECT
Missile Warning Incident
I am attaching Graham Claytor’s written communication to Sena-
tor Stennis and Congressman Price for your information. He has made
it brief and usable as a contingency press release if the incident leaks.
(See Tab A). (S)
mation. Carter initialed the top of the memorandum.

You asked two questions yesterday.2 We have the answer to the
first: are the two computer systems connected? They are, but the con-
nection apparently did not generate analogous behavior by both. That
leads to your second question, what triggered the information on the
warning display? They do not yet know. An answer may be available
in a few days, but the mysteries in this incident, plus recent previous
incidents,3 have sufficiently disturbed Defense so that Bill Perry will
lead a panel of experts on a major system review that goes far beyond
an answer for this case alone.4 (S)

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense5
Washington, June 4, 1980
FACT SUMMARY
Early yesterday morning a technical problem in a computer at
North American Air Defense Command caused some erroneous data
to be transmitted. As a result some displays at the National Military
Command Center and Strategic Air Command Headquarters indicated
multiple missile launches against the United States; however, other
information available directly from the sensor system failed to confirm
that any missiles had been launched. As a precaution and in accordance
with standard procedures, certain Strategic Air Command aircraft and
Command and Control aircraft were brought to a higher state of readi-
ness. These aircraft were manned and engines started. One Command
and Control aircraft in the Pacific took off. There was no change in
overall US defense posture and, after an evaluation, all systems were
returned to normal.
The cause of the computer discrepancy is under investigation. In
the meantime arrangements have been made to insure that at all times a
special secure telephone connection is in effect to provide a parallel line
of communication from one center to the other, permitting even more
prompt override, if necessary, of any false computer driven indications
of an attack.
2 No other record of Carter’s questions was found.
4 Brzezinski wrote below the last paragraph: “I have asked for a fuller report for
you.”
5 Secret.

Throughout the event on 3 June, the command center personnel
at all locations performed well and in accordance with established
directions.
188.	 Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense1
Washington, June 4, 1980
FACT SHEET
During the morning of 3 June a missile warning incident occurred
which caused certain precautionary measures to be taken within our
strategic forces in accordance with standard procedures. The purpose
of this fact sheet is to provide information concerning this incident and
to outline corrective steps which have been and will be taken.
Technical problems in the computer system that provides infor-
mation to the National Command System caused erroneous data to be
generated which in turn provided indications in the National Military
Command Center (NMCC) and at the Strategic Air Command (SAC)
Headquarters of a missile attack against the United States. However,
key missile warning sensor systems, which are connected directly to
the NMCC, to the SAC Command Center, and to the North American
Air Defense Command (NORAD) gave no indication of hostile mis-
sile activity and, therefore, strong indications of the spurious nature of
the data were available. Throughout the incident, the data at NORAD
headquarters reflected that all sensor systems were functioning prop-
erly and that no missile launches had been detected by these sensors.
The first threat indication was received by SAC directly from the
NORAD computer. The indication was a missile warning display of two
Sea Launched Ballistic Missile (SLBM) trajectories indicating the possi-
bility of the missiles being targeted against the United States. Within
a short time, this display had increased to a large number of SLBM
trajectories. The SAC Senior Controller, acting in accordance with stan-
dard procedures, initiated an alarm which caused all SAC alert bomber,
tanker, and postattack command and control crews to move to alert
to Brown under cover of a June 5 memorandum which reads: “Attached is a copy of the
fact sheet concerning the June 3 missile warning incident, which the President saw this
morning. The President has asked that you receive a copy with his two questions.”

aircraft, start engines, and await further instructions. Commander
in Chief, SAC, subsequently directed that the SAC crews shut down
engines but remain in their aircraft.
The National Emergency Airborne Command Post (NEACP) at
Andrews AFB received the initial notification of a possible threat of
large numbers of SLBMs and automatically initiated actions prepara-
tory to emergency launch. By the time the NEACP had taxied into posi-
tion for takeoff, the SLBM threat no longer appeared on the display
consoles in the NMCC and the senior watch officer directed the NEACP
to hold in place. The Pacific Command Airborne Command Post, how-
ever, did launch in response to the indications.2
This incident may appear similar to the false indication of a mis-
event was caused by an inadvertent injection of a test scenario into
the NORAD computer system. Extensive corrective actions have been
taken to prevent a similar incident, and all testing and corrective work
is being transferred to a separate computer system. The cause of the
events on 3 June is as yet undetermined. All possibilities are being
pursued. A long term effort will be initiated to determine and correct
basic problems within the entire system. Until this review is completed,
the NMCC, SAC and NORAD Command Centers will be on a special
watch condition known as “Voice Tell,” which insures that a special
secure telephone connection is in effect to provide a parallel line of
communications. This will permit information to be passed immedi-
ately from one center to the other, overriding if necessary any false
computer driven indications of an attack.
Throughout the event on 3 June, the command center personnel
at all locations performed well and in accordance with established
directives.
W. Graham Claytor
2 Carter wrote in the left margin next to this and the following paragraph: “What
caused it? Corrective action?”
3 See Document 167.

189.	 Memorandum From the President’s Science and Technology
Adviser (Press) to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 6, 1980
SUBJECT
Activities Report concerning Presidential Directive/NSC–24; Telecommunications
Protection Policy (U)
PD/NSC–242 was issued to establish a national policy to guide
the conduct of U.S. Government activities in and related to the security
and/or protection of telecommunications. Attached is the 1979 report
of activities required by PD/NSC–24. (U)
The Soviet Union continues to intercept U.S. domestic micro-
wave telecommunications systems from their Embassy and other
diplomatically immune locations in Washington, D.C., San Francisco,
and New York City. We are also seriously concerned about their inter-
cept activities of U.S. Domestic satellites from their collection site in
Cuba and from vessels off each of our coasts operating in interna-
tional waters. (TS)
You may recall that the U.S. Government instituted a program
called DUCKPINS which moved selected leased government circuits
from microwave to underground cable facilities. When these targets
dried up, [less than 1 line not declassified] reported the movement of
Soviet targeting to other government agencies, economic targets and
Defense contractors. The DOD was alerted and they began looking at
possible solutions. (TS)
The fact that Defense contractors were now a prime Soviet tar-
get was verified in the 1979 Threat Assessment I asked Stan Turner to
conduct,3 the specifics of which were briefed to the subcommittee by
Admiral Inman in July 1979.4 Defense gave an initial briefing to the sub-
committee in August concerning how they would approach a counter-
measures program. They very candidly advised that this area would
require considerable time and study since a more complex dimension
was now added to our protection concerns. I expect Defense to have
their protection strategy plan available for review by mid-July and will
2 See Document 40.
3 Not found.
4 No minutes of the meeting were found.

convene the PD/NSC–24 Subcommittee to hear their briefing soon
thereafter. After your review of the attached report I recommend you
forward the Executive Summary to the President and you authorize
distribution to all Subcommittee members. (TS)
Frank Press

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Office of Science and Technology
Policy5
Washington, April 15, 1980
[Omitted here is the title page and table of contents.]
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Soviet Union is intercepting U.S. domestic microwave tele-
communications from diplomatically immune locations in Washington,
D.C., New York City and San Francisco. Exploitation of U.S. common
carrier domestic satellite communications is also of serious concern.
Presidential Directive PD/NSC–24 was issued with the objective of
enhancing the protection of United States communications, the inter-
cept and exploitation of which may be useful to a foreign adversary.
Primary emphasis was placed on protecting government information
of value to the USSR. (TS)
The Presidential Directive assigned Executive Agent responsi-
bilities to the Departments of Defense and Commerce. The Secre-
tary of Defense is the Executive Agent for Communications Security
(COMSEC) to protect government-­derived classified information and
government-­derived unclassified information which relates to national
security. The Secretary of Commerce is the Executive Agent for the
protection of government-­derived information not related to national
security and for dealing with the commercial and private sector to
enhance their communications protection and privacy capabilities.
The State Department, the Manager, National Communications Sys-
tem (NCS), and the General Services Administration (GSA), were also
given specific on-­going responsibilities. Revised guidance was given to
5 Top Secret.

the Executive Agents in a November 26, 1979 Implementation Decision
Memorandum to clarify their role relationships.6 (U)
MAJOR ACTIVITIES IN 1979
—PROJECT DUCKPINS—A government program to minimize
Soviet interception of telephone conversation over domestic micro-
wave radio by transferring selected U.S. government voice circuits
from microwave to underground cable facilities in Washington, D.C.,
New York City and San Francisco. Circuits actually under this protec-
tion number 17,347 with another 1,067 on order. A third phase has been
initiated by DOD which is responsive to both this program and the
proposed a cable fix for 22 high priority defense contractors which
were designated as “Most Sensitive.” Defense plans to route all of these
leased circuits, which carry information of value to an adversary, by
cable in the three Protected Communications Zones (PCZs), by the end
of 1980. The Agency has also been tasked to brief these high priority
contractors on the domestic intercept threat, and provide the Manager,
NCS, assistance in circuit identification and selection, necessary for the
implementation of protective cable routing. These contractors, how-
ever, represent only a fraction of the total problem. In addition to pro-
posing Defense Contractor protection fixes, an overall DOD plan, still
in the formative stages, will be forwarded to the Special Subcommittee,
for decision and will include a broader, system-­wide series of propos-
als which will in large part deny the Soviets the information they are
targeting. (S)
—EXECUTIVE SECURE VOICE NETWORK (ESVN)—The Assis-
tant Secretary of Defense for C3I declared the ESVN fully operational.
This network was subsequently renamed the Federal Secure Telephone
Service; its capability and electronic cryptographic key distribution was
expanded as well as additional secure voice terminals being installed.
There are now 249 operational terminals as compared to 90 reported
last year. (C)
—GSA BULK PROTECTION PROGRAM—With the assistance
and approval of the NSA the General Services Administration has:
Closed bids for proposals for FTS voice service to Alaska, Seattle-­
Anchorage, 72 circuits, Seattle-Juneau, 24 circuits and San Francisco
Advisor Press to Secretary of Defense Brown and Acting Secretary of Commerce Luther
Hodges, copying multiple agencies, in which Press delineated lines of responsibilities
between the Department of Defense and Department of Commerce in achieving policy
objectives as established in PD/NSC–24. (Central Intelligence Agency Electronic Reading
7 Not found.

and Washington, D.C., 192 circuits. The initial implementation plan
uses the DOD developed CY–104 systems which bulk encrypts in 24
channel increments. Contract awards on the procurements are planned
to begin the second quarter of 1980. Since September 1979, GSA has
been using 19 of 24 bulk protected voice channels of the DOD satellite
system between Hawaii and California. In addition to the protection,
this sharing reduces costs for the circuits by approximately sixty thou-
sand dollars a year. With the cooperation of various international carri-
ers GSA moved 12 circuits normally routed over unprotected satellites
between Hawaii and Puerto Rico to the U.S. Mainland to less vulnera-
ble cable routes. (C)
—BRIEFING PROGRAM—Telecommunications carriers and gov-
ernment contractors were to be briefed on the nature of the threat. The
National Security Agency has thus far briefed a total of 33 Defense con-
tractors on the domestic intercept threat—­sixteen briefings were done
in 1979 with additional ones planned for the January–March 1980 time
frame. The NTIA conducted a series of unclassified briefings with 12 of
the major common carriers. (C)
—SOVIET TARGETING OF U.S. CITIZENS—The 1979 Threat
Assessment contained no evidence to suggest that private citizens have
become targets. (S)
—REAL ESTATE ACQUISITION BY COMMUNIST COUN-
TRIES—The Real Property Committee, an interagency group chaired
by State was established by PD–24 to review and if necessary deny
Soviet and communist bloc property acquisitions that present a seri-
ous potential threat to U.S. telecommunications security. The commit-
tee met seven times; initially in February with Ambassador Leonard of
the USUN to ensure that he was fully cognizant of the technical and
political background concerning the Soviet interests in New York prop-
erty acquisitions. On the advice of the FBI and NSA, the Committee
interposed no objection to a possible Bulgarian purchase of property
for a chancery at the International Center on Connecticut Avenue and
Van Ness Street. Since 1973 the State Department had been encourag-
ing the PRC to acquire properties in the open marketplace without a
requirement for prior Department approval. On May 10 the Committee
discussed a building which the FBI had learned that the PRC planned
to acquire, and considered again the question of requiring the PRC to
obtain State Department approval before buying.8 The Committee con-
cluded that it was insufficiently instructed to make decisions on either
the specific building in question or on its future role in the broader ques-
tion of bringing PRC property acquisitions under U.S. control. Based on
this circumstance the PRC Embassy in Washington was advised that
8 No minutes of the meeting were found.

the State Department should be kept informed of PRC plans to acquire
property. This was reiterated in a diplomatic note of October 26 which
stated the necessity to obtain the Department’s approval prior to the
acquisition or occupancy of diplomatic, consular, or other property in
the United States.9 The Chinese have advised that in the future it will
comply with the request. (TS)
—NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY COMMITTEE—
The publication of NSC/PD–24 rescinded the 1968 NSC United States
Communications Security Board (USCSB) directive10 and necessitated
the construction of a supporting interagency advisory committee to
replace the former USCSB. The National Communications Security
Directive, established the National COMSEC Committee (NCSC) to
advise and assist the Executive Agent in formulating and implementing
This directive delineates, under the Secretary of Defense, the COMSEC
responsibilities of the NCSC, the Director, NSA, and department and
agency heads. (U)
—INFORMATION ASSESSMENT (GOVERNMENT)—A series of
information assessments were conducted in 1979. Among others, the
National Security Agency (NSA) completed a COMSEC threat report
for Federal Reserve and Treasury International Communications with
Foreign officials. The study was undertaken by the NSA following a
formal request from the Federal Reserve Systems Board of Governors.
They evaluated the specific threat to the security of voice and printed
(TELEX) communications between either the Federal Reserve or Trea-
sury on one hand and foreign governments or central banks on the
other. Treasury has initiated several thorough investigations to assess
the value of information processed by the department which could
benefit an adversary. Vulnerabilities, thought to be non-­existent, have
been identified, and personnel involved have reacted positively. The
level of awareness has been raised significantly. As a direct result of
one survey concerning the Bureau of Government Financial Opera-
tions, Treasury Financial Communications System they are now in the
process of encrypting the system with Data Encryption Standard (DES)
based equipment. The Special Project Office of NTIA completed five
Embassy of real estate located at 5315 Connecticut Ave. N.W., Washington, D.C. We
also called ‘The Embassy’s attention to the necessity to obtain the Department of State’s
approval prior to the acquisition or occupancy of diplomatic, consular or other official
property in the United States.’” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
rity Directive is at the National Security Agency website.
11 Not found.

telecommunications and information vulnerability surveys in the Fed-
eral civil sector and had three more in progress. Each survey performed
by NTIA documents specific findings and offers NTIA’s recommenda-
tions for corrective action. The eight survey projects involved a range of
Federal civil governmental activities including agencies specializing in
socioeconomic matters, transportation, scientific matters, law enforce-
ment, a regulatory agency, and an organization involved with national
financial activities. Each was an in-­depth study of agency telecommuni-
cations resources and included interviews with operations, telecommu-
nications, and management personnel. Agencies who have participated
in this project have given NTIA “high marks” for their thoroughness,
professionalism and excellence of the survey findings and recommen-
dations. (U)
PROGRAM OVERVIEW
DUCKPINS continues to be our most potent countermeasure with
a limited in-­place bulk encryption effort trailing behind. NSA’s bulk
protection technology development progresses slowly due to a variety
of national network problems which must be overcome. Lack of secure
voice terminals continues to hamper fulfilling our end-­to-­end voice
security and protection requirements. Overall progress toward imple-
menting “fixes” to deny the Soviets information or access to informa-
tion has been undeniably slow. This has been due in part to technology
problems and in part to an inability to identify information requiring
protection. (S)
As previously reported the difficulty of defining or accurately
determining what unclassified information is, or may be useful to a for-
eign adversary or whether it is, or is not national security related con-
tinues to plague us and obscure executive agent responsibilities. This
situation is further compounded by the recognition that classes and
categories of information can be, and in many instances, are “moving
targets.” That is, information can rapidly gravitate from one category
to another for a host of reasons depending upon national or interna-
tional conditions. One thing is clear, however, only the originator of the
information operating within departmental guidelines can legitimately
decide whether his or her information should be protected from inter-
ception while in transmission. (U)
The briefing programs by both Executive Agents are notewor-
thy and continued without abatement. Similarly the information
vulnerability studies being done by the NTIA have been extremely
successful. All department and agencies should avail themselves of
this service. (U)
After discussions with the Director, NSA and Administrator, NTIA,
an Implementation Decision Paper was issued in late 1979 in an attempt

to clarify executive agent responsibilities; it has in some respects helped
the situation. (U)
PLANS AND PROJECTIONS FOR 1980
—The COMSEC Threat Report program to determine and dissemi-
nate foreign SIGINT threats to U.S. telecommunications and the vulner-
ability analysis program of both U.S. civil and military communications
will continue and will provide for the subsequent establishment of
COMSEC standards and doctrine. (S)
—The remaining contractors from the list of 22 “Most Sensitive
Contractors” will be briefed on the intercept threat to their communi-
cations. (S)
—Field trials of the LADNER equipment will be conducted on the
terrestrial microwave systems of the Other Common Carriers (OCCs)
to verify compliance with a system performance and operating require-
—Develop a Federal policy concerning the protection require-
ments for leased, commercial or government-­owned communications
satellite circuits. (U)
—COMSEC doctrine will be developed for unclassified DES appli-
cations; however, the absence of a comprehensive data base on com-
puter security will make progress both difficult and slow. (C)
—The Phase I PCZ Pilot Program and the FSTS will continue oper-
ation and expansion as various implementation levels are approved. (S)
—Procedures to verify compliance of commercial DES equipments
with FS–1027 for unclassified national security-­related applications
should be finalized. (U)
—The position paper on public cryptography will be compiled,
coordinated, and submitted. (U)
—The security evaluations of the six DES-­based equipments for
NTIA will continue and should be completed during 1980. (S)
—Complete the DUCKPINS III Program by December 1980. (S)
—Emphasis will be placed on the bulk protection of FTS circuits
transmitted over satellite and terrestrial microwave systems. Commer-
cial cryptography will be used whenever appropriate, available and
cost effective. (C)
—Develop an options paper for a Federal policy which authorizes
and provides for selected unclassified information which, when so
marked, must be protected during electrical transmission. (U)
—Complete arrangements for the sharing satellite capacity on
two or more wideband systems which will provide FTS protected ser-
vice for Guam to Hawaii and Puerto Rico to the CONUS communica-

—Develop a program to facilitate procurement and distribution of
all appropriate department and agency secure voice equipment (STU
II) which may permit the government to take advantage of large order
procurements and resulting economies of scale. (C)
—Initiate procurement actions for commercial cryptographic sys-
tems to replace CY–104 systems where cost-­effective and technically
feasible. The National Bureau of Standards (NBS) Data Encryption
Standard (DES) will be used until a certification process is established
and other technologies made available. (C)
—Expand the KY–70 to KY–3 interface from two to four ports to
improve intersystem communications by eliminating queing problems.
Both should be operational by July 1980. (C)
190.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, June 7, 1980
SUBJECT
False Missile Alert (U)
SUMMARY
In summary, I feel that we have a serious problem with the com-
puter system at NORAD. I intend to devote adequate senior staff atten-
tion, manpower, and resources to correction of this problem as soon as
possible. However, in spite of this deficiency, I have confidence both
that the overall system is designed so that you will get accurate warning
information in a timely manner and that there are enough safeguards in
the system that the United States would not take any offensive action
based on false information.
The command and control of our strategic forces is an essential
part of our nuclear deterrent. We must avoid repetition of incidents
which weaken our confidence or the Soviets perceptions. Therefore,
while we will be brutally honest internally we must pursue our fixes
with a minimum of publicity.
Harold Brown
191.	 Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom)
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 9, 1980
SUBJECT
Missile Attack Warning System Deficiencies (S)
As you noted on Saturday,2 this latest erroneous attack warning
by the NORAD–SAC computer system is creating not only operational
problems for us but also public perception and political problems.3 I
recommend a number of steps for preempting some of the adverse crit-
icism and also for getting some important things done. (S)
Sent for information. A stamped notation indicates Brzezinski saw the memorandum.
Brzezinski drew a line from Odom’s initials in the heading to the right margin of the
memorandum and wrote: “WO, Speak to me. ZB.”
2 June 7.

First, a commission to investigate must be set up at once. The JCS
and SAC cannot be left to review the problems alone. The Defense Sci-
ence Board might provide the umbrella. To be compelling to public
critics, it cannot be Harold Brown’s in-­house review. You might con-
sider Schlesinger to head the review. That appointment could achieve
two things at once. First, Schlesinger’s prestige and Republican back-
ground could help turn the matter into a bi-­partisan affair. Second, it
could take Schlesinger out of the public debate the remainder of the
summer. He can be expected to become more vocal against the Admin-
istration. (S)
Second, [2 lines not declassified] I am attaching a memo (Tab A)4
in which I made the case against this option. [1 line not declassified]
Brown, for some reason, [4 lines not declassified] if he knew that we
have an [less than 1 line not declassified] option [less than 1 line not declas-
sified] he would give the President fits. He also promised that the
Senate Armed Services Committee (SASC) would be looking into the
matter. [1 line not declassified]
Third, the President should sign the targeting PD5 [less than 1 line
not declassified] soon. [1 line not declassified] The PD, properly back-
grounded to the press, should help diffuse the NORAD issue. You will
recall that I have frequently referred to the SIOP and the NORAD–SAC
plan for war as having many of the characteristics of the German and
Russian war plans of 1914. They were based on the assumption that
the war would be short. They could not be reversed once commenced.
They set in motion enormous forces and actions, the consequences of
which planners had only the vaguest notion. And they were not related
to the war aims of any party involved. Although we cannot dismantle
the SIOP system, we can surely begin serious problems to give us less
cataclysmic options. (TS)
Fourth, the SCC on COG/C3I, scheduled for this week, can be
both politically and operationally useful in this present situation. Any
investigation by an outside commission will soon determine that NCA
survivability is doubtful if the present system is stressed by a Soviet
strike at our C3I. The COG/C3I study recommendations would launch
the first serious program to increase NCA survivability since the 1950s.
(TS)
In summary, the President can, in the next ten days, take four sig-
nificant steps.
—Set up a commission to investigate the NORAD system.
—[1 line not declassified]
4 Not found attached.
5 See Document 208.

—Sign the targeting PD and begin the backgrounders on the gen-
eral direction away from a short-­warning response to more flexibility.
—Get out a PD on COG/C3I which will expedite programs that
will make us able to ride out very large attacks and C3I attacks, and still
respond in a coordinated fashion under Presidential control at a time of
our choosing, not in the five or ten minutes provided by NORAD. (TS)
If you like this general approach, then we should arrange for
Brown to brief the President on the PD by Wednesday at the latest.6
[1 line not declassified] The COG/C3I is on track. The investigating com-
mission should be raised with Brown today, and a decision can be taken
on how to proceed by Wednesday when the PD is discussed. (TS)
6 Denend drew a vertical line to the left of this sentence, extended the line to the
bottom of the page, and wrote on June 6: “ZB, I have not heard back from Phil Wise on a
briefing time. The P’s schedule is really tight this week. Les.”

192.	 Memorandum From Jasper Welch of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, June 12, 1980
SUBJECT
SASC Action on FY–81 Strategic Programs Budget
In committee action yesterday, the Senate Armed Service Commit-
tee (SASC) made several significant changes in the strategic forces por-
tion FY–81 defense budget. These were:
—Authorizing deployment of 100 existing MINUTEMAN III mis-
siles in MINUTEMAN II silos.2
—Authorized starting the FB–111 stretch program.3
—Restrictive M–X language: “Notwithstanding any other provi-
sion of law, the initial phase of construction shall be limited to 2300
protective shelters for the M–X missile in the initial deployment area.”4
Comments
If we go forward with deployment of the additional 100 MINUTE-
MAN III missiles, our MIRVed missile launcher total will reach the
SALT II ceiling of 1200 in the spring of 1982 when the third TRIDENT
SSBN goes on sea trials (vice December 1984 and the seventh TRIDENT
if the MINUTEMAN III level is kept at 550). If the SALT II Treaty is in
force at that time, we most probably would choose to remove MIN-
UTEMAN III launchers to stay within the 1200 limit. While in principle
this could be done by reconverting them to MINUTEMAN II launch-
ers, there is virtually no possibility that the SCC procedures for con-
verting MIRVed to unMIRVed launchers would permit MINUTEMAN
III to II conversions without major changes to the launchers (if this is
permitted at all). As a consequence we would almost certainly end up
and Assistant to the Office of Management and Budget Hubert Harris. Brzezinski wrote
in the upper right corner: “DA, note. ZB.” And unknown hand wrote below Brzezinski’s
2 Aaron underlined “100 existing MINUTEMAN III,” drew an arc in the margin to
the left of this sentence, and wrote: “Do we have to?” An unknown hand wrote below
3 Aaron underlined “FB–111 stretch program.”
4 Aaron underlined “2300 protective shelters for the M–X missile in the initial
deployment area.”

dismantling the MINUTEMAN III launchers. Thus, under SALT II, the
net effect of the deployment of 100 additional MINUTEMAN III would
be (by 1985) the loss of 100 “perfectly good” MINUTEMAN IIs—­and
an unfortunate loss of 100 in the overall US aggregate at a point when
we won’t even be near the 2250 level in terms of operational5 systems.
While early 1981 action on the SALT II Treaty could reverse the SASC
action, it will produce one more argument for the anti-SALT forces in
the Senate.
The Senate action promoting FB–111 stretch and the House action
promoting B–1 derivatives seems unlikely to produce a conference
compromise which would be acceptable to the Administration.
The restrictive M–X language is in fact quite vacuous in content and
is not a bad outcome considering what we might have been stuck with.
Incidently, we have the Air Force to thank for continuing to oppose
restrictive language and eventually obtaining this thoroughly watered-­
down version. It is said that OSD was prepared to give up much earlier.
Conclusion
Unless the MINUTEMAN and FB–111 changes are later overturned
on the Senate floor or in conference, the Administration is going to be
faced with a very tough decision on the DOD Authorization Bill.
5 Aaron underlined “the 2250 level in terms of operational.” An unknown hand
193.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, June 13, 1980
SUBJECT
Actions Taken to Correct Errors Identified by the False Missile Warnings
This memorandum is an update on our actions to identify and cor-
rect the false missile alert problem.
upper right corner of the memorandum.

As you are aware, the false indications that led to the precaution-
ary measures taken at SAC on June 3 and 6 resulted from a computer
malfunction. These false indications were immediately identified by
duty officers, who exercised the planned safeguards designed for such
a contingency. The corrective actions taken thus far include procedures
to strengthen human safeguards as well as technical measures to repair
the immediate problem in the computer. The following are specific
actions which have been taken in these two categories:
Operational and Procedural Actions
Emergency action procedures have been modified so that any com-
mand center can request a Missile Display Conference (MDC). This is
the lowest of three levels of conference: Missile Display; Threat Assess-
ment; and Missile Attack. Any potentially threatening warning indica-
tion will result in an MDC, and MDCs will be conducted on dedicated
secure voice circuits. If any delay occurs, non-­secure voice circuits will
be used.
Amendments have been made in SAC missile warning procedures
on an interim basis pending a complete review of all relevant proce-
dures. No posture change will be made in SAC forces unless confirmed
by a NORAD system confidence of “medium” or “high,” or the receipt
by SAC of sensor data indicating a potential missile attack directly
from either our infrared-­sensing satellites or our new SLBM warning
radar.
The Chairman of the JCS has discussed with me, and then approved,
a revised Situation Action display. The revision adds missile count
information derived from directly-­connected sensor data. The display
already has NORAD summary data for each sensor system. Thus, both
the NORAD summary (which comes through the computer) and direct
(though less detailed) data from the sensors can be compared on one
display. Software program development and checkout testing will take
approximately three weeks at SAC. Installation at NMCC and ANMCC
will require an additional four days. Since NORAD does not have the
Situation Action display, installation at NORAD will take significantly
longer.
The Chairman of the JCS visited SAC Headquarters and NORAD
Headquarters yesterday and today to discuss new procedures and fol-
low-­on actions.
Technical/Equipment Actions
The technical problem that generated the false displays occurred
in a NOVA 840 minicomputer manufactured by Data General. The
specific minicomputer that introduced the problem is four years old
and is used in the Communications System Segment (CSS) at NORAD.

NORAD is almost certain they have isolated the problem to a single
chip in an interface for the high-­speed data lines. Until the fault is posi-
tively isolated and corrected, the following interim precautionary mea-
sures have been taken:
—A different and separate computer, the Mission Essential Backup
(MEBU), is now the primary source of NORAD-­processed data.
—The CSS has been taken out of operation. If the MEBU should
fail, a different channel of the CSS, and the low-­speed teletype data
lines (neither of which has experienced problems), will be activated to
provide data to the command centers other than NORAD. (NORAD
would use all CSS data in this case.)
A task force of highly competent and respected computer experts
from the private sector, headed by Bob Evans (Vice President of IBM
for Engineering, Programming, and Technology), has been assembled
to conduct a thorough review of the computer and communications
problems at NORAD. The task force began meeting on Tuesday2 and a
preliminary report is due this weekend.
I will continue to keep you advised of our progress.
Harold Brown
2 June 10.
194.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, June 13, 1980
SUBJECT
False Missile Alerts
I think that the following background information is helpful in
providing a context for answering questions about the recent false mis-
sile alerts.2 (U)
initialed the top of the memorandum.

Many times each year there are events which result in a display
indicating launch of either a single or of a few missiles. These can be
caused by a Soviet test launch of ICBMs or SLBMs, which are observed
by our infrared satellites. Occasionally they are caused by errors: elec-
tronic interference in one of our radars, which results in a false indi-
cation; the reflection of sunlight off the top of high clouds or off the
surface of a pond which causes a false target in our infrared satellites;
communications error; or computer malfunction. (S)
Moreover, there are about 50–60 Soviet test launches every year.
Because of the nature of these events (for example, the tracks are gener-
ally in a direction that makes them nonthreatening) they are quickly dis-
missed during a conference of duty officers at NORAD, SAC, ANMCC
and NMCC. A few of them, however, may persist long enough or be of
such a nature that SAC takes precautionary actions for survival such as
alerting crews or starting engines. (S)
In the 1950s and 1960s we had nuclear-­armed SAC bombers on
airborne alert. Our strategic warning system is good enough today to
allow us time to flush our bombers for survivability, so we now keep
them on ground alert. A necessary consequence of this mode of oper-
ation, however, is that the alert status of the bomber force must be ele-
vated on any missile warning indication, however unlikely the false
alert scenario which generated the warning may turn out to be in ret-
rospect. (U)
Against this background, I recommend that we emphasize the fol-
lowing general points in response to questions about the recent false
alerts:
• Because of short times of missile flight, a semi-­automated warn-
ing system is necessary to integrate and display information from
multiple sensors, and provide it quickly to the National Command
Authorities for decision. (U)
• The automated parts of our warning system may generate
ambiguous or misleading indications from time to time. (U)
• Fully recognizing this possibility, the Defense Department has
consequently made human safeguards an integral element of the over-
all warning system. We are confident that these safeguards will catch
all false alerts no matter how they are generated. (U)
• False alerts may occasionally result in some precautionary mea-
sures for survivability (but the steps taken to date are far short of the
airborne alert of bomber aircraft that was continuously in effect 15–20
years ago). (U)
• There is no chance that any irretrievable actions would be taken
based on ambiguous computer information. (U)

• The incidents on June 3 and June 6 were caused by errors gen-
erated in a NORAD communications device (minicomputer), which
resulted in false indications of a missile attack. The minicomputer is
used to transmit data from NORAD’s main computer to other com-
mand centers. NORAD’s main computer receives warning data from
sensors such as satellites and radar, which actually monitor missile
launches and flights. The sensors themselves never registered a missile
attack, nor did the main computer indicate an attack. Consequently, the
false indication was recognized by the appropriate people in the mili-
tary command centers within 2–3 minutes. (U)
• Our response during both incidents was in accordance with
planned procedures. What occurred were the initial precautionary
measures to prevent our bombers and command aircraft from being
trapped on the ground—­measures which do not represent even the
beginning of a retaliatory attack. Within the first two minutes, SAC
alerted its aircraft crews as a precautionary measure and instructed
them to start their engines. This procedure is frequently practiced as
part of our training. Nothing irreversible was done in our response to
the false warning. (U)
• Although we believe the immediate cause of these incidents has
been isolated to a particular device, the Department of Defense has
assembled a task force of highly respected computer systems and com-
munications experts to conduct a thorough examination of our NORAD
attack warning system. (U)
195.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, June 15, 1980
SUBJECT
Update on M–X (U)
I have recently informed you of several changes we have made
in the detailed engineering design of the M–X basing arrangement,2
while remaining well within the scope of the basing decision you made
2 In the margin to the right of this clause, Carter wrote a question mark and drew
an arrow inward.

last September. Because of the intense political interest in M–X and
the importance of this system to our future strategic posture, I believe
it would be useful to provide you some additional information, and
update you on our current activities. (U)
The design upgrades are explained in the letter I sent to Committee
changed the missile transporter from an “integral” design, in which the
missile and launch equipment are always mounted on the transporter,
to a “non-­integral” design, in which the missile, launcher, and ancillary
equipment roll out of a van-­like transporter into a shelter loading dock.
This design change has two big advantages: it is cheaper, and it elim-
inates the requirement for a separate shield vehicle to cover the trans-
porter. The new design cannot dash automatically from one shelter to
another, but can dash into a choice of shelters from an alert posture
on the road, if we come to believe at some future time that the Soviets
have penetrated our screen of location uncertainty. Additionally, the
new design is much more amenable to use of mass simulators, which
we believe will probably be necessary. (S)
You will note that my letter to Chairman Stennis announced these
changes in a low-­key way;3 I wanted to let him know that we were
doing everything possible to save costs and reduce the complexity of
the system, without having the changes seem to amount to a new bas-
ing mode, which they do not. At this point, members from the affected
states recognized that with the new dash method we could do away
with the loop road, and use linear roads if we wished. Because the
term “racetrack” had acquired pejorative connotations, it was easier for
those members to support us if they could take the credit for “killing
the racetrack.” Hence, the big headline in the Star. (U)
The land saving made possible through going from loop to lin-
ear layouts will probably be about 5%. Together with reduced spacing
between shelters, the entire system as now planned will extend over
about 20% less land and will require about 1000 miles less of road than
originally thought. (U)
As we anticipated, the political opposition to M–X is quite strong
and comes from a variety of quarters:
—Those who don’t want any new missile system.
—A small, highly vocal group that may not be totally opposed to
new strategic forces, but doesn’t like our basing choice for M–X. Some
of these advocate a new submarine-­based system because they have no
concern about SSBN (or SLBM) vulnerability.
—Those who are greatly concerned about environmental impact
in the desert states. These people team easily with the first two groups.
—Some strongly pro-­defense people, who believe that the Air
Force’s vertical shelter recommendation was the best plan and the
3 Not found.

Administration watered it down. (General Lew Allen has been work-
ing hard to defuse this opposition. Enclosure 2 is a letter he wrote about
three months ago on these issues. The same letter also anticipated the
design change to the non-­integral transporter.)
—Last, and perhaps most important, the sincerely concerned cit-
izens of Nevada and Utah. These residents have a long tradition of
suspicion of federal activities in their areas. Most people in impacted
areas are defense-­minded and, to some extent, reluctant to fight defense
programs. They are, however, very much concerned about the possible
impact of M–X on their lives. They are most worried about the influx
of people into their isolated communities; the inevitable change in life-­
style that will result; the possibility of boom-­bust problems; and the
impact on local mining and agriculture. Understandably, they tend to
resolve their dilemma by adopting the arguments of the second and
third groups.
I am taking every step possible to alleviate the real adverse effects
and to inform the local people honestly of the scope and character of
those problems we can’t completely eliminate. (The facts are frequently
a lot less worrisome than rumors.) (U)
One major activity we are involved in, which you will hear more
about in the future, is the “split basing” study to assess the additional
costs and problems in locating one half of the system in Nevada and
Utah and the other in New Mexico and Texas. I have already stated in
some hearings that the extra cost of split basing may be prohibitive (per-
haps $3–4 billion), but the members and Governors from Nevada and
Utah insist that a thorough study be made. I recognize that Nevada/
Utah elected officials must question this project with sufficient rigor to
demonstrate to their constituencies that their interests are being cared
for. I have promised an objective and complete analysis. (U)
We have found frequent visits out West by senior civilian officials
and Air Force people, who are working there continuously, extremely
helpful. A few weeks ago Bill Perry and David Aaron were on a two
hour panel debate on M–X that was broadcast nationally on public TV.
Since then, Bill has spent additional time in the Southwest, including
attending some meetings in very small towns, getting to know the peo-
ple and hearing their concerns first hand. (U)
I believe that all these activities are paying off. We have developed
considerable feel for those actions we might have taken which would
be totally unacceptable, and for areas where reasonable accommoda-
tions and compromises can be made. We have found, too, that some
opposition melts away when our representatives describe to small cit-
izen groups in situ the need for M–X, and the extensive analyses lead-
ing us to this particular design. We will continue to seek and accept
all such educational opportunities as we forthrightly address citizen
concerns. (U)

Naturally, many of those issues and others find able spokespersons
in Congess, and we have a full plate of ongoing Congressional actions,
but we still may need further White House assistance. (U)
The first of two important events in the coming months is publica-
tion in July of the Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) in sup-
port of the deployment area selection and land acquisition. Following
public hearings during the comment period, the final EIS is to be sub-
mitted in November, leading to a December decision and subsequent
introduction of necessary land withdrawal legislation to Congress. Our
schedule requires legislative action by mid-1981 in order to protect our
1986 IOC date. (U)
The second important event is the System Design Review, begin-
ning next month and continuing through September, that will give us a
more detailed look at the consequences and benefits of design decisions
we have made since you authorized the start of full scale engineering
development last September. (U)
In summary, I am pleased with engineering progress on the M–X
program and am more confident than ever that we made the right basic
decisions last year. We are still facing some battles to obtain a high
degree of public and Congressional support, but we have a very vig-
orous program and I feel the situation is improving. Your continuing
support has been most helpful. (U)
Harold Brown
196.	 Memorandum From Stuart Eizenstat and Steve Simmons of
the Domestic Policy Council to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the Director of the
Office of Science and Technology (Press)1
Washington, June 16, 1980
SUBJECT
Study of Accidental War Potential
It was recently reported that for the third time in seven months
a computer malfunction signaled erroneously that the Soviet Union
was launching a nuclear attack.2 Although the computer mistakes were
quickly corrected, it seems to us that such accidental errors are cause
for concern. We believe that this latest malfunction provides an oppor-
tunity to conduct a quiet but thorough appraisal of the potential for
nuclear war being started as a result of technological or human error,
our command and control capacity to prevent this from happening,
and recommendations which would help ensure that such accidental
nuclear warfare never occurs.
This is obviously a national security issue, and thus falls in your
area. However, we thought it an important matter to raise with you.
Unless you disagree, we would appreciate the opportunity to meet and
discuss whether such a study might have merit.
197.	 Paper Prepared in the National Security Council
Washington, undated
[Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional
not declassified]

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council
Washington, undated
[Top Secret. 13 pages not declassified]

Annex A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council
Washington, undated
[Top Secret. 2 pages not declassified]

Annex B

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council1
Washington, undated
SOVIET NUCLEAR THREAT TO U.S. LEADERSHIP
(TS) A critical question in the COG problem is, if the Soviet Union
were to attack the United States, would the civilian and military leader-
ship infrastructure be attacked as well? The evidence suggests that they
would. Soviet doctrine stresses the importance of effective command
and control for the successful conduct of military operations. Accord-
ingly, Soviet military planning emphasizes the neutralization of enemy
C3 assets. In the case of a conflict within a theater of operations, there is
an extensive body of information regarding Soviet planning for attacks
on opposing command posts and communications centers. Targeting
of such facilities is accorded the highest priority, equivalent to target-
ing nuclear weapons of opposing forces. In the case of intercontinental
conflict, there is no direct evidence of recent vintage. However, a con-
siderable body of indirect evidence suggests that targeting priorities
are similar.
(TS) Although direct evidence of Soviet intentions is not available,
it is considered highly unlikely that the Soviet Union would launch a
major intercontinental strike against U.S. military forces that would
not include strikes against key command, control, and communica-
tions centers, including the National Command Authority (NCA).
Since the locations of the primary U.S. federal relocation sites are pub-
licly available, it is again considered highly unlikely that these would
not be targeted. Thus, it must be assumed that the Soviet Union would
apply as many weapons as necessary to ensure the destruction of
these key sites. The single warhead versions of the SS–17, SS–18, and
SS–19 (in particular, the SS–18) would be the most likely candidates
for attacking [1 line not declassified] given our estimate of their damage
expectancy.
(S) There is some dated evidence of Soviet intent to use SLBMs
against command posts and communications centers. Although cur-
rent Soviet SLBMs have a much lower damage expectancy than more
modern ICBMs, SLBMs have the advantage of shorter flight times,
which reduce the amount of warning time available. However, it is not
believed that the Soviet Union would consider a “decapitation” attack
alone, that is one aimed solely at the NCA command and control, to be
1 Top Secret.

adequate to attain their war-­fighting objectives. Thus, an attack against
the NCA would almost certainly be part of a large scale strike against
U.S. military forces.
(S) The length of strategic warning of nuclear attack would depend
on the circumstances of the crisis leading to the attack. The intelligence
community, however, has estimated that war in Europe “would be pre-
ceded by a period of extreme tension in a crisis of unprecedented sever-
ity.” The Soviet Union apparently believes that a period of increased
tension will precede any major use of military forces. The intelligence
community believes that there is virtually no chance that the Soviet
Union would attack NATO countries from a standing start, and the
majority view is that the USSR and the Warsaw Pact would take at least
eight days of preparation before initiating hostilities in Europe. How-
ever, “strategic warning” cannot be regarded as something that can be
provided with any degree of precision, since it depends as much on the
interpretations and perceptions of the national policy authorities as it
does on any array of intelligence evidence.

Annex C

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council2
Washington, undated
ALTERNATIVE CONCEPTS FOR PRESIDENTIAL
SUCCESSOR SUPPORT
Over the past several years, a number of studies have been con-
ducted to evaluate various concepts to improve the survivability and
endurance of the Presidency in a protracted nuclear conflict. These con-
cepts include:
—Submarine Emergency Alternate Command Post (SEACP);
—Maritime surface vessels;
—Airborne systems, including the NEACP;
—Land-­based systems.
All are motivated by the basic need for the Presidency to survive
and function over extended periods of time in a nuclear environment.
The following outlines the major conclusions of these efforts and
offers some thoughts on directions various basing platforms might go.
2 Secret.

SEACP
A recent Navy study concluded that it would be feasible to convert
a POLARIS SSBN to perform most of the missions associated with a
national-­level command post. However, the concept was judged to be
deficient in the following areas:
—Safe and timely embarkation of the President (or successor)
would present major problems. It would be extremely difficult to effect
a timely rendezvous with a SEACP.
—The pre-­attack and early trans-­attack survival of a submarine
command post is dependent upon its ability to remain undetected
by the enemy. Its location would be compromised, and its probability
of survival reduced, if it were to tie into tactical warning and attack
assessment communications networks.
—It is doubtful that submarine communications technology
would support the volume of communications traffic which would be
associated with the President’s functions. Submarines are normally not
required to effect a great deal of transmissions; their communications
systems are focused on receiving.
—Dedicated submarine platforms are extremely costly.
It was apparent from the study that the SEACP is not a cost-­
effective platform for Presidential survival. However, submarines do
offer potential for other key COG functions, such as  the reconstitution
of C3I systems which are destroyed during the early stages of a nuclear
conflict.
Surface Vessels
Navy, Coast Guard, and even merchant vessels can be configured
to carry special communications and support packages for the Presi-
dent. Surface vessels offer advantages in mobility and flexibility. The
proliferation of ships in different locations would enhance survival
through dispersion. However, surface vessels have some significant
shortcomings as well:
—Connectivity with surviving domestic telephone nets would
be tenuous from the high seas. The volume of radio communications
which would be necessary to support Presidential functions would
provide an EM signature which could jeopardize the vessel.
—Dedicated and proliferated platforms would be costly. This was
the experience with the NORTHAMPTON, a cruiser formerly dedi-
cated to the COG role.
—Surface vessels are vulnerable to submarine attack, especially if
the ship has been identified prior to the conflict as a high-­value target.
Under those circumstances, such a vessel would probably have a sub-
marine tail at all times.

—There may be come [some?] political liability associated with the
President leaving the continental United States.
An alternative seaborne concept, of considerably less cost, is to
develop our land-­based systems such that they are readily deployable
on ships, tugs, or barges which could operate on inland waters or in
coastal areas. This would provide an additional measure of flexibility
and mobility in a COG system.
Airborne Platforms
Our current COG system relies heavily upon airborne assets,
[5 lines not declassified]
The [less than 1 line not declassified] also has some major drawbacks:
—[6 lines not declassified]
—C3 and staff configuration are such that the President will prob-
ably be unable to execute his functions as Chief of State or Chief Exec-
utive, in addition to his requirements to command theater nuclear and
conventional forces.
For these reasons, it would be imprudent to rely exclusively upon
[less than 1 line not declassified]
As with seaborne platforms, it may be possible to combine a land
mobile system with airborne carriers, such as C–130s. Under this con-
cept, the land-­based system could embark on aircraft and be moved to
various parts of the country, depending upon the attack pattern.
Land Based System
Several land based deployment concepts were also evaluated by the
Working Group. For analytic purposes, these deployment modes were
treated as discrete sets. Operationally, these concepts could clearly be
mixed. (Other somewhat different modes of deployment could evolve
and expansions of specific mixtures could be developed in response to
a changing threat.)
Detailed analyses were performed on basing modes with (a) ded-
icated prepared sites and stationary or semi-­mobile operation; (b) des-
ignated unprepared sites and stationary or semi-­mobile operation; and
(c) a fully ground mobile concept.
—Dedicated Prepared Sites. Sites are selected in low-­risk areas and
will have fall-­out protection, connectivity to the commercial telephone
system, life support supplies and access to designated ground vehi-
cles. Since these preparatory steps are austere, some added advanced
preparation may be required. Depending on the threat, from 20 to 650
of these sites were used in the analysis. If used in stationary operation,
all sites must be equipped with full communications packages. The
successor and his team would disperse at random to one of the sites
and leapfrog between the sites.

In semi-­mobile operations mode, the number of communications
packages would be reduced to 2–4 per potential successor. These pack-
ages, while not fully mobile, would be moveable and would permit
some limited communications while on the move. The successor could
move at random between sites using designated vehicles or aircraft.
—Designated Unprepared Sites. Again, sites should be located in
such buildings as motels, schools, armories or small federal, civil, or
military installations.
In the stationary operating mode, a site would be activated at ran-
dom by dispersing communications and support packages to the site.
Successors and their support team would then be dispatched to the
activated site in designated vehicles or aircraft.
In the semi-­mobile operating mode between 2 to 4 semi-­mobile
support groups, communications and support packages per successor
would move at random between sites. Teams would have limited com-
munications while on the move (in designated support vehicles).
—Fully Mobile Operations. Ground-­mobile operation can be
achieved by having the successor joint a fully-­equipped caravan in a
relatively low-­risk area with little possibility for exposure to fall-­out.
Three caravans per successor were used in the analysis. The teams
relied on fuel and food caches in the area; nevertheless, their endurance
would be limited. (Other full mobile deployment modes have been
evaluated in previous analyses. Alternates such as submarines, fully
airborne and shipborne operations were excluded for reasons of cost,
limited communications and reduced endurance.)
Evaluation
The five basing modes were then evaluated on the basis of the fol-
lowing parameters:
—Survivability, which depends on the threat (Soviet weapons
availability, yield, and accuracy); the enemy’s intelligence capability to
detect and acquire an evading successor; U.S. protective measures con-
sisting of hardening; and the extent of location uncertainty which can
be introduced through secrecy, proliferation of sites, or mobility.
—Endurance characteristics, requiring the deployment modes to
be able to operate essentially self-­contained and be able to endure for
30 days during trans-­attack. Endurance depends on the availability of
essential life support, electric power, and fuel.
—Operability, which is the ability to perform the required func-
tions. (The more mobile a ground-­based system, the greater its poten-
tial for operability degradation.)
—Costs.

Examining the various basing options, some rough comparisons
can be made. From this general assessment, it appears that the desig-
nated unprepared semi-­mobile mode presents the most cost-­effective
option. It should be stressed, however, that this is not based upon defin-
itive analysis; it only represents a logical starting point for the iterative
development and evaluation processes outlined in the basic paper. The
table also does not exclude the possibilities of mixed systems, draw-
ing upon several alternate basing modes to maximize redundancy and
dispersion.
CHARACTERISTICS
Survivability Endurability
Operability
Cost
BASING MODES
Submarines
high
good
poor
high
Surface Vessel
low-­
moderate
good
poor-­
moderate
high
[less than 1 line not
declassified]
high
poor
moderate
moderate-­
high
Land-­based Dedicated
Prepared Stationary
low-­
moderate
good
good
moderate-­
very high
Dedicated Prepared
Semi-Mobile
moderate-­
high
good
moderate-­
good
low-­high
Designated Unprepared
Stationary
low
good
good
very low
Designated Unprepared
Semi-Mobile
high
moderate-­
good
moderate-­
good
low-­
moderate
Fully Mobile
high
poor
poor
high
EVALUATION MATRIX

198.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 18, 1980
SUBJECT
Continuity of Government/C3I
The SCC met on June 12 to review the proposals for a new approach
to continuity of government and survival of the National Command
Authority (see Summary of Conclusions at Tab B). All agencies fully
support the recommendations. I have prepared a Presidential Directive
which is drawn almost entirely from key language in the recommen-
dations made to the SCC (Tab A).2 It spells out national objectives and
specific agency responsibilities under the supervision of a White House
Steering Group. (C)
This is the culmination of a long effort to improve our continuity
of government program and at the same time to remove vulnerabilities
to the National Command Authority for control of the military forces.
President Kennedy received a report in 1962 pointing out the system’s
inadequacies but did nothing to improve it. President Nixon received a
proposed Presidential Directive, mandating a new concept for surviv-
ability and a program office to build and test it, is a step of enormous
strategic importance and of historical significance. (C)
An ad hoc group in the Executive Office of the President (NSC,
OMB, Hugh Carter, and the Military Office) has carried this project
through after the Federal Preparedness Agency and the Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency (FEMA) each failed to deliver. Defense,
State, and the DCI have also been brought together to add the weight
that FEMA cannot bring alone to this effort. Because of his strong inter-
est and support, you may want to mention this to Hugh. He has helped
my staff keep the momentum, and he will be important in the follow-­on
work of the White House Steering Group. (C)
NSC–58 [2]. Confidential. Sent for action. At the top of the memorandum Carter wrote:
“Zbig. J.”
2 The draft PD was not found attached. The signed version of PD–58 is printed as
Document 201.
Document 144.

RECOMMENDATION:
In light of the unanimous recommendation of the SCC, sign the PD

Tab B

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
­Committee Meeting4
SUBJECT
Continuity of Government/C3I (U)
PARTICIPANTS
4 Secret. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room. No minutes of
the meeting were found.
State
Thomas Tracy, Assistant Secretary for
Administration
Defense
Secretary Harold Brown
Robert Komer, Under Secretary for
Policy
Daniel Murphy, Deputy Under
­Secretary for Policy Review
JCS
Chairman General David Jones
Lt. General John Pustay
CIA
Deputy Director Frank Carlucci
[name not declassified], COG/C3I Study
Group
OMB
Randy Jayne, Associate Director
Robert Howard
FEMA
Director John Macy
Frank Camm, Associate Director
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Hugh Carter
Marvin Beaman
NSC
B. General William E. Odom
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting with brief remarks on the
background for the subject today, continuity of civil government and
survivable military C3I at the national level. The present system has
remained essentially unaltered since the 1950s. In the meantime, Soviet
capability has made it extremely vulnerable. The paper being reviewed
today proposes a new conceptual approach to survivability and recom-
mends steps for implementation. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski asked if there were any comments or reservations
on the basic paper and the approach it suggests. All agencies expressed

full approval. Defense and FEMA added that we should move to imple-
ment it as rapidly as possible.5 (S)
Dr. Brzezinski next turned to three specific and unresolved issues
in the procedures and responsibilities for implementation. (C)
1. Covert Versus Overt Funding—In the discussion of this budget-
ing question, DOD and JCS expressed strong support for overt fund-
ing. CIA took no position. FEMA and OMB preferred covert funding.
Defense expressed concern that a covert approach would force Defense
to pay for the entire program because FEMA could not so easily bury
the money in its programs. (S)
OMB insisted that security of the program is important and that
it should be funded covertly in order to avoid detailed public scrutiny
by Congress. Defense pointed out that FEMA can manage “black” pro-
grams. Hugh Carter asked which approach would allow the program
to be implemented faster. Defense insisted that greater speed is possible
through overt funding. (S)
Defense proposed a compromise that the Joint Program Office
work out a solution to this funding issue. All agencies agreed. (C)
2. Joint Program Office—FEMA originally objected to the concept of
a Joint Program Office with Defense as the Executive Agent. By defin-
ing more clearly the boundary between Defense and FEMA program
responsibilities, compromise language was found to satisfy FEMA.
Therefore, the concept of a Joint Program Office was supported by all
agencies. (S)
3. DCI/DOD Division of Management Responsibilities—Defense and
CIA disagreed on the division of program management responsibilities
for defining the new system. CIA insisted that the DCI, under Execu-
tive Order 12036,6 has the program responsibility through the NFIB for
survivability of all intelligence systems and communications. Defense
argued that the Executive Order gives this authority to the Secretary of
Defense. OMB proposed compromise language which retains the pres-
ent modus operandi between the DCI and the Secretary of Defense on
other disputed issues in interpreting Executive Order 12036. Thus this
issue was set aside. (S)
With the above mentioned changes in the concept paper, all agen-
cies support a recommendation to the President that he direct the
implementation of the new approach as it is spelled out in the respon-
sibilities and implementation sections of the paper. (S)
5 Attached but not printed is the paper; see Document 197.
199.	 Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron) to President Carter1
Washington, June 24, 1980
SUBJECT
Update on MX (U)
At my request, Harold Brown has sent you the attached memo2
providing 1) an update on the campaign to win improved support for
the MX, and 2) a summary of the evolutions in the basing mode design
since your decision last September. (U)
Harold’s memo seems guardedly optimistic concerning improved
public acceptance. It also makes clear that winning acceptance for the
MX program is going to require a long and arduous campaign. Two
aspects of this campaign that you might also note are:
—Parallel DOD and White House coordinating groups have been
set up to insure that the campaign benefits from all perspectives, and
we all articulate the same policy.
—In view of the great skepticism being expressed about whether
we can complete a competent EIS within this year, we are taking special
steps to explain to the public how our EIS process is carrying out its
work, and we are planning for a blue ribbon review of the EIS to help
establish its credibility. (C)
You will note that Harold’s memo does not describe any plans he
may have for visiting Nevada/Utah himself, although I have suggested
to him that he do this. (U)
Finally, let me add a personal note. We have just been through two
very close votes on MX at the Platform Committee. We need, within the
party, to do some more missionary work on MX. I will be talking to Jack
Watson, Anne Wexler and others about this. (C)
right corner of the memorandum: “cc Harold, Zbig—Lew Allen’s letter is excellent.
Should be distributed to all members of Congress—& to key elements of press & others.
J.”
2 Not found attached. See Document 195.

200.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 25, 1980
SUBJECT
Strategic Balance Charts
The President has asked for clearer charts on the strategic balance
and additional charts that portrayed the balance with and without
SALT and with and without MX. DoD has cooperated with the DCI in
responding to this request. As part of this effort, my staff developed
the attached strategic force comparisons that give a clear picture of
the strategic balance, the importance of SALT, and the contribution
of MX.
In particular, we include the results of various U.S. program
responses to the Soviet increases that the Intelligence community
projects beyond their SALT-­limited forces in the No-SALT case. These
projected U.S. program increases are derived from DoD judgments on
force-­planning, and not from approved levels nor from Intelligence
estimates. Thus, they are not suitable for an NIE. But they are critical to
an understanding of the issues.
I believe the President will find these comparisons informative and
useful in any dealings with Congress.
Harold Brown

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense2
Washington, undated
STRATEGIC FORCE COMPARISONS
Summary
The charts that follow compare U.S. and Soviet central strategic
forces with and without a SALT II agreement. In both cases, the con-
tribution of MX to the strategic balance is highlighted. We have used
2 Secret.

the “moderate” estimates of Soviet forces contained in the most recent
National Intelligence Estimate (NIE).3 The moderate Soviet force with
a new 10–RV ICBM is compared with currently programmed U.S.
forces for SALT-­limited cases. For the No-SALT cases, projected Soviet
forces are compared with two U.S. force alternatives: (1) a minimum
U.S. reaction that expands MX and retains all older systems; and
(2) a larger U.S. force buildup that includes extensive bomber force
modernization.
With SALT
• Our current plans would retain the U.S. lead in warhead num-
bers and arrest the negative trends in other static indicators such as
equivalent megatons and hard target kill.
• When compared with the static indicators, the U.S. position
would be somewhat more favorable in the balance of forces that sur-
vive an initial counterforce exchange, particularly if forces are on gen-
erated alert when the strategic conflict begins.
• The capability of surviving U.S. forces to retaliate against eco-
nomic and non-­silo military targets in the Soviet Union would increase
steadily after 1981, due primarily to programmed improvements in the
submarine and bomber forces.
Without SALT
• The Soviets are projected to increase their strategic forces sub-
stantially if SALT II limits are not observed. In the absence of a U.S.
response, the pre-­exchange balance indicators would continue their
current adverse trend. The post-­exchange balance would also shift to
the Soviets’ advantage. However, our capability to devastate Soviet
economic and non-­silo military targets would degrade only modestly
from the SALT case.
• The U.S. could add to its planned strategic forces to deny the
Soviets a clear advantage in the strategic balance. However, such pro-
grams would require substantial new funding for increased strategic
forces and production of nuclear materials, just as would the Soviet
increases beyond SALT levels.
• Deployment of MX in multiple protective shelters (MPS) would
reverse currently unfavorable trends in the strategic balance, with or
without a SALT II agreement. In the No-SALT case, however, this rever-
sal would require a larger and more costly MX program.
3 See the attachment to Document 184.

• MX would present the Soviets with a difficult choice between
allocating a large number of ICBM warheads against MX shelters or
employing them against other valuable targets. MX would also provide
a hedge against potential Soviet advances in threats to the submarine
and bomber legs of the U.S. strategic triad.
DAY-TO-DAY ALERT FORCES UNDER SALT II
[chart not declassified]
Description: These charts assess the strategic balance and the retal-
iatory potential of planned U.S. forces under SALT II. (The NIE estimate
for a Soviet force with a new 10–RV ICBM is used, since it provides

more capability against MX in shelters. A new 1–RV ICBM is projected
as a slightly more likely development.)
Observations:
• The U.S. would retain a lead in pre-­exchange (on-­line) warheads
although this lead would become marginal in the mid and late 80s. The
Soviets would continue to lead in the EMT and HTK measures.
• The post-­exchange balance is shown with U.S. forces on day-­to-­
day alert and Soviet forces with some SLBMs and bombers covertly
generated. The negative trends would be reversed in the mid and late
80s because of programmed U.S. forces. The U.S. advantage in war-
heads would be greater than in the pre-­exchange case. (The balance
would appear more favorable to the U.S. if the Soviets were to develop
a 1–RV ICBM and forego the 10–RV missile.)
• The retaliatory potential of U.S. forces remaining after the coun-
terforce exchange would increase because of planned modernization of
U.S. bomber and submarine forces.
GENERATED ALERT FORCES UNDER SALT II
[chart not declassified]
Description: These charts show the post-­exchange balance and U.S.
retaliatory potential if the war evolves from a crisis that gives the U.S.
and Soviets time to generate their forces and achieve a higher degree of
survivability.
Observations:
• The U.S. would enjoy an unambiguous post-­exchange advan-
tage in warheads and even pull ahead in residual EMT after 1983. The
advantages are due to the large percentage of U.S. capability residing in
bomber and SLBM forces, which achieve much higher alert rates when
forces are generated.
• U.S. retaliatory potential would also be much higher than in day-­
to-­day alert because of the additional bomber and SLBM forces avail-
able on generated alert.
DAY-TO-DAY ALERT FORCES WITHOUT SALT II
Reactive MX Program
[chart not declassified]
Description: [4 lines not declassified]
Observations:
• [2 lines not declassified]
• [2 lines not declassified]

GENERATED ALERT FORCES WITHOUT SALT II
Reactive MX Program
[chart not declassified]
Description: [2 lines not declassified]
Observations:
• [3 lines not declassified]
DAY-TO-DAY ALERT FORCES WITHOUT SALT II
Reactive MX Program Plus Bomber Force Expansion
[chart not declassified]
Description: [7 lines not declassified]
Observations:
• [3 lines not declassified]
POST-EXCHANGE DAY-TO-DAY ALERT FORCES
WITH AND WITHOUT MX
[chart not declassified]
Description: These charts illustrate some of the contributions of the
MX program with or without SALT. (In 1989, the MX system is assumed
not declassified]
Observations:
[1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified]

201.	 Presidential Directive/NSC–581
Washington, June 30, 1980
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Director, Federal Emergency Management Agency
The Director, White House Military Office
SUBJECT
Continuity of Government/C3I (U)
I have reviewed the recommendations of the Special Coordination
Committee for improving our Continuity of Government system. It is
essential that we establish and maintain a capability for the Presidency,
under the most stressing conditions, to be able to:
—­survive a nuclear attack, even one which involves repeated
attacks over a long period of time;
—­direct, as Commander-­in-Chief, our strategic and theater nuclear
forces, and all other aspects of a general war;
—­conduct, as Head of State, negotiations with adversaries and
with our allies during the conflict;
—­control, as Chief Executive, domestic affairs during the conflict
and the national recovery after the war has ended. (S)
To support the development of a system to meet these require-
ments, I direct that the following actions be taken:
1) The concept put forth in the Special Coordination Committee
paper on Continuity of Government (Tab A) is approved as the initial
direction for program development.2 (C)
2) The responsibilities of the various agencies, the development
concepts, and the public posture will conform to section VI of the Spe-
cial Coordination Committee paper. (C)
3) An interagency steering group, chaired by the NSC staff, and
consisting of representatives of the White House Military Office, the
2 Attached but not printed is the paper resulting from the June 12 SCC meeting; see
the attachment to Document 198.

Secretaries of State and Defense, and the Directors of Central Intelli-
gence, FEMA, and OMB, will oversee the development and validation
of the recommended concepts. (C)
4) A Joint Program Office will be established under the Secretary of
Defense. It will work in close cooperation with the Director of FEMA to
refine, develop, validate, and implement this concept, responsive to the
requirements of the Secretary of Defense and the Director of FEMA. (C)
The Joint Program Office will:
—­define overall responsibilities for development, management,
and operation of a deployed system;
—­prepare a detailed program for use of FY 1981 and FY 1982 funds;
—­develop and refine the operational requirements;
—­supervise the development of a series of tests and exercises to
validate the concept;
—­plan for the program to be fully operational to support at least
five successors by 1984 and at least ten by the late 1980s;
—­submit alternate program plans and budgets, a proposed exer-
cise program, and recommendations concerning the division of funding
responsibilities between FEMA and DOD and the degree of program
classification to the Special Coordination Committee for review within
three months. In the interim, program details will continue to be clas-
5) Consistent with the above guidance, and in close cooperation
with the JPO, FEMA will:
—­continue to improve, pending development of a new system,
the current capability [less than 1 line not declassified] to disperse and
support [less than 1 line not declassified] successors in [less than 1 line not
declassified] facilities;
—­continue to develop procedures and capabilities, in coordination
with the Department of Defense, for locating, communicating with,
identifying, and authenticating dispersed successors, as a basis for
determining legal succession to the Presidency;
—­coordinate the efforts of other government agencies to insure
that their specific survival plans are compatible with the system for the
Presidency. (S)
Jimmy Carter

202.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, July 2, 1980
SUBJECT
False Alerts (U)
I sent you memoranda on June 7 and 13 discussing various aspects
of the false missile warning displays which resulted in alerts of Strate-
investigating those incidents and this memorandum summarizes our
present understanding of the cause, enumerates the corrective actions
underway, and assesses the public and congressional reactions. (U)
The Cause (U)
NORAD attributes the source of the spurious data to the intermit-
tent failure of a 46¢ micro-­electronic integrated circuit (often referred to
as a “chip”) in a data communications interface device at the NORAD
Combat Operations Center in Colorado. Although NORAD has been
unable to get the suspected circuit to fail again under test,3 the NORAD
evaluation has been confirmed by an independent task force of highly
competent and respected computer experts enlisted from the private
Corrective Actions (U)
This particular electronic fault will be corrected by replacing the
suspected integrated circuit; however, to prevent a similar, future
hardware failure from causing such an undetected error, we also are
right corner of the memorandum: “cc Harold, ok J.” Brzezinski forwarded the memoran-
dum to Carter under cover of a July 11 memorandum in which he noted that Brown was
“managing a difficult situation as well as can be expected. It is important for you, in my
view, to let Harold hold the lead on this problem and keep it at Defense and NORAD,
not letting the focus shift to the White House. No investigation will satisfy everyone,
and the more information made public about the investigation, the easier it will be for
the critics to exploit it imprudently beyond what is sound for national security.” Carter
underlined the phrase “Harold hold the lead” and wrote at the top of Brzezinski’s mem-
orandum: “Zbig, I agree. J.” Brzezinski returned Brown’s memorandum under cover of a
July 17 memorandum in which he noted Carter’s comments and added: “The President
has affirmed his decision for you to hold the lead on any future investigations and cor-
rective actions.” (Ibid.)
3 Carter underlined the portion of this sentence that reads “has been unable to get
the suspected circuit to fail again under test” and drew an exclamation point in the right
margin next to it.

proceeding to improve the automatic error-­detection and correction
capabilities of the NORAD data communications system. Specifically,
NORAD will:
—­put monitor devices on output lines set to alarm whenever a
warning message (whether valid or not) is being sent so as to speed
confidence checking
—­improve the error-­detection routines throughout its computer
and data communications system
—­make continuous and comprehensive records of system perfor-
mance to be used to improve its troubleshooting capability
—­analyze its computers and communications equipment to find
(and fix) other places where a single failure could produce a false mis-
sile attack indication.
Until these corrective actions are implemented (about 60 days)
NORAD will operate primarily on the [less than 1 line not declassified]
completely bypassing the equipment that caused the recent incidents.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) have assessed that this temporary mode
of operations can be tolerated, although it does have certain operational
limitations, notably [1 line not declassified] The JCS-­directed procedural
changes to [3 lines not declassified] (S)
Congressional Reaction (U)
The Chairmen of the Armed Services and Appropriations Com-
mittees of both Houses of Congress were notified of the false alerts less
than 24 hours after they occurred. Congressional interest has remained
high ever since. We have briefed the House Armed Services Commit-
tee and several Senators individually, and we continue to respond to
many letters on the subject from members of Congress. Congress seems
to have been mostly reassured by our explanations, but continues to
express concern about [9 lines not declassified]
Press Reaction (U)
Our approach to the news media has followed that which I out-
lined to you in my June 13 memorandum on false missile alerts. Most
of the newspaper stories which appeared immediately after a June 18
press briefing by my Assistant Secretary for Communications, Com-
mand, Control, and Intelligence, Gerry Dinneen, correctly reflected the
points in that memorandum. However, television network follow-­up
stories appearing June 24–26 have attempted to sensationalize (mush-
room cloud) the incidents or to link them to unrelated matters. We con-
tinue to receive many press inquiries and requests for interviews on the
subject. We will have to continue to emphasize that there is no chance
that any irretrievable actions would be taken based on ambiguous com-
puter information, nor do the precautionary survivability measures in
any way reduce the absolute human control over nuclear weapons.

Conclusion: A misleading picture is worth, in show business (TV news)
much more than ten thousand accurate words.
The Future (U)
In summary, we are diligently pursuing corrective actions for the
specific cause of the June 3 and 6 false alerts, just as we addressed the
ferent, however, and as I reported to you in my June 13 memorandum,
I believe we must be prepared for the possibility that another, unrelated
malfunction may someday generate another false alert. Although we
will make appropriate electronic improvements to minimize the proba-
bility of such a false alert, we must continue to place our confidence in
the human element of our missile attack warning system. (U)
Harold Brown
4 See Document 167.
203.	 Memorandum From Steve Simmons of the Domestic Policy
Staff to the Military Assistant to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Odom)1
Washington, July 9, 1980
SUBJECT
Accidental Nuclear War Study
Per your suggestion, I have listed possible subjects for examination
by an accidental nuclear war study group. I am no expert in these mat-
ters, and this list is clearly not complete. Also, significant work must
have been done on a number of these items and thus a first chore for
the Special Coordinating Committee or other study group would be
to prioritize those specific matters it would focus on, and separate out
those matters where only background information on what has already
been done is necessary.
MATTERS FOR STUDY
1. Is the nuclear defense computer system adequate? How can mal-
functions and false warnings be prevented? When they occur, how can
they be detected in the quickest possible manner?
2. Is our capacity to recall or destroy missiles which have already
been launched adequate?
3. Do we have adequate ability to protect the President and others
in the line of succession as well as provide adequate temporary gov-
ernment facilities in case of an accidental nuclear launch by the Soviet
Union? (If only two or three missiles were launched by the Soviet Union
and our reaction was not to launch a full scale retaliation believing that
this may have been an accident on the Soviet’s part, it would be essen-
tial for us to have continuing top level focus on this accidental nuclear
dilemma.)
4. Is the communications system for the President adequate so that
he can be assured of instant update of a nuclear attack-­accident situa-
tion as well as final authority on whether or not to retaliate?
5. Is our communications ability adequate to contact the Soviet
Union and warn them of an accidental mistake as well as provide a
way for them to verify that a launch or upgraded state of readiness on
our part results from accident? Are hotline facilities adequate?
6. Is there adequate psychological testing and screening of person-
nel at nuclear missile facilities, radar facilities, and for pilots of nuclear
bombers?

204.	 Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom) to the
President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Aaron)1
Washington, July 17, 1980
SUBJECT
Meeting with Eizenstat on WH Study of Accidental Nuclear War
You already, I believe, have heard most of the arguments on this
issue. Eizenstat believes it might be helpful politically for the White
House to appear in charge and on top of a study and investigation
of the chances of nuclear war.2 Presumably this is in response to the
NORAD false alert problem.3
Information
—DOD has already conducted a large study and several reports
have gone to the President on the matter.
—Defense has briefed the press and Congress. The Congressional
committee chairmen have been kept well informed from the beginning.
—Hugh Carter and Marty Beaman are strongly opposed to Eizen-
stat’s study proposal. Their reasons include the fact that DOD has
already done one and that to initiate such a study now would be to
invite political trouble for the President. It would open a Pandora’s box.
—I am unaware of any ground swell demand for such a study in
the press or elsewhere. Senator Tower is being handled by DOD.
Considerations
—Thus far we have kept this matter away from the White House
and in the Pentagon where it belongs. Why shift the focus to the Pres-
ident now?
—No study will satisfy even half its audience. It will merely
invite all kinds of additional study issues and increase lack of public
confidence.
—For the sophisticated Defense analyst, it could lead to debates
about C3I vulnerabilities, debates we cannot win.
mation. Aaron initialed the memorandum next to the heading.
2 Not found.

—The whole business of NORAD, the SIOP, etc. is a great curiosity.
Mathematicians, scientists, and quacks will appear in droves to learn
more, to provide copious advice, and to turn the system into a circus or
analysts’ amusement park.
—There may be some good reasons for a study, but they escape
me.
—I have already received a press call from Science 80 about this
study. I warned Simmons that this would happen.
205.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, July 18, 1980
SUBJECT
FY 82 Defense Program: We are well underway in examining indi-
vidual Service submissions for the FY 82 Defense Budget and the FY
82–86 program, and devising alternative policy and program options.
Graham Claytor is chairing, with OMB participation at a senior level,
the Defense Resources Board (DRB) review. The DRB objective is to
develop an integrated DoD five-­year program centering on the 5-­year
funding profile, provided by OMB, but with a reasonable range of
alternative levels in either direction. I will have their recommendations
shortly, and by the end of the month I will have made my tentative
decisions, subject to my reconsideration soon thereafter in the light of
comments from the Service Secretaries and JCS. This timing and that of
the OMB “Spring” Review this year would make your consideration of
the kinds of defense issues usually presented at OMB Spring Review an
unproductive use of your time. Therefore I am working with John White
of OMB to structure an alternative approach. It would present a brief
written summary of the competing needs of readiness, personnel costs,
and hardware within various defense funding levels as constrained by
the overall economic and budget forecasts. Before our decisions on pro-
grams and budget details are made later this year, I believe we should
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 64, Brown’s Weekly Report: 1980. Top Secret. Carter
wrote in the upper right corner of the memorandum: “cc Harold. J.”

have a meeting with the JCS to hear their views, and an NSC meeting
to address the broad national security issues.2 (U)
Soviet AWACS Testing: A recent DIA intelligence report3 describes
unusual flight tests of what may well be a new Soviet CANDID (IL–
76) AWACS. Insufficient hard evidence makes a confident assess-
ment difficult, but—­given the obvious Soviet incentive to develop an
AWACS—I believe that the flight tests indicate a Russian attempt to
detect low-­flying aircraft and direct interceptors to those aircraft. Such
a step on their part would be consistent with the evolution of Soviet
strategic air defenses we anticipated when the B–1 program was can-
celled in 1977.
If this is in fact an AWACS test program, the Soviet Union could
have a force of 20 CANDID aircraft operational by 1985. We also project
at that time a deployment of 400 modified FOXBAT interceptors and
the beginning of the new Sukhoi and Mikoyan fighter deployments;
these three aircraft can be expected to have a look-­down/shoot-­down
capability. This Soviet force of interceptors and AWACS would be quite
effective against penetrating bombers of the B–1 type, but would have
limited capability against our ALCMs.
Given the problems of attacking ALCMs, the Soviets are more
likely to extend their defense coverage beyond their borders to attack
the missile-­launching aircraft. Forward defenses, including extended
aircraft, could be expected in the 1990s and would offer significant
capability against the B–52 ALCM carrier.
Our most promising response to that Soviet approach is to extend
the ALCM range, thereby allowing the carrier to stand off even from
extended range interceptors. We have two relevant R&D programs;
first, an improved engine that would give the first generation cruise
missile 35 percent more range; and second, an improved cruise mis-
sile design that achieves greater range by operating at more efficient
altitudes. Both improvements could be operational in time to meet this
threat if it develops. I will keep you advised as more information on
Soviet testing is received and analyzed. (TS)
Legislative Issues: The conference committee on the FY 81 Defense
Authorization Bill is scheduled to convene next week. I have already
had preliminary discussions with both John Stennis and Mel Price,
and will meet with each next week. I will write the conference com-
mittee a letter strongly objecting to a number of the proposed add-­ons,
and pointing out the imbalance created by those and by several of the
2 Carter wrote in the left margin next to this paragraph: “ok, if satisfactory to
McIntyre.”
3 Not found.

deletions made either in the Senate or House. I will also meet with Joe
Addabbo and Jack Edwards next Tuesday4 before their Subcommittee
begins its markup of the FY 81 Appropriations Bill. I intend to make
a particularly strong plea to them against funding the refitting of the
NEW JERSEY and the ORISKANY. (U)
Rapid Solidification Technology (RST): In November 1978 I sent you a
memorandum5 describing the RST metallurgical process and outlining
potential military applications for the late 1980s. Since then we have
expanded our program and are encouraged by progress in develop-
ing new alloys. In addition, both U.S. and foreign industry have begun
aggressive in-­house research and development programs. I believe that
this emerging U.S. industrial base must be stimulated and encouraged
by the government. The DoD program will partially fill this need, but
additional government investment in or underwriting of the civil sector
would be useful—­and contribute substantially to the overall health of
the economy. Under Secretary Bill Perry will work with Frank Press to
develop an integrated plan of action. (U)
Overseas Medical Research Laboratories: During preparation of the
FY 81 budget, OMB directed the closure, or conversion to contract
operations, of our eight overseas laboratories. With the assistance of
distinguished civilian scientists from industry and academia, we sub-
sequently completed a study that confirms the clear military need for
these units. The study6 also documents strong U.S. embassy and host
government support for current operations, and the infeasibility of con-
tracting for like services. These efforts are a U.S. activity that brings
political benefits (on a smaller scale) like those accruing to Cuba from
its provision of teachers and physicians in developing countries. I
believe the laboratories provide a unique military, scientific, and polit-
ical return far in excess of their cost, and have asked Jim McIntyre to
reconsider the decision in light of current information. (U)
Mobilization and Deployment Exercises: We have now completed an
unclassified study of NIFTY NUGGET-78 and REX-78,7 the two ambi-
tious mobilization exercises we held in late 1978. There was substantial
media interest in the exercises, and we expect considerable interest in
the unclassified study. The study contains some very frank and critical
comments on our mobilization capabilities as they existed two years
4 July 22.
5 Not found.
6 Not found.
7 See Office of the Secretary of Defense, An Evaluation Report of Mobilization and
Deployment Capability Based on Exercises NIFTY NUGGET-78 and REX-78. (Washington:
Department of Defense, 1980)

ago.8 To try to reduce misunderstanding of these comments, the report
will be released following a background briefing to explain that this
Administration was the first ever to conduct such a test of our mobili-
zation procedures, and that we have remedial efforts underway to cor-
rect the deficiencies observed during the exercises. (U)
[Omitted here is material unrelated to national security policy.]
Exercise GLOBAL SHIELD: The Strategic Air Command recently
completed the largest and most comprehensive Air Force strategic
readiness exercise ever conducted. During the nine-­day schedule,
every facet of SAC’s Emergency War Order was realistically tested:
[number not declassified] missiles and [number not declassified] aircraft
were brought to maximum readiness levels, over [number not declassi-
fied] sorties were flown, and an ICBM was launched from Vandenberg
AFB, California. The exercise highlighted our ability to generate and
maintain strategic weapons systems at heightened alert levels. (S)
Harold Brown
8 Carter underlined “as they existed two years ago” and wrote in the left margin
next to it: “Emphasize this.”
206.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, July 24, 1980
SUBJECT
OMB Report on FY 82 DOD Budget (U)
As background for the OMB Spring budget review you are sched-
uled to attend from 2–4 p.m. tomorrow, Jim McIntyre has sent you a
memo reporting the status of the FY 82 defense program.2 The main
message in the memo is a little diffuse, but not really arguable—­you are
the upper right corner of the memorandum. Copies were sent to Brown and McIntyre.
2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, this meeting took place in the Cabinet
Daily Diary). No minutes of the meeting were found.

going to have to make some very hard choices in finalizing this budget
in December. You clearly cannot make these choices now, but having a
sense of what they are will be important in the months ahead. (U)
The basic problem is that the required force readiness and RDF
capabilities that appear necessary in this new era of Soviet aggressive-
ness (combined with unforeseen cost increases in some defense pro-
grams and in military compensation) cost more than your current fiscal
guidance for 82 can hope to support. (C)
OMB’s memo suggests too strongly that budget scrubs, particu-
larly in non-­major hardware and support equipment area, can go a long
way toward solving the funding problem. I doubt it—­the requirements
are too large, readiness is too strongly related to many of the kinds of
non-­major hardware and support items OMB refers to, and the long
standing funding pressures that have been felt in these accounts have
been too high to leave much juice to be squeezed out now. Thus, some
combination of the three alternatives given below must be adopted this
The real alternatives are 1) to increase the budget guidance by
the rate of longer term improvements by cutting RDT&E and slow-
ing some major procurement programs and 3) selectively slow down
improvements planned for some specific mission areas or theaters,
with the most obvious candidate being NATO. (S)
All three alternatives involve changes in our basic defense plans—­
changes that must be informed and justified with even better intelli-
gence, analyses, and assessments than you have had for making defense
budget decisions in the past:
—If we are going to cut back on our previously planned improve-
ments for NATO, we should have identified, at least for ourselves, spe-
cific feasible adjustments our Allies can make to take up the slack. We
should also carry out a careful analysis of the political effects on Europe
of such cutbacks. Cutbacks that are large enough to satisfy our other
defense funding requirements could sharply undercut our efforts to
lead the alliance toward an improved western military posture.
—We must establish some benchmarks that will allow us to judge
whether we have struck the proper balance between readiness-­related
short term improvements and the longer term improvements that flow
from RDT&E and major procurement programs. Cutting longer term
procurement in favor of higher readiness, as the services propose to do,
may be a reasonable strategy. However, if we do not carefully justify
this move, OMB’s fears that Congress will simply add back any pro-
curements we cut will be realized.
—We need to reassess the assumptions OMB describes as under-
lying our defense plans—­particularly those justifying improvement

in our force posture at the current “steady pace.” We should audit
our defense plans to insure that we are maintaining adequate hedges
against the possibility that some of the assumptions underlying our
defense planning prove wrong.
—Finally, we must insure that the adjustments we might make in
overall priorities for our defense planning, as well as the overall level
of defense effort we are making, are consistent with our latest and best
understanding of the evolving challenges posed by the Soviet Union
and other potential adversaries. Past budget reviews have concentrated
too much on the details of our defense programs at the expense of pro-
viding information on how well the overall program meets the chal-
lenges we are facing. (S)
With continued effort I believe Jim, Harold and I can be ready this
fall to provide much of this information to support making the hard
choices you must face then. (U)

Attachment

Memorandum From the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre) to President Carter3
Washington, July 24, 1980
SUBJECT
Defense Program for 1982
SUBJECT
Nuclear Targeting Policy
Today you are meeting with Harold Brown, the Vice President, and
me to respond to the request you made at Tab I, page 2,2 for a briefing
on the proposed Presidential Directive on Nuclear Weapons Employ-
ment Policy. You asked to know:
—­what is changed in targeting, etc.;
—­how we propose to brief the allies;
—­what public statements are to be made? (TS)
Harold will answer these questions for you. (U)
With the new directive, you will make rather significant and
important innovations in improving control and management of our
nuclear forces. At the same time, it is not a totally new departure. The
basic direction toward more flexibility was set by the Schlesinger effort
tiated the process, and it was not very specific about the need for a
better staffing capability. Nor did it tie theater forces and other mili-
tary operations into planning effectively. I have added the emphasis on
exercises in the new PD as a result of your own involvement in IVORY
ITEM exercises in 1978. They had an enormous educational impact and
helped my staff and Harold’s design parts of the new PD. That learning
process must continue if this new PD is to have its best effect and you
are to guide the evolution of the policy. (TS)
mation. Printed from an uninitialed copy.
in the Oval Office. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)

208.	 Presidential Directive/NSC–591
Washington, July 25, 1980
SUBJECT
Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy (C)
In PD–18,2 I directed a follow-­on study of our targeting policy for
nuclear forces. I have reviewed the results and considered their impli-
cations for maintaining deterrence in the present decade, particularly
in light of the growing Soviet strategic weapons arsenal and its capa-
bilities. (S)
The most fundamental objective of our strategic policy remains
nuclear deterrence. I reaffirm the directive of PD–18 to that effect. The
purpose of this directive is to outline policies and actions in the nuclear
force employment field to secure that continuing objective. (S)
Our strategic nuclear forces must be able to deter nuclear attacks
not only on our own country but also on our forces overseas, as well
as on our friends and allies, and to contribute to deterrence of non-­
nuclear attacks. To continue to deter in an era of strategic nuclear
equivalence, it is necessary to have nuclear (as well as conventional)
forces such that in considering aggression against our interests any
adversary would recognize that no plausible outcome would repre-
sent a victory on any plausible definition of victory. To this end and so
as to preserve the possibility of bargaining effectively to terminate the
war on acceptable terms that are as favorable as practical, if deterrence
fails initially, we must be capable of fighting successfully so that the
adversary would not achieve his war aims and would suffer costs that
are unacceptable, or in any event greater than his gains, from having
initiated an attack. (C)
The employment of nuclear forces must be effectively related to
operations of our general purpose forces. Our doctrines for the use of
forces in nuclear conflict must insure that we can pursue specific policy
objectives selected by the National Command Authorities at that time,
from general guidelines established in advance. (S)
These requirements form the broad outline of our evolving coun-
tervailing strategy. To meet these requirements, improvements should
be made to our forces, their supporting C3 and intelligence, and their
employment plans and planning apparatus, to achieve a high degree
of flexibility, enduring survivability, and adequate performance in the
2 See Document 31.

face of enemy actions. The following principles and goals should guide
your efforts in making these improvements. (S)
Pre-­planned options. The Single Integrated Operational Plan will
provide pre-­planned targeting for strikes against the Soviet Union, its
allies and its forces. It should provide for retaliatory strikes that will
be effective, even if the Soviets attack first, without warning, and in a
manner designed to reduce our capability as much as possible. It will
be developed with flexible sub-­options that will permit, to the extent
that survival of C3 allows, sequential selection of attacks from among
a full range of military targets, industrial targets providing immediate
military support, and political control targets, while retaining a sur-
vivable and enduring capability that is sufficient to attack a broader
set of urban and industrial targets. In addition, to the maximum extent
possible, pre-­planned options will be provided for selection in response
to specific, lesser contingencies (including attacks on Cuba, SRV and
North Korea as appropriate). [1 line not declassified]. (TS)
While it will remain our policy not to rely on launching nuclear
weapons on warning that an attack has begun, appropriate pre-­
planning, especially for ICBMs that are vulnerable to a preemptive
attack, will be undertaken to provide the President the option of so
launching. (TS)
Flexibility. In addition to pre-­planned options we need an ability
to design nuclear employment plans on short notice in response to the
latest and changing circumstances. This capability must be comprehen-
sive enough to allow rapid construction of plans that integrate strategic
force employment with theater nuclear force employment and general
purpose force employment for achieving theater campaign objectives
and other national objectives when pre-­planned response options are
not judged suitable in the circumstances. (S)
To assure that we can design such plans, our goal should be to
have the following capabilities on a continuing basis in peacetime,
during crises, and during protracted conflict:
—Staff capabilities, within all unified and specified commands
which have nuclear forces, to develop operational plans on short notice
and based on the latest intelligence.
—Staff capabilities at the seat of Government to support the NCA
for coordinating and integrating the nuclear force employment for all
commands.
—Intelligence and target development capabilities which permit
damage assessment and acquisition of a broad range of targets, fixed
and mobile, on a timely basis for military operations. (S)
Reserve Forces. Pre-­planned options should be capable of execution
while leaving a substantial force in secure reserve and capable of being
withheld for possible subsequent use. The forces designated for the

reserve should be the most survivable and enduring strategic systems
consistent with the need for a flexible and varied reserve force capable
of being effectively employed against a wide target spectrum and with-
held if necessary for a prolonged period. The secure reserve force will
be increased over the next two years to support a more flexible execu-
tion of our countervailing strategy. This will be done according to the
Secretary of Defense’s guidance. (TS)
Targeting categories. Overall targeting planning appropriate to
implement a countervailing strategy will result in a capability to choose
to put the major weight of the initial response on military and control
targets. Military targets must be selected for the purpose of destroying
enemy forces or their ability to carry out military operations. Strategic
and theater nuclear forces should to the extent feasible be used in com-
bination with, and in support of, general purpose forces to achieve that
objective. (S)
More specifically, the following categories of military targets, with
appropriate sub-­options for different theaters, should be covered in
planning:
—­strategic and theater nuclear forces, including nuclear weapons
storage;
—­military command, control, communications, and intelligence
capabilities;
—­all other military forces, stationary and mobile;
—­industrial facilities which provide immediate support to mili-
tary operations during wartime. (TS)
In addition, pre-­planned options, capable of relatively prolonged
withhold or of prompt execution, should be provided for attacks on the
political control system and on general industrial capacity. (TS)
There must be extensive and effective coverage in the pre-­planned
options of all categories. Methods of attack on particular targets should
be chosen to limit collateral damage to urban areas, general industry
and population targets outside these categories, consistent with effec-
tively covering the objective target, and, where appropriate, overall
plans should include the option of withholds to limit such collateral
damage. (TS)
Command, Control and Communications, and Intelligence. Flexibility
in contingency planning and in operations will be highly dependent
on our C3I capabilities, including their ability to acquire targets, assess
damage, and survive attack. Strategic stability in an era of essential
equivalence depends as much on survivability, endurance and recon-
stitutability of C3I capabilities as it does on the size and character of
strategic arsenals. (C)

PD/NSC–533 directs that our C3I programs and our guidance to
telecommunications common carriers support the development and
maintenance of such capabilities. In addition, PD/NSC–414 directs
that we seek greater continuity of government should deterrence fail.
Implementation of PD/NSC–53 and PD/NSC–41 must be pursued in
parallel with that of this employment directive. (C)
The relationship of acquisition policy to employment policy. Our acqui-
sition programs must be evaluated in terms of their support for the
employment policy ordered by this directive. The required flexibility,
survivability, endurance, and target destruction capability must be
taken into account in developing programs for acquiring nuclear weap-
ons systems, and their supporting C3I systems, needed to support our
countervailing strategy. (S)
Implementation. As new targeting capabilities are developed, and
as our operational staffing support change to meet the foregoing direc-
tives, they must be reviewed and tested to validate their feasibility and
soundness. For that purpose:
—At least two exercises involving the National Command Author-
ities should be conducted each year to evaluate our capabilities and our
employment doctrines.
—Continued study and analysis of means to improve and refine
our countervailing strategy of general conflict should be conducted by
the Department of Defense.
—The results of these exercises, studies and analysis will provide
the bases for modification and any further development of employ-
ment and acquisition policy.
—A report will be rendered to the President at least annually on
our employment plans, including, but not limited to, on the size and
capability of the reserve forces, the degree of flexibility available, lim-
iting factors in achieving flexibility, and the status of programs to pro-
vide improvements.
—Any change or new pre-­planned options will be submitted to
the President for his review and approval, in accordance with current
procedures. (TS)
NSDM–2425 is superseded by this directive. (U)
Jimmy Carter
3 See Document 165.
4 See Document 91.

209.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, August 2, 1980
SUBJECT
False Alerts (U)
My last memorandum on this subject was on July 2.2 In that mem-
orandum I summarized the corrective actions underway to prevent
false missile warning displays like those which resulted in alerts of
Strategic Air Command bomber crews on June 3 and 6. The purpose
of this memorandum is to provide an update on the status of those
actions. (U)
Subsequent to the June 6 false warning, Aerospace Defense Com-
mand (ADCOM) suspended operation of the NORAD Missile Warning
Computer System (427M) as its primary means for providing missile
warning data and attack assessment to other US and Canadian com-
mand centers. While the factors which contributed to the false alerts on
June 3 and 6 are being corrected, NORAD is providing such data to its
customers via a completely different computer, the Minimum Essential
Back-­up (MEBU) computer. (C)
I believe there were three major contributors to the false alert
of the 427M system, (2) computer programs which lacked sufficient
error detection capability to prevent spurious data from being trans-
mitted to NORAD’s customers, and (3) lack of a monitoring system
which would permit NORAD personnel—­whose mission it is to pro-
vide accurate warning data and attack assessment—­to examine what
they were sending to their customers. All three of these discrepancies
require correction, but had any one of them been resolved prior to 3
June, the false alerts either would not have occurred or would have
been resolved more expeditiously. (S)
Analysis of the June 3 and 6 events has all but convinced ADCOM
and the independent team of computer experts from the private sec-
tor that the failure was associated with a specific micro-­electronic inte-
grated circuit in a particular data communications interface device at
NORAD. Nevertheless, the actual physical phenomenon which caused
that circuit to produce the spurious signals on June 3 and 6 is still
to Carter under cover of an August 6 memorandum. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 202.

unknown. There are 552 circuit boards in the 427M which are gener-
ally similar in design and fabrication (commercial rather than military
quality) to the one that failed on June 3 and 6. These boards, used as
interfaces throughout the 427M system, remain the primary vulnera-
bility of the 427M today. Since these boards cannot be quickly rede-
signed and replaced, it is imperative that we take a very conservative
approach to error detection and correction in the system’s computer
programs. (S)
Error Detection (U)
When the spurious signals were transmitted to NORAD’s custom-
ers on June 3 and 6, error checking throughout the missile warning sys-
tem was totally inadequate. Relatively simple error checks in the data
stream which would detect random errors were removed and restored
by the computer system as data messages were routed through various
elements of the system. Although (as a result of changes made since
the incidents) such simple error checks are now carried consistently
through the 427M system and through the computers at the receiv-
ing command centers, these checks are inadequate to prevent bursts
of errors from producing false data messages as occurred on June 3
and 6. That is, if the 427M were on-­line today and the same failure that
occurred on June 3 and 6 were to recur, it is highly likely that some
erroneous messages would again be transmitted and appear on the dis-
plays of NORAD’s customer command centers. (S)
The solution to this problem is the incorporation of a very power-
ful error-­detection technique known as cyclic redundancy codes (CRC)
into the computer programs of the missile warning system. Installation
of CRC will delay the return to full operation of the more capable 427M
for another three months, but I believe it is essential that we do so in
order to provide acceptable assurance that bursts of errors caused by
circuit failures will not cause false data messages to be sent. (C)
Quality Control (U)
It is the responsibility of the people on duty in the NORAD Chey-
enne Mountain Complex (NCMC) to provide valid, accurate warn-
ing information to the other command centers as well as to provide a
NORAD assessment. Yet prior to June 6 the crew on duty in the NCMC
had no way of inspecting the data they were transmitting to their cus-
tomers; they had to assume that the data they were seeing displayed
were the same as those which were being transmitted to the other
command centers. This, we are now well aware, was an erroneous
assumption, but the fact that the people most qualified to analyze the
data discrepancy on June 3 and 6—­the people in the NORAD Chey-
enne Mountain Complex—­were isolated from observation of the false

data being sent to their customers delayed expeditious resolution on
the spot of the false alert which ensued. (S)
To address this problem we are in the process of installing monitor-
ing devices on the data lines exiting the NORAD Cheyenne Mountain
Complex. These devices will provide audible and visual alarms to the
Systems Controller and the Missile Warning Officer at NORAD when-
ever a warning message is transmitted to the National Military Com-
mand Center or to Strategic Air Command Headquarters. The NORAD
Systems Controller and the Missile Warning Officer can then expedi-
tiously examine the validity of such messages and quickly advise the
receiving command center should the message be false. (C)
The independent team of computer experts from the private sector
concluded, as I had, that it is unlikely that a system as large and com-
plex as the NORAD missile warning system can be made completely
failure-­proof. Nevertheless, I find some reassurance in the following
general conclusion from their report: “The checks and balances and
practices are such that the events of June 3rd and June 6th, by them-
selves, could not have led to an improper use of nuclear weapons.” But
we need to improve the system and our procedures. We have done so
and will make further improvements.3 (S)
Harold Brown
3 Carter wrote below Brown’s signature: “The deficiencies were/are serious. J.”
Brzezinski returned the memorandum to Brown under cover of an August 7 memoran-
dum drawing attention to Carter’s comment. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,

210.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Flap with Muskie Over PD–592
I do not know if the flap will continue and why Muskie has chosen
to carry it on in the media. For your information, here is the background:
1. I have enclosed the text of the memorandum3 which was sent
to you with PD–59. One of the alternatives was a NSC meeting which
Muskie would have attended.
2. Brown was instructed by you to brief Muskie, and on August 5
I reminded him to do so. He did, but the following day before Brown
could show the actual directive to Muskie, both the New York Times and
the Washington Post broke the story that precipitated Muskie’s ire.4
August 1977. During the next two years, at least three formal SCC
meetings were held, and Vance was involved in two and Christopher
in one. In addition, at least two internal DOD studies on the subject
were initiated in 1977 and circulated to State and the NSC. Moreover,
the Secretary of Defense’s annual reports to Congress for FY ’79, ’80
and ’81 contained explicit descriptions of the targeting flexibility—­the
countervailing strategy—­embodied in PD–59. These documents were
previewed by State. In addition, Brown made a statement to the NATO
Nuclear Planning Group on June 4, 1980, on the countervailing doc-
trine.6 Muskie’s State Department subordinates should have briefed
him on its contents prior to the NATO ministerial in Ankara. This was
apparently not done.
inski’s behalf.
2 See Document 208.
3 Printed as Document 185.
5 See Document 31.
6 Documentation on the NATO Nuclear Planning Group is scheduled for publica-

4. The SCCs in the spring of 1979 took note of Defense’s progress in
implementing the results of the targeting study. This past winter, I sug-
gested in a memo to Harold Brown7 that we complete the process initi-
ated by PD–18 in a directive which codified what had been done within
Defense and the general direction for future development which his
countervailing strategy implies. He agreed and suggested that he and
I work out a final product prior to any additional interagency review.
To my initial draft of a PD, he added considerable detail on the present
SIOP, giving it a far more sensitive substance than it originally had.
5. State officials did not participate in the translation of the doc-
trine into specific SIOP instructions and for very good reasons. These
adjustments are extraordinarily sensitive. The tradition of keeping mil-
itary contingency planning away from our diplomatists except in its
general outline is an old and valid one. (S)
The whole thing seems to me more a matter of personal sensitivity
than substance, even though Brown was somewhat slow in briefing
Muskie after you initiated that approach; however, both of them were
on the move and it was not easy for them to get together. Nevertheless,
the central point remains valid: the SIOP should not be reviewed or
discussed by those not authorized or required to deal with it; only the
broad doctrine should be—­and Harold’s statements of broad doctrine
are—­on the public record. (S)
7 Not found.

211.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 26, 1980
SUBJECT
The Carter Transformation of Our Strategic Doctrine
I want to summarize for you the fundamental change occuring in
U.S. strategic doctrine over the last three years. You may or may not
want to take public credit for it, but you should have a clear view in
your own mind of its historic significance. That is being obscured and
confused in the public fuss over PD–59,2 the last of a series of related
directives you have signed. (C)
The Requirement for Change
There have been two previous transformations in our strategic doc-
trine. The first, “massive retaliation,” occurred in the 1950s under Pres-
ident Eisenhower.3 It was designed to deter the Soviets by our large
lead in nuclear weapons and strategic bombers. The second, “assured
destruction,” was sponsored in the 1960s by Presidents Kennedy and
Johnson as they watched Soviet forces grow and the U.S. lead shrink.4
Secretary McNamara designed the concept primarily as a budgetary
instrument to decide “how much was enough?” in strategic forces.
The doctrinal notion was added by others. They, however, believed the
Soviets would stop their buildup at near our force levels. When they did
not and when they introduced new qualitative capabilities, the doctrine
lost much of its relevance. To revise our doctrine then became a criti-
cal although unpopular task in face of the continuing Soviet buildup
through the 1970s. You have accomplished this through a number of
directives which put much more emphasis on objective capabilities to
reinforce the subjective and psychological aspects of deterrence. (C)
upper right corner of the memorandum: “Zbig—Good. Share w/VP, Ed, Harold. J.” In
an August 22 memorandum to Brzezinski, Odom discussed “The Differences Between
PD–59 and NSDM–242.” In a marginal notation on Odom’s memorandum, Brzezinski
instructed him to use it as a base for an expanded memorandum that Brzezinski would
send to Carter. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 210.
3 Carter underlined “‘massive retaliation’” and “1950s” in this sentence.
4 Carter underlined “‘assured destruction’” and “1960s” in this sentence.

What Has Been Done
Based upon reviews and recommendations from the agencies,
in response to conceptualization and coordination by the NSC, you
have directed (a) that we maintain “‘essential equivalence’” in gen-
eral purpose and strategic force levels (PD–18); that strategic defense
is part of the overall military balance (PD–41); that national objec-
tives be met for telecommunications to support all levels of conflict
(PD–53); that mobilization planning guidance be developed for all
agencies, DOD being only one of them (PD–57); that a conceptually
new approach be applied to “continuity of government” and main-
tenance of the National Command Authority under nuclear attack
(PD–58); that a significant step be taken in the evolutionary process
of our targeting policy (PD–59).5 An elaboration of each of these is
important to give you a more textured appreciation of the overall
policy changes. (C)
PD–18, signed in August 1977, put stress on reversing the conven-
tional force balance adverse trends in Europe, acquiring a U.S. rapid
deployment force, and maintaining strategic force “essential equiva-
lence” in face of the continuing Soviet buildup.6 It directed a number
of follow-­on efforts, because, as PRM–10 showed, the implications of
“parity” with the USSR were complex and needed several additional
U.S. responses. (C)
PD–41, on civil defense policy, signed in September 1978, revived
the view that defensive capabilities are part of the strategic balance,
even if only a small part.7 The idea of “defense” was abandoned in
the 1960s after serious attention to it by both President Eisenhower and,
for a time, President Kennedy. Studies by CIA corroborated the Soviet
open literature about Soviet civil defense capabilities, and a dispersed
Soviet population, even partially dispersed, might make a difference of
tens of millions of initial survivors. Changes in our targeting could not
reduce the difference significantly. (C)
PD–53, national security telecommunications policy, was signed in
which Defense, as the executive agent of the National Communications

5 Carter underlined “‘essential equivalence,’” “telecommunications,” “mobilization
planning guidance,” “maintenance of the National Command Authority under nuclear
attack,” and “targeting policy” in this sentence. The Presidential Directives are printed as
6 Carter underlined “PD–18,” “reversing the conventional force balance adverse
trends in Europe,” “U.S. rapid deployment force,” and “maintaining strategic force
‘essential equivalence’” in this sentence.
7 Carter underlined “PD–41” and “civil defense policy” in this sentence.
8 Carter underlined “PD–53” and “telecommunications” in this sentence.

 System (set up by Kennedy after the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962 when
he found agencies with separate and non-­interoperable communica-
tions systems, a paralyzing condition for his control), has the responsi-
bility to implement, not only in its C3I programs but also with guidance
to common carriers on interoperability and survivability for crisis and
war. PD–53 changed fundamentally the objective of telecommunica-
tions heretofore: sufficient to communicate an execution message for
a retaliatory strike but nothing more for endurance, flexibility, and a
prolonged conflict.9 (U)
PD–57, mobilization planning guidance, signed in March 1980,
tasked the first work on mobilization guidance at the national level
since the 1950s.10 Treated as less than a serious issue, even in the
Defense Department until lately, mobilization responsibilities in other
agencies, although critical for wartime, had long been a joke. As the
Soviet buildup cancelled our superiority, the joke became a dangerous
one, undercutting our credibility in the eyes of careful foreign observ-
ers. Little concrete result has been achieved to date, but the level of
serious interest is surprisingly high after PD–57’s emergence. A parallel
achievement in manpower mobilization has been the draft registration
law. It is a major step. (C)
PD–58, Continuity of Government/C3I, signed this June, initiates
a wholly new conceptual approach to making the National Command
Authority and the Presidency for civil government survivable under
conditions of repeated nuclear attack.11 The existing system built in the
1950s, was judged vulnerable already by 1962 in a report to President
Kennedy. President Nixon received a similar report in 1970 but failed
to act on it. Neither report offered a solution to the problem of hardsite
vulnerability. Until the new system is built and tested, it is doubtful that
the U.S. could ride out a well-­conceived Soviet attack on our national
C3I, carry through to a third or fourth ranking successor if need be, and
retaliate in a coordinated manner. Even if we were lucky enough to do
that, the staff support for the Presidency to mobilize, control the forces,
and govern the civil sector is lacking. PD–58 requires the development
of precisely that support. (S)
9 Carter underlined “retaliatory strike,” “endurance,” “flexibility,” and “prolonged
conflict” in this sentence.
10 Carter underlined “PD–57” and “mobilization planning” in this sentence.
Authority,” and “survivable” in this sentence.

PD–59, the nuclear weapons employment policy directive, com-
pletes the series.12 It is, to some extent, an addition to NSDM–242,13
the first effort at “limited” nuclear options taken in 1974 by Nixon and
Schlesinger. I want to spell out for you in some detail the differences
between the two directives, however, because there are claims already
being made that PD–59 is nothing new, just a rehash of NSDM–242. (C)
a. [8 lines not declassified]
b. NSDM–242 put most emphasis on targeting postwar recovery
resources, i.e. cities and industry. PD–59 retains this insofar as it retains
the SIOP. For all other targeting, and even within the SIOP after eco-
nomic recovery targets are hit, PD–59 puts the targeting emphasis on
these categories: all military, C3I, and war-­supporting industry. (C)
c. NSDM–242 treated C3I as needed to transmit “emergency action
messages” to our forces, to chat with Moscow via MOLINK, and for
diplomacy with other states. PD–59 calls for C3I of a much more flexi-
ble and extensive kind: (1) control of both nuclear and general purpose
forces operations and (2) a “look-­shoot-­look” capability to locate new
and moving targets rapidly through a prolonged conflict. (C)
d. [6 lines not declassified]
e. NSDM–242 said nothing about “acquisition policy,” only
“employment
policy.”
Programmatically,
therefore,
NSDM–242
remained a dead letter. PD–59 ties acquisition to employment policy.
That means that OMB, Defense, and the DCI must take the new policy
into account in their budgets and programs. (C)
NSDM–242 kept the old theoretical baggage, trying to make a lim-
ited “retaliatory” or even a first use strike more credible as the SIOP
became less credible. Could the U.S. public sit calmly through such
LNOs, having not even civil defense protection? NSDM–242 was a
misconceived document. It merely exaggerated the flaws of the SIOP.
PD–59 is fundamentally different, while not designed to be a “war
fighting” doctrine, it takes into account Soviet employment doctrine
because, with the Soviet acquisition of such large and accurate forces,
that doctrine cannot be ignored if deterrence is to be maintained. To fail
to make this change would be to risk drifting into a situation where our
doctrine and capabilities could, in a crisis, deter ourselves more than
the Soviets. (C)
12 Carter underlined “PD–59” and “nuclear weapons employment policy” in this
sentence.

In summary, you have taken a series of steps that add up to a major
revision of our strategic doctrine, the third one since World War II. The
previous two, like this one, have been driven by Soviet force develop-
ment. This is the first phase of the task. The second, the programmatic
phase, will be a major task of your second-­term defense policy.14 (C)
14 Brzezinski sent the memorandum to Mondale and Muskie under cover of a Sep-
tember 2 memorandum. It reads in part: “The President asked me to share the enclosed
memorandum with you, especially since there is likely to be some public discussion of
our current strategic doctrine. In the last three and one-­half years, the President has taken
a series of steps that add up to a major revision of our strategic doctrine, the third such
major revision since World War II. The Administration should obtain more public credit
for this than it has so far.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
212.	 Editorial Note
In Presidential Directive/NSC–60, “Nuclear Weapons Deploy-
ments,” September 26, 1980, President’s Assistant for National Secu-
rity Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski informed Vice President Walter
­Mondale, Secretary of State Edmund Muskie, Secretary of Defense
Harold Brown, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff David Jones
that ­President Jimmy Carter had approved the Secretary of Defense’s
Nuclear ­Weapons Deployment Request for Fiscal Year 1980–1981. The
directive also enumerated conditions under which actual deployments
might vary; directed the Departments of State and Defense to secure
Carter’s approval of an Allied consultation strategy before proceed-
ing with the deployments; directed the Departments of State and
Defense to coordinate any other deployment level changes and send
them to Carter for approval; and outlined additional rules governing
the deployments. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski

213.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, October 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Emergency Procedures for Presidential Succession
On John Macy’s report of the exercise NINE LIVES last May,2 you
commented that you would like a “summary of procedures” and that
“FEMA inform at least the top five in the chain of succession” about the
improved system known as Operation TREETOP. He has responded in
a letter at Tab A. The Summary of the Procedures is at Tab B. (S)
No action by you is required. The important points for you to
know are:
—John Macy has briefed the top five officials in the line of succes-
sion below the Vice President. They have a copy of Macy’s letter to you
and are aware that you have asked them to be briefed.
—On procedures, you may disperse, whenever you determine that
the strategic situation is precarious, five potential successors with small
support teams. This allows you to reduce greatly our vulnerability to a
surgical strike against the National Command Authority.
—This capability, Operation TREETOP, is only an intermediate
step toward the new continuity of government system directed by

Tab A

Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (Macy) to President Carter4
Washington, August 19, 1980
Dear Mr. President:
(U) On June 4, I sent an initial report5 to you on Exercise NINE
NSC–58 [2]. Secret. Sent for action. Drafted by Odom. Carter initialed the upper right
corner of the memorandum.
2 Not found.
3 See Document 201.
4 Secret.
5 Not found.

request and in close coordination with the Department of Defense. In
your written comment on that report,6 you asked that following our
review, we provide you with a “summary of procedure” and that we
“inform at least the top five in the chain of succession.” Our review is
now nearing completion and we have progressed sufficiently in our
post exercise critique to comply with your request at this time.
(S) The exercise tested several of our contingency plans for national
security emergencies including, primarily, those for the dispersal and
support of Presidential successors. Surrogates were used for the princi-
pals involved and communications security was a paramount consid-
eration. Enclosed is a brief description of the plans which were tested
and the procedures associated with each.
(U) With respect to your request to inform at least the top five in
the chain, you are advised that all officials in the line of succession,
below the level of the Vice President, are briefed by me and my staff on
the plans and procedures for emergency dispersal and support shortly
after assuming office. I intend to provide each of them with copies of
this letter and our final review of the NINE LIVES Exercise.
(S) In general, the exercise was very profitable from the viewpoint
of lessons learned. The principal problem areas which deserve our con-
tinued attention and near term solutions include:
—Clarification of legal interpretation associated with details
of succession to the Presidency. These are being investigated by the
Department of Justice.
—Need for greater communications support at various dispersal
locations. The Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Depart-
ment of Defense are investigating means to improve this capability.
—Need for more effective procedures for decisionmaking with
respect to timing, successor selection, and dispersal. This is being
addressed by the National Security Council, the Department of Defense,
and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
—Need for more adequate support of successors when dispersed.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency is expanding current
plans to provide such support.
—Need to re-­evaluate helicopter support for the emergency dis-
persal of successors during crises periods. This problem is under study
by the Department of Defense and the Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency.
(U) I considered the exercise to be very successful and feel that
this kind of joint civil/military exercise greatly enhances our continu-
ity of government capabilities. With your continued support and in
6 Not found.

coordination with the White House Military Office, the Department of
Defense, and the new Joint Program Office on Continuity of Govern-
ment, I will conduct similar exercises at least semiannually.
(U) The Secretary of Defense has seen this letter and concurs.
Respectfully,
John W. Macy, Jr.

Tab B

Paper Prepared in the Federal Emergency
Management Agency
Washington, undated
[Secret. 8 pages not declassified]
214.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to Secretary
of State Muskie and the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 7, 1980
SUBJECT
Basic Strategy Issues (U)
I believe that one of the most important legacies we can leave to
our successors is some clear advice on the basic strategic issues they
will now have to confront. Our views on these issues should also shape
our own final budget decisions.
To this end, I would like to discuss the attached paper with you at
the next MBB with a view to then providing a paper to the President.
For obvious reasons let me request that you give the attached no further
distribution, and that no copies be made.
Harold
Southwest Asia/Persian Gulf—(12/80). Secret; Sensitive. Sent via Alpha Channel. On
November 4, President Carter lost reelection to former California Governor Ronald
Reagan.

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense2
Washington, undated
BASIC ISSUES AFFECTING STRATEGY
AND FORCE POSTURE IN THE 80s
I. THE PROBLEMS WE CONFRONT
A. The “catch-­up” problem. The cost of the Vietnam War ($236B in FY
75) created a substantial imbalance between a diverted or declining US
effort and steady real increases in Soviet defense spending. While real
the investment sector, where inflation most outran budget predictions
of its level. In fact the differential between US and Soviet defense invest-
ment runs (according to CIA estimates) about $240B over the decade of
the 70s, as measured in FY 1980 dollars. True, total NATO plus Japa-
nese defense spending is still comparable to that of the Warsaw Pact,
because fortunately we have rich Allies and the USSR only poor ones.
But in the crucial investment sector the alliance still lags behind—­and
alliance investment is only partially additive to ours, because of over-
lap, duplication, and inefficiencies. Yet we must confront this problem
squarely in the 80s and address the related strategic issues.
B. Strategic nuclear parity. Preserving strategic deterrence natu-
rally takes overriding priority, and will be more expensive than in the
recent past even if we can arrange a continuation of the SALT II limits
on Soviet forces. We will have to spend a lot more on a strategic arms
race if SALT II fails—­and modernize forces/strengthen C3 even with
SALT II. Nonetheless, the chief strategic consequence of nuclear parity
is to compel greater reliance on much more costly conventional forces.
In short, nuclear parity requires a better (more favorable to us) conven-
tional balance as well.
C. The Strategic Vacuum in the Persian Gulf. Since PD–18 was written
the revolution in Iran, invasion of Afghanistan and now Iran/Iraq war
have underlined the vulnerability of the oil-­rich PG region to Soviet
exploitation. Moreover, the President has already made the policy deci-
sion to repel such a threat by force if need be.3 This compels us to face
2 Secret.
he declared that “an attempt by any outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf
region will be regarded as an assault on the vital interests of the United States of America,
and such an assault will be repelled by any means necessary, including military force.”

up to a whole new requirement—­one and two “half-­wars” instead of
one and one-­half.4
D. The “Simultaneity” Problem. Though DoD is doing its best to
meet an added PG/IO requirement, even currently programmed
RDF capabilities cannot cope with a Soviet threat at levels they could
surely mount. Moreover, the forces, lift, and support we would have to
employ against this PG/IO lift, and support we would have to employ
against this PG/IO threat would be largely at the expense of our NATO
and Far East capabilities, at least for the next several years. This raises
the question of “simultaneity.” We must prudently hedge against the
possibility that a direct US/Soviet clash in the PG/IO would escalate
into a global conflict, whether or not we chose to escalate. There is a
real question about the likelihood—­or attractiveness to the Soviets—­of
mounting simultaneous attacks, as opposed to threats. If they did attack
however, currently programmed US and allied resources would not
permit adequate defense of three widely separated theaters simultane-
ously. We would have to go on the strategic defensive somewhere and
perhaps sacrifice territory, as we had to do initially in WW II. Thus we
must find strategic avenues for reducing the risks that regional con-
flict would expand into global war—­at times and under circumstances
adverse to our vital interests.
E. Serious economic constraints, including the impact of the energy
crunch and other inflationary/slow growth pressures, severely con-
strict our ability to generate adequate defense growth—­despite grow-
ing popular perceptions that such growth is essential.
F. Differing perceptions of the “threat” also create serious difficulties
for us. Most of our friends simply don’t see the magnitude of the threat
as we do, or if they do, quail at confronting it. The political consensus
in most of them for greater defense efforts and a more assertive policy is
weaker than in the US, particularly-­among the rising generation. More-
over, much of the world seems to think we’re still as strong as ever,
but questions US leadership, while many others think we’ve sunk to
second place. In both cases we confront a pervasive “image of the US”
problem.5
What about the longer term? If we can deter conflict and restrict
Soviet expansionism for another decade or so, there is reason to believe
that internal Soviet contradictions will progressively limit Soviet ability
to keep building up military power. Hence we probably do not face
an unending arms race; rather our problem is how to get through a
4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this sentence and an
arrow pointing to it.
5 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this and the previous
sentence.

dangerous decade with our vital interests intact. During this period
we must of course continue our efforts to constrain Soviet power and
enhance stability via the SALT process, MBFR and other forms of arms
control.6
II. BASIC ISSUES OF GRAND STRATEGY
In DoD’s view the sheer magnitude of these problems makes
clear that a further major evolution of present policies and programs
is required, despite the real accomplishments of the last few years. The
accelerated DoD programs we believe essential will be presented to a
PRC. This paper addresses corollary strategic and policy issues which
also bear directly on our national security needs. Indeed there are clear
tradeoffs here.7 To the extent that the policy initiatives DoD proposes
are infeasible or prove unsuccessful, even larger US defense budgets
than DoD is proposing will almost certainly be required.8
This is because what our friends and allies do for the common
defense is fully as important as what we do ourselves. Indeed our own
vital interests can only be adequately served, at a cost we can afford, by
a “coalition” strategy and posture. Among other things, we cannot suc-
cessfully defend in WE, SWA, or the FE without extensive participation
and cooperation of friends and allies. Thus rational burden-­sharing is
the sine qua non of credible deterrence/defense.
Nor can we afford to address our security needs purely in terms of
defense programs. A better dovetailing of US defense, economic, and
foreign policies is equally essential, which raises a related set of issues.9
We have selected eight key issues for SCC debate and recommen-
dation to the President. What we decide on each of them will affect
the others, as well as the size of future US defense programs. There-
fore, after considering each issue on its own, we ought to think about
the overall situation to see whether our conclusions add up to a viable
overall strategy for the 80s, which in turn should drive our security
policies as well as programs.
Issue #1—Do the 80s pose a significantly greater danger of major regional
or global conflict? This is essentially a matter of subjective judgment. But
volatility and change in the so-­called Third World (and the opportuni-
ties this offers for Soviet or surrogate exploitation), together with grow-
ing stresses in Eastern Europe (especially Poland) and post-Tito risks
in Yugoslavia, do seem to create greater likelihood of conflicts affecting
6 Brzezinski wrote in the right margin next to this paragraph: “containment +
decay?”
7 Brzezinski underlined “tradeoffs” in this sentence.
8 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this and the previous
sentence.
9 Brzezinski drew two short lines bracketing this paragraph.

coalition interests in the 80s. Some also argue that there is a “window”
of vulnerability—­not just nuclear—­which Moscow might be tempted
to exploit before this gap can be closed. For example, the USSR might
feel impelled to create a diversion from its problems in Eastern Europe
by pressing forward in Southwest Asia.
Moreover, the threat to vital Free World oil access in the volatile
PG/IO region could lead to direct US/USSR confrontation—­if the Soviets
were tempted to intervene forcibly and only the US has much capabil-
ity for deterring or halting Soviet intervention.
Thus DoD does see a greater likelihood of conflict, which impacts
directly on both the size of coalition deterrence/defense effort needed
and on relative emphases within it. For example, it bears on the relative
weight we give to readiness vs. modernization if resources remain so
constrained.
Issue #2—If for several years to come defending our vital interests in the
widely separated NATO, Persian Gulf and Far East theaters simultaneously
is beyond our capabilities, which should receive priority? And—­a different
question—­where should the greatest resource increment be applied?
These issues have grave political as well as military implications. Our
strategy has long been based on the premise that holding on to Western
Europe, a developed power complex now fully as rich as our own, was
first priority. We see no reason to change this judgment.
But the security and economic health of Western Europe (and
Japan for that matter) depend on assured access to PG oil. Thus in a
real sense defense of the PG/IO is directly linked to that of both other
areas of vital interest to us. Moreover, the vulnerability and volatility of
the PG region suggest that the risks of conflict may be greatest in this
area, where we are currently least well-­prepared. The DoD judgment is
that the Soviets would see much less risk and almost as great gain in
seeking control of Southwest Asia and its resources by combined mil-
itary action and political pressure than in seeking control of Western
Europe by those means. Therefore, DoD believes that Southwest Asia
should have priority in our FY 82–86 buildup, (though not necessarily
in wartime allocation of our forces).10
In turn Europe and Japan must be pressed to assume a greater
share of the burden of their own defense under a “division of labor”
concept (see Issue #4). Moreover, in the Far East theater improving US/
PRC/Japan relations offer new strategic options to protect our vital
interests and create added constraints on Soviet behavior at little cost
to the US (see Issue #4).
10 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this and the portion of
the previous sentence that begins with “Asia and its resources” and ends with “by those
means” and an arrow pointing to it.

Issue #3—How can we best fill the PG/IO power vacuum? If this is our
top priority need through the mid-80s, we must develop a more cred-
ible surge capability. Given the political and military constraints on
deployable Allied power, this has to be primarily a US task—­with only
modest help from our European or FE Allies.
But within current budget guidelines we could not deploy suffi-
cient force rapidly enough, and support it adequately, to offer much
confidence of credible defense if deterrence failed. For example,
wing, RDF currently programmed will still lack important elements,
especially sufficient lift, support, and munitions—­and the basing
structure programmed would be marginal. Moreover, DoD believes
an adequately supported force of at least 61⁄3 divisions plus seven
air wings is needed to pose a credible US ability to counter Soviet
intervention should it in fact take place.11 There is also a critical lack
of the fast air and sealift needed to surge to the PG in timely enough
fashion to maximize deterrence or minimize Soviet gains. Are we
willing to pay this price?
Moreover, even if we develop such capabilities, they cannot be
used effectively without forward bases in the area. This is the weak-
est single element of our emerging PG/IO strategy. Because the area
countries are so strongly opposed to US bases, we are compelled to
build ungarrisoned facilities which they presumably would allow us
to use once they perceived an imminent threat.12 Saudi Arabia is key in
this respect—­both as the largest oil producer and the geographic locale
from which we could most effectively deter or defend against a Soviet
move into Iran/Iraq. Since the Gulf states may not let us deploy until
the last moment, we also need staging bases in the region (which can
serve as less vulnerable rear logistic bases too). Egypt looks like the best
bet.13
But this uncomfortable dependence on PG/IO states with whom
we lack a firm alliance relationship dictates a major effort to improve
our relations with them. Here the lack of an Arab-Israeli settlement
makes our task more difficult. Israel’s efforts to strengthen her own
security position risk exacerbating the Arab/Israeli dispute at the very
time when we seek to get the Arab states to focus on the Soviet threat.
DoD believes it may be necessary to provide such firm security assur-
ances (and sufficient aid) to Israel as to calm her legitimate fears (and
11 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to the portion of this sen-
tence beginning with “believes” and ending with “credible” and an arrow pointing to it.
12 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence.
13 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence and a check-
mark in the right margin.

make even clearer to the Arabs our commitment to Israel’s security).14
Such assurances (and aid) may also be indispensable to successful com-
pletion of the Camp David process, in terms of autonomy and territory.
They would in turn enable us to meet the insistent demand of Saudi
Arabia (and Egypt) for “equal treatment” with Israel. DoD sees a reso-
lution of this issue as indispensable to the kind of security relationship
without which we simply cannot execute a viable PG/IO strategy.15
The energy squeeze poses another serious obstacle to closer rela-
tionships with key PG oil producers. Their price increase and produc-
tion policies create economic difficulties which in turn impede our
defense efforts, thus adversely affecting the very East/West military
balance which in the last analysis protects their security too. Since con-
tinuation of such policies could make major defense budget increases
impossible, DoD believes it vital for us to attempt to develop a policy
which explicitly trades our security umbrella for their granting sure
access at reasonable prices to PG oil.
Issue #4—What Far East strategic posture will best relieve Soviet pres-
sure on Europe and the PG/IO, while limiting risks of simultaneous global
war? If we must give strategic priority to Europe and now the PG/
IO, we face again the old WW II problem of what to do about our
Pacific flank. Though neither China, Japan, nor for that matter the US
can pose a major offensive threat to the USSR, Moscow exhibits live
concern over its own FE flank and is steadily strengthening its forces
there. Fortunately Japan’s rapid economic development and the grow-
ing parallelism of US/PRC strategic interests (China’s concern over the
Soviet threat is even greater than our own), offer a strategic option for
(1) enhancing Soviet concern over a two-­front threat; yet (2) forestall-
ing the need for major US defense increases directed specifically at this
third theater.
Given our acute need to limit Soviet capabilities against NATO
and the PG/IO, and our inability to deal with all three fronts simul-
taneously, DoD believes that the clearest way to accomplish goals (1)
and (2) above is to insist on greater Japanese rearmament and provide
China certain carefully calculated defensive weaponry.16 Something of
this sort is probably necessary to improve China’s defensibility in any
case. Absent this approach we would almost certainly need to carry
out a massive US force buildup in the Western Pacific. We also urge
that Japan should be pressed to finance more of the US/Japanese
defense capability and (indirectly through trade) some of the PRC arms
14 Brzezinski underlined “to Israel” in this sentence.
15 Brzezinski drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this sentence. He also
drew two short lines in the right margin bracketing this and the previous sentence.
16 Brzezinski underlined “insist on greater Japanese rearmament” and “certain care-
fully calculated defensive weaponry” in this sentence.

modernization. This would be in Japan’s own strategic interest and
would relieve the burden on the US. Moreover, we see little risk that
a reluctant Japan will go so far in rearming as to pose again a threat to
US strategic interests. Instead they are in the same boat as we are now.
Since it would be difficult for the US to defend South Korea if we
were fully engaged elsewhere, [6 lines not declassified] A third part of this
strategy would be to use the leverage of our aid to press China to deter
any NK attack.17
DoD stresses a Far East “threat-­in-­being” concept because both
Japan and China probably would prefer to remain neutral as long as
possible in any NATO/WP or US/USSR conflict. Nor could we pose
a major offensive threat to the USSR in the FE so long as they did so—­
and maybe even if they joined us. Moreover, Moscow too might prefer
to refuse its FE flank until it had won in Europe and/or the PG (which
would give it a stranglehold on Japan’s oil).
For all these reasons DoD believes that the US must face up to the
and (3) the sale of limited defensive arms to China, [less than 1 line not
declassified] The chief risk we see is that of provoking the USSR to pre-­
emptive action.18 But, we regard this risk as modest so long as US or
European arms sales are carefully calibrated to be defensive, and so
long as the USSR faces major problems in EE and the PG/IO. We must
also weigh against this risk the likelihood that otherwise US defense
outlays would have to be further increased in order to cope with the
“simultaneity” problem.
Issue #5—How can we best get our friends and Allies to do more for the
common defense? This issue has bedevilled US policy since the early 50s.
But the loss of US strategic nuclear superiority, increasing Soviet con-
ventional capabilities, European and Japanese economic growth, and
now the US need to fill the security vacuum in yet a third theater all
compel imparting new vigor to this effort. Even if we wish to do so,
we cannot any longer carry so much of the burden of Western defense.
Since we prefer to remain the chief Free World nuclear defender (a
major call on our resources even in a SALT II regime), it must become a
cardinal aspect of US political, economic, and military policy in the 80s
to get our Allies—­and friends—­to contribute a lot more to conventional
defense. Moreover, their failure to do so at a time when US defense
17 Brzezinski underlined “third,” and drew a vertical line and a checkmark in the
right margin next to this sentence.
18 Brzezinski drew two vertical lines and an arrow pointing to it in the right margin
next to this sentence.

efforts are expanding will set loose divisive US domestic debate which
could seriously fray our alliances.19
This will be an uphill fight. Under pressure of economic difficul-
ties, but in large measure because of political disarray, our European
Allies are falling short of even 3% real defense growth. Japan is inching
forward only under US pressure.20 Both they, and even more those LDCs
of great strategic importance to us (like Turkey, Pakistan, Thailand,
Korea), are weakened by the energy squeeze. Our developed Allies also
fail to perceive the threat of growing Soviet capabilities as we do, or
quail at confronting it.21
An all-­out effort to counter these perceptions and galvanize Allied
efforts must become a central purpose of the next presidential term.
As the leader of the Free World coalition, we must set clear goals and
press unremittingly for their achievement, accepting the inevitable
Allied recriminations but keeping them from becoming seriously coun-
terproductive. Perhaps the best way to get our NATO Allies to accept
bring home to them the need for a genuine “division of labor” by actu-
ally shifting more US forces now committed to NATO to meet PG/IO
commitments.23
80s offers much prospect of really meeting urgent common needs.24 We
have asked Japan for so little for so long that modest incrementalism is
all it offers. This will not suffice for the 80s (as was laid out in Issue #4)
unless the US is prepared to spend a great deal more.25
Since greater effort by our Allies will be so hard to come by, indirect
as well as direct contributions must be sought (the latter are often more
palatable). For example, maximum host nation support of all kinds will
significantly reduce US defense costs for which we must otherwise pro-
gram, while involving (in the case of wartime rather than peacetime
HNS) only contingent Allied allocation of wartime resources—­largely
19 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this sentence and wrote
beside it: “yes.”
20 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence and the por-
tion of the previous sentence that begins with “political disarray” and ends with “defense
growth.”
21 Brzezinski drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this sentence.
22 Brzezinski drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this sentence.
23 Brzezinski drew two diagonal lines at the end of this paragraph.
24 Brzezinski drew a vertical line and an arrow pointing to it in the right margin next
to this sentence.
25 Brzezinski underlined “not” and drew a checkmark in the right margin next to
this sentence.

civil. We have accomplished much along these lines in the past few
years, but tapped only a portion of the potential.26
POL is a good case in point; we must insist that our Allies meet at
least our initial wartime POL needs to the fullest extent possible out
of their civil stockpiles (just as they plan to meet their own wartime
needs). We must also get them to meet as much as possible of the local
construction and support needs of our deployed peacetime forces.
(Congress will increasingly insist on this).27
Greater European/Japanese military and economic aid to other
threatened countries is another indirect way to get more rational bur-
densharing, which must be geared more directly to collective secu-
rity concerns.28 The FRG’s special relationship with Turkey must be
exploited to fill a gap we are unable to fill. To the extent economic aid
is fungible,29 it can be used to permit recipients to buy US military
equipment (Japanese loans to S. Korea and China could be used for this
purpose).
Our oil-­rich friends in the PG area must be called on to finance as
much as feasible of the security umbrella which only we can provide
them. To this end, we should seek direct contributions from them to
finance the security needs of less wealthy Allies (e.g. revive Saudi aid
to Egypt). We must ask them to finance the facilities we need and stock-
pile POL for us. Indirectly, they can help us by moderating oil price
increases and keeping production high (e.g. Turkey’s likely 1980 oil
Issue #6—How can we best maintain both adequate modernization and
a perceived technological edge? In Issue #1 we argued that greater risk
of conflict in the 80s dictated greater emphasis on readiness. But over
the last three decades our perceived technological superiority, mani-
fest not only in our strategic forces, has probably exerted even greater
deterrent impact on Soviet thinking—­an advantage we must not lightly
cast away. Moreover, defense investment today is what creates usable
power tomorrow.31
DoD’s current guidelines deliberately place R&D and moderniza-
tion investment behind readiness. But we also must reduce the growing
“defense investment gap” between the US and USSR. Instead, during
the last three years (FY 79–81) our procurement budget each year has
26 Brzezinski drew a checkmark in the right margin next to this sentence.
27 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this paragraph.
28 Brzezinski underlined “aid” in this sentence and drew a vertical line in the left
margin next to it.
29 Brzezinski drew a checkmark in the right margin next to “fungible.”
30 Brzezinski drew a diagonal line at the end of this paragraph.
31 Brzezinski underlined “greater emphasis on readiness,” “probably exerted even
greater,” and “creates usable power tomorrow” in this paragraph.

had on the average 5% less purchasing power than the FY 77 budget
(even FY 78 had only about 1% real growth). This is basically because
we have consistently underestimated inflation, especially with respect
to major defense procurement—­which has run well above the general
inflation index.
Hence the issue is whether the US is prepared to make a significant
modernization effort or to keep falling behind. DoD does not propose
matching Soviet procurements (which we couldn’t afford even at 7–8%
real annual defense budget growth). What we do propose is exploiting
our superior technology in selected key areas such as ASW, antitank
weaponry, and other PGMs, Stealth vehicles, and cruise missiles of var-
ious kinds. We can also exploit our greater efficiency in defense invest-
ment (for example, we see no need to design and build four new ICBMs
when one will do the job).32
We must press our Allies hard along similar lines. By enlightened
rationalization/standardization/interoperability policies, and accept-
ing more of a two-­way street, we can make Allied defense investment
more efficient too.33
But an indispensable corollary to exploiting our own technology
more vigorously is to accelerate our efforts to prevent it from leaking
its details to the USSR (which makes enormous efforts to secure those
details).34 DoD sees this too as a key element in any viable security
strategy for the 80s.
Issue #7—Since quality uniformed manpower will be so tight in the 80s,
what relief must we seek? A return to the draft is an obvious answer, but
raises so many thorny problems that other measures should be taken
first. Clearly, we must pay what is necessary to remain competitive
in the labor marketplace, and above all do whatever is necessary to
retain trained manpower in key skills. It is the worst false economy to
have to spend so much to keep training new people to achieve skills
that those leaving already have (for example, it costs over $600,000 to
train an advanced fighter pilot; paying him even $20,000 more a year
to hold him five more years would be far cheaper than having to train
another one).
Beyond this, DoD simply cannot afford to use scarce uniformed
manpower to do peacetime blue collar jobs which could be done just as
well—­and more cheaply—­by civilians. Substituting civilians for mili-
tary people was successful in the past; we replaced about 90,000 military
32 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this paragraph, another
one in the right margin, and next to it wrote “wrong.”
33 Brzezinski underlined “two-­way” in this paragraph and wrote in the right margin
next to it: “No.”
34 Brzezinski drew a short vertical line in the left margin next to this paragraph.

with civilians during the Vietnam buildup and about 40,000 when we
ended the draft. Yet DoD has cut down civilian employment by about
120,000 since 1974, largely through increased efficiencies. We have now
reached the point where continuing to cut, instead of building up as a
substitute for needed increases in scarce military manpower at a time
when defense needs are expanding, will compromise readiness—­even
if defense spending is increased. In fact, increased readiness and real
growth in defense programs require more, not fewer, civilian employ-
ees in industrially funded activities such as Navy yards, air rework
facilities and laboratories. Arbitrary civilian manpower restraints here
are equally counterproductive. DoD’s special circumstances demand
relief from such limitations (even though they appear politically attrac-
tive to both outgoing and incoming administrations).35
Issue #8—Lastly, how can non-Defense agencies best complement DoD
efforts? The acute security problems we confront in the 80s dictate a far
broader effort than is in DoD’s purview. In the largest sense, our for-
eign and economic policies must take more fully into account national
security needs.36 National policies which reduce inflation and promote
investment clearly help defense. So too do energy policies which pro-
mote conservation, accelerate use of alternate fuels, and hold down
energy costs. Such policies will also assist the defense efforts of cru-
cially needed Allies.
In DoD’s view our coalition defense and overseas force projec-
tion strategy also dictate providing much greater security assistance
to friends and Allies in maintaining adequate defense efforts. Such aid
is often more cost-­effective than building up our own forces to com-
pensate for their weakness. In particular, key countries like Turkey,
Pakistan, and Egypt need to be strengthened militarily as a key aspect
of our PG/IO deterrent strategy. To this end a substantial rise in Secu-
rity Assistance is indispensable. Since many important client states are
unable to meet the financial terms required by current FMS policy, or in
some cases, can’t pay at all, more flexible terms plus some element of
grant aid are equally important.37 State/DoD have prepared proposals
for SCC review.38
III. THE DOD POSITION. DoD recognizes that its proposals on the
above issues add up to a highly ambitious security program for the 80s.
But it goes without saying that deterrence is far more desireable and
far less costly than conflict, even granting that a credible war-­fighting
35 Brzezinski drew vertical lines in the left and right margins next to this sentence.
36 Brzezinski underlined “must take more fully into” in this sentence.
37 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this and the previous
sentence.
38 Not found.

capability is crucial to deterrence. The sheer magnitude of the security
problems we confront is so great that only such far reaching initiatives
offer prudent possibilities of limiting the global risks.
There is no realistic prospect of solving these problems solely
through the application of more funds. Some of the threats are too
immediate for that. Even the longer run concerns cannot be confidently
met by expansion of real US defense efforts at increased but feasible
rates. Therefore, both in the near term (FY 82 budget) and the medium
term (FY 82–86 FYDP) some very difficult choices will have to be made
and the non-DoD portions of the program (security and economic assis-
tance, major increases in Allied efforts) will be required.
Put another way, the programmatic corollary to this paper is pro-
about $250 billion in today’s dollars. But without the measures pro-
posed herein, even defense outlays of this size would not suffice to
protect our vital security interests adequately. Nor can we realisti-
cally expect that all the measures proposed herein will achieve the full
results desired. Thus simple prudence dictates energetic pursuit of the
full package. Our security demands no less.

215.	 Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Basic Strategy Issues
PARTICIPANT
summary: “Susan, file—­hold C.” The meeting took place in the White House Situation
Room. No minutes of the meeting were found.
2 See Document 214.
State
Secretary Edmund Muskie
Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher
Defense
Secretary Harold Brown
Deputy Secretary W. Graham Claytor
Under Secretary for Policy Robert W.
Komer
JCS
Chairman General David Jones
OMB
Director James McIntyre
CIA
Director Stansfield Turner
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
NSC
BGeneral William E. Odom
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
Dr. Brzezinski opened by saying this is not a budget meeting but
rather a review of probable geopolitical and strategic challenges which
will face the U.S.; it also has relevance for our foreign policy decisions
as well because they are interrelated with security. The Defense paper,2
on which the meeting is based, is provocative and important. It raises
critical issues and offers contingent answers. The answers we give these
issues will have both budgetary implications and implications for the
strategic legacy left by this Administration. They will also be import-
ant for the President to use in constructing his State of the Union Mes-
sage in which he will offer warnings and conclusions about the decade
Before the discussion could proceed to the list of eight issues, Sec-
retary Muskie offered the following general objections:
—It has nothing to do with the FY 1982 budget, only implications
for FY 1983–86. (McIntyre corrected this observation by noting that the
Southwest Asian issue and the “readiness versus modernization” issue
are relevant to the FY 1982 budget.) (C)

—He wondered about the speeches that had been made during
the campaign, about the conditions of our national security in light of
the assertions in this paper. If the defense is not adequate, as the paper
insists, then we did not advocate a proper policy and we have misled
the American people. (S)
—The paper says things about our own record for the past four
years. It assumes that our Allies in Europe and East Asia must adopt
drastic policy changes or the threat won’t be met. If the threat is
that serious and the Allies won’t act, do we have to take up the slack?
What are the consequences for Japan if the U.S. suggests that Japan
take over the security of Korea? If the Japanese won’t be responsive,
why raise the issue now? It would be better to do it later and in a
slower manner. (S)
—The President’s concern with the State of the Union Message is
understandable, and there are some valid points in the paper, but the
problems relate to a period when we won’t have jurisdiction over pol-
icy. The paper needs revisions before it can be adopted by the President
and the National Security Council. (S)
Harold Brown answered Muskie’s remarks about the “terrifying
paper” (Muskie denied that he had used these words), a surprising
paper, Brown added, in light of what was said during the election cam-
paign. Brown recalled that our warnings during the campaign about
the problems in the 1980s, about the importance of our Allies’ contri-
butions, about our defense programs going ahead on schedule, and the
importance of arms control are very consistent with the thrust of the
paper. You say the Allies will not accept it. The future will be terrify-
ing if the Allies do not and we do not carry out our defense programs.
Brown added that there has not been time to staff this paper with other
agencies, but its issues are primarily defense matters. In any case, we
have to leave the next Administration some strategic assessment. (S)
Muskie asked why we must go public with this. Harold Brown
said it will not be a public document. McIntyre added that in so far as
it is included in the defense report to the Congress on the Five-Year
Defense Plan, it will be public. Dr. Brzezinski added that it could be
refined in our discussion here to provide points to the President for his
State of the Union Address. (C)
Harold Brown and McIntyre entered a short debate on how large
a deviation from previous FYDPs is appropriate. McIntyre charged
that Defense is “phoneying” the books on the threat and the problems.
Brown argued that “real, real growth” to meet inflation may require
quite large deviations as compared to “real growth” which has not.
Both agreed to defer this debate until the upcoming PRC meeting on
the Defense budget. (S)

Komer offered the caveat that we separate tactical from strategic
issues. We are not talking about Japan taking responsibility for the
defense of Korea now but rather about this policy aim as a strategic
objective for the future. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski responded to Muskie that the paper and the
SCC discussion could help the President in considering most of the
defense issues. Although some foreign policy issues are included,
the paper admittedly does not address the full range of foreign policy
problems. (C)
Turner offered the following general comment: he accepts the
premises that (1) we cannot meet a Persian Gulf, European, and East
Asian war simultaneously, (2) a coalition with our Allies is essential to
meet our defense requirements. Because coalitions work only in war-
time, U.S. strategy must not be dependent upon our allies to protect our
vital interests. We need a strategy for a better defense deployment. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski and Brown challenged the soundness of Turner’s
conclusion by citing the impossibility of defending Europe and Japan
without their help. Dr. Brzezinski added that Turner had made one
valid point: the Persian Gulf region is an exception; only the U.S. could
defend it; we should face up to that now. (S)
Turner accepted Dr. Brzezinski’s argument but added that we need
more flexibility because our past record of predicting locations of con-
flicts has been poor. (S)
Harold Brown said that if you look at the U.S./Soviet relationship
you see that we play down areas far away from the Soviet Union like
South Africa, the Caribbean, and the South Pacific. Geography is not
against us there, but in Europe, East Asia, and Southwest Asia/Persian
Gulf, the USSR is very close. Thus, we need advanced preparation for
those regions. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski closed the general discussion and directed comment
to the list of eight issues. (C)
Issue #-1—Do the 1980s pose a significantly greater danger of major
regional or global conflict? Dr. Brzezinski asked if this is true, or if there is
anyone who disagrees with it. (S)
Muskie raised a question about post-Tito Yugoslavia3 creating a
greater danger of a regional conflict. Brown explained that we mean the
Soviets might exploit centrifugal forces in that country. Komer added
that the National Intelligence Estimate says that the first six months are
not likely to be a problem; the real danger will come later; therefore, we
should not be surprised that it has been quiet to date. (S)
Issue #-2—If for several years to come defending our vital interests in the
widely separated NATO, Persian Gulf and Far East theaters simultaneously
is beyond our capabilities, which should receive priority? and Issue #-3—How
can we best fill the PG/IO power vacuum? (S)
Harold Brown said that some within Defense believe that any-
thing less than enough to meet both the NATO and Persian Gulf theater
requirements simultaneously is inadequate. He does not agree with
this view, and he cited World World II in which we gave priority first to
one theater and then another. Now we must ask what is the ratio of our
interests to the risks in each theater. In Brown’s view the ratio is higher
in Southwest Asia; therefore, it should receive priority in programs. (S)
General Jones acknowledged Brown’s point but said that when
additional requirements are placed on the military services, they impact
on our European and Asian capabilities whether we like it or not. (S)
Muskie said look at it the other way. If all that is necessary to seize
the Persian Gulf in order to break the West’s hold in Europe, why would
the Soviets attack in all three theaters at once? (S)
Brown replied that they would feint in Europe while attacking in
the Persian Gulf. (S)
Jones said they would not attack in Europe but would mobilize in
order to hold us in position in Europe. In all our present plans the pri-
ority commitment of forces is to Europe. (S)
Muskie expressed surprise and asked if we are not already shifting
the priority to the Persian Gulf. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski explained that this is our emerging policy, not yet a
fully developed one. (S)
Komer explained that the paper is not referring to operational
­priority but rather budget priority to the Persian Gulf and Southwest
Muskie said okay, but the issue is the same. Europe won’t even live
up to the three percent commitment. (C)
Brown then explained that we are moving from a three-­and-­a-­half
division to a six-­and-­a-­half division plan for the Persian Gulf. The addi-
tional three divisions will have to be taken from forces which now are
committed to reinforce NATO. The Europeans will have to take up the
slack as we reallocate them. There was a lengthy digression on the sig-
nificance of this reallocation, when it actually takes place, whether it
will put pressure on the Europeans to fill the gap, or whether they will
respond the same way they did to the three percent goal. (S)
Muskie argued that the Europeans might be right, that there will
not be a simultaneous attack in both theaters. We might take a lesson
from the Europeans. Brown argued that the U.S. must lead, not follow

the European example. It is better to lead on the way “up” in force
development than on the way “down.” (S)
Issue #-4—What Far East strategic posture will best relieve Soviet pres-
sure on Europe and the PG/IO, while limiting risks of simultaneous global
war? Dr. Brzezinski listed the three points of the Defense paper recom-
mendations as:
—Getting the Japanese to rearm faster.
—Getting the Japanese to take security responsibilities for Korea.
—Sale of limited defensive arms to China. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski expressed doubt that this formula is feasible. The
Japanese will not respond effectively. (S)
Muskie asked why. The problems are the same that we have with
the Europeans! (S)
Brzezinski replied that indeed the argument can be made that the
Europeans won’t contribute adequately to defense and, therefore, we
should also contribute less. This would lead to complete Finlandization
of Europe and our inability to defend adequately either in Europe or
in the Persian Gulf. Therefore, the proper conclusion is that we must
continue to press the Allies for more defense effort regardless of their
reluctance. (S)
Turner argued that two of the points are paper tigers. First, build-
ing up China will take far too long to make any difference in the 1980s.
Second, the same is true for Japan. The United States should shift its
forces to the two other theaters and ignore East Asia. (S)
Brown conceded some truth to this. In a three front war, East Asia
would get last priority. Turner argued that cancellation of our “swing
strategy” was a mistake. The Atlantic is critical, and we must be able to
draw from the Pacific to win the Atlantic battle. (S)
Brown turned to arms for China and said that we must face up to
it. Is it politically feasible to provide weapons or to get the Europeans
to do it? (S)
Muskie objected to any increase in military cooperation because it
might cause the Soviets to take programmatic actions we do not like. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski put our policy toward China in the following way.
We now have the ability to do a number of low key things. There is
no need for a new policy. If the Soviets do inflammatory things, make
these destabilizing moves such as intervention in Poland, we will have
the option of increasing our military operations with the PRC publicly
and explicitly as a U.S. reaction to Soviet behavior. (S)
Harold Brown said he liked Dr. Brzezinski’s formulation, but the
new Administration will have to address some specific issues like
fighter aircraft engine improvements for China. (S)

Issue #-5—How can we best get our friends and Allies to do more for the
common defense? Harold Brown made the only significant comment on
this point. The Allies he reports always rebuff us by putting too much
pressure on them about defense contributions, but Brown went on to
observe, only by chiding them do we get them to act. (S)
Issue #-6—How can we best maintain both adequate modernization and
a perceived technological edge? Dr. Brzezinski and Harold Brown debated
briefly about technology transfers to the USSR. Brown argued that
violations to our present policy, i.e. illegal leaks, are more critical than
expanding our controls. Dr. Brzezinski found this a surprise. He has
seen no study or intelligence to support the conclusion. Harold Brown
said that this is Bill Perry’s judgment. (S)
Issue #-7—Since quality uniformed manpower will be so tight in
the 1980s, what relief must we seek? and Issue #-8—Last, how can non-­
Defense agencies best complement DOD efforts? were not discussioned
[discussed?]. (C)
Dr. Brzezinski asked how best to present these issues to the Pres-
ident. He suggested that the SCC discussion might introduce them. A
National Security Council meeting with the President could follow. (C)
Muskie expressed his reservations about basing the discussion on
the Defense paper because he has not been able to staff it within the
Department of State. (C)
Dr. Brzezinski, Harold Brown, and Komer pointed out that the
issues are primarily Defense issues, not a broad review of our foreign
policy review issues. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that the agencies, if they
desire, put their comments on the paper in written form before an
NSC meeting. This would allow State’s most thoughtful criticisms and
advice to be presented. (C)
Muskie and Christopher agreed to this approach, a National Secu-
rity Council meeting on the Defense paper combined with written com-
ments from State and the DCI. (C)

216.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 25, 1980
SUBJECT
Basic Strategy Issues
Harold Brown submitted a paper outlining nine issues of basic
strategy for our national security policy which he asked be discussed at
an SCC Meeting.2 Attached are the Minutes of that discussion.3 It was
the SCC recommendation that an NSC meeting be held on the paper
along with comments by the DCI and State. The purpose would be
to help you clarify the strategic legacy you want to leave the Reagan
Administration as you address the Defense budget decisions. It would
also help you decide the major points you will make in your State of the
Union Address. (S)
As you will see from the Minutes, Ed Muskie was not happy with
the paper, was disturbed about not having it staffed widely in State,
and was reluctant to bring it to your attention. Harold, on the contrary,
was very anxious to bring it to your attention. I encouraged Muskie to
put his views in writing so that they may have the most thoughtful and
considered expression. Depending on Muskie’s comments, we may
need an NSC meeting.4 (S)
2 See Document 214.
3 No minutes of the meeting found. The summary of conclusions is Document 215.
4 Carter wrote at the bottom of the memorandum: “Zbig—I’ll wait for Ed’s com-
ments. J.”

217.	 Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to
President Carter1
Washington, December 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Defense Strategy Paper
I agree with the central arguments of Harold Brown’s paper on
U.S. strategy for dealing with the Soviet Union.2 My understanding of
these arguments is that:
—­the danger of conflict is increasing;
—­the U.S. must intensify its defense effort;
—­the Allies must do more; and
—­our economic, energy, and foreign policies should be geared to
support our increasingly difficult national security requirements.
However, I believe that in a number of areas these points are car-
ried to far-­reaching conclusions unsupported by the analysis.
Before addressing the specific issues Harold raises, here are three
broad questions which should be raised:
First, a question of process. I do not believe that Harold’s paper
contains sufficiently detailed analysis to justify making decisions
involving basic security issues and billions of dollars.
Second, the budgetary implications. What is the analytical basis
for arriving at a figure of $250 billion? Where would these funds come
from: In an increased deficit? In reductions of domestic programs or
foreign assistance? What would be the inflationary impact? The posi-
tive as well as negative affects on our industrial base and civilian R&D?
And third, I would like to see closer examination of the view that
we may be faced with the prospect of simultaneously fighting one and
two half wars. I join with Harold in hoping that any conflict or conflicts
with the Soviets could avoid the use of nuclear weapons. We should
by all means provide the President with sufficient options to enable
him to avoid that dreadful decision. But what is the prospect that three
simultaneous wars with the Soviets in different parts of the world
could under almost any foreseeable circumstances not lead to a general
nuclear war? And if this is so, what are the implications for the force
buildup and dispositions Harold suggests?
Dec. 80. Secret. Sent via Alpha Channel. An unknown hand wrote at the top of the mem-
orandum: “TS + RB drafters. S/P did final.”
2 See Document 214.

I have the following comments on the eight issues discussed in the
paper:
Issue #1
I generally agree with Harold’s assessment, and would add that
nuclear parity could ease Soviet fears regarding the risks of military
adventures and even of engaging U.S. forces.
We should also consider the question Harold raises as to whether
readiness should take priority over modernization. I take it from Har-
old’s concerns about increased dangers of war that DOD would favor
stressing readiness, but I read elsewhere in the paper that the investment
sector is crucial and that we should make every effort to take advantage
of our greatest strength: technological innovation and modernization.
Should we be more aggressive in exploring ways of seeking sav-
ings in strategic arms for the sake of building up our conventional
strength? My sense is that once our new strategic programs begin com-
ing on line in the mid-1980s, including ALCM carriers in the early part
of the decade, our strategic position will start improving rather signifi-
cantly, with the Soviets increasingly at a disadvantage if they cannot or
do not do anything about their vulnerable ICBMs.
Issue #2
I agree that we need to continue to strengthen our abilities to react
swiftly to a Soviet thrust into the PG/IO areas. I’m less inclined than
Harold, however, to think that the Soviets see the stakes for themselves
as high in Southwest Asia as in Europe. In the former, they may have
an interest in denying us our vital interests; in the latter they see their
own interests as vital—­interests which go first to perserving the status
quo in Eastern Europe and then to strengthening their position vis-­a-­vis
NATO. In setting priorities for the next five years, let’s bear in mind
that our concerns may well shift back to Europe if we experience fur-
ther crises there, as well we may.
Moreover, we should consider more closely whether Soviet doc-
trine and experience would incline them to strike in force against South-
west Asia in order to cut the lifeline of the industrial states. Soviet
experience in Afghanistan against a weak but determined enemy in a
hostile environment may have given Moscow pause in considering a
far larger venture in the same region. Would Soviet diversion of sub-
stantial forces from their strategic reserve into Southwest Asia lead
them to be concerned about their vulnerability on other fronts—­except
under general war conditions? The threat may for some time continue
to be more from weakness and political flux in Iran, and thus Soviet
opportunity—­at little cost and with no direct aggression—­to funda-
mentally improve its strategic position and influence in the region. This

challenge is difficult for us to meet. Even a major increase in U.S. force
capability in the region may not ultimately enable us to meet it.
Issue #3
Facilities may be the weakest link in our strategy for filling the
PG/IO vacuum—­but we should not discount the fact that men, lift,
prepositioned stocks may also be in short supply. Even if facilities are
the main problem, we should stick to our strategy of diversification.
It makes political—­and I would think strategic—­sense to do so. If our
military doctrines place a premium on large, individual base com-
plexes, we should review those doctrines, or at least their application in
this part of the world. Also, the way to get to the modern staging bases
that we need is through a policy of gradually increasing our presence
and rights throughout the area, rather than a make-­or-­break effort for
a few super-­bases.
DOD’s idea of trading U.S. security assurances and new assis-
tance to Israel for progress toward a comprehensive peace is worth
considering.
But I am doubtful about seeking an explicit security-­for-­oil bargain
with the Saudis. It’s been implicit in our policies for some time. But
we can’t be so sure that the Saudis would so value an explicit security
commitment that they would commit themselves to permit sure access
to oil at reasonable prices. For they know that we are pursuing our own
security interests, and that we will probably act to protect those inter-
ests whether or not we make a commitment. They also could doubt
the strength of our security assurances if we threaten to go slow on
security measures unless oil is guaranteed—­with consequent damage
to our security position in the area.
Issue #4
I agree with Harold’s argument here and throughout the paper that
we should (a) force the Soviets in peace and war to spread their defense
effort and deployments against all three fronts (Europe, Southwest Asia
and East Asia) so that they cannot concentrate against any one (e.g.
redeploy from the Chinese border to Europe, and (b) discourage the
Soviets from expanding a conflict beginning in one of these areas to the
other two. But this strategy raises major problems if it means expand-
ing the geographical scope of Japan’s military role and our direct con-
tribution to China’s military capabilities.
[2 paragraphs (34 lines) not declassified].
On China, it has been my understanding that they are so far behind
the Soviets that the provision of “certain carefully calculated defensive
weaponry” would not make an appreciable difference. The Chinese
currently tie down about one-­fourth of Soviet armed forces and about

the same proportion of their new SS–20 capability. But the major Soviet
concern is probably that of being entrapped in the masses of Chinese in
the event of war. This is what forces the Soviets to maintain its heavy
dispositions in the region. Thus, what we ought to be addressing is
whether it is helpful or harmful to worry the Soviets further about the
U.S.-Chinese military relationship.
Issue #5
I feel as strongly as Harold does about this. It’s crucial for our inter-
national security posture, and it’s crucial for maintaining domestic sup-
port for our foreign policy and defense efforts. I happen not to think
it makes sense to raise the NATO spending goal to, say, five percent.
Doing so, while the Allies are still at or worse than three percent would
tend to show that these goals aren’t real. We also face the real problems
that the Socialists and other “left” electorate in Europe remain strong.
We must press our Allies as firmly as we can but calibrate our pressure
carefully so we do not end up with Governments in European capitals
even less sympathetic to our objectives. Our interest is to strengthen
Europe and our ties with it, and to get the Allies to do what is feasible;
we will defeat all our objectives if the focus of foreign policy tension
becomes U.S.–European rather than Allied-Soviet.
I’m also beginning to think we should look for some concept other
than the “division of labor.” It tends to accentuate European views that
Europe is or can be an “island of detente” insulated from U.S.–Soviet
competition in Southwest Asia. Moreover, I’m not sure the American
public will be satisfied—­and supportive of our efforts—­if the Allies
aren’t bearing more of the burden and running the same risks as we in
the Persian Gulf. I agree that we want the Europeans to fill the gap in
NATO, but we have to involve them more in Southwest Asia.
Finally, we are unlikely to revive Saudi aid to Egypt absent signif-
icant progress on Palestinian issues or an unwelcome Egyptian move
back toward the Saudi positions on Jerusalem, etc.
Issue #6
I agree fully both that we make every effort to keep our technolog-
ical edge and that we tighten up on technology transfer.
Issue #7
I would add here only that for their own reasons, our Allies are
likely increasingly to point to the absence of an American draft as
undercutting our case that the security situation is getting more acute
and requires more sacrifices from everyone.

Issue #8
As Harold notes, we are working on a joint plan on security assis-
tance. Needless to say, State has always sought higher assistance levels
than have been approved. Beyond this, while we have sometimes dif-
fered with DOD over how to get other governments to act in our inter-
est, State must continue to make every effort to ensure that our foreign
policy helps meet our military needs.
218.	 Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Defense Budget
PARTICIPANT
Situation Room. No minutes of the meeting were found.
State
Secretary Edmund Muskie
Reginald Bartholomew, Director,
Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs
OSD
Secretary Harold Brown (Chairman)
Dep. Sec. W. Graham Claytor, Jr.
Amb Robert Komer Under Secretary
for Policy
Russell Murray, Asst. Sec. for Program
Analysis and Evaluation
JCS
General David Jones
Admiral Stansfield Turner
John Koehler, Dep. to the Director for
Resource Management
OMB
James McIntyre
Edward Sanders, Assoc. Dir. for
National Security and Interna-
tional Affairs
ACDA
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy
William Ashworth, Asst. Dir.,
­Weapons Evaluation and
Control Bureau
OSTP
Benjamin Huberman
John Marcum
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
NSC
General Jasper Welch
General William Odom
Victor Utgoff

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
Harold Brown, as Chairman, asked that the group comment on the
Defense paper that provided an estimate of the size and scope of the
collective Defense program facing the free world and the United States,
as its leader, if current national security guidance is to be followed and
its goals achieved.2 Brown explained that the purpose of the paper was
to set the context for consideration of the Defense budget. (C)
The paper developed estimates of what it will take in ground, air,
and naval forces of the U.S. and allies to produce various force level
ratios between them and the Pact in critical geographical and func-
tional areas. This also describes what these forces will cost the U.S. and
its allies in money and manpower to implement current national secu-
rity policy. The quantitative estimates are developed for two levels of
assurance that the free world’s forces are adequate; for two dates, 1987
and 1995, for achieving either level of assurance; and for two levels of
contributions by the rest of the free world—­one reflecting more equi-
table sharing of burdens by all nations, and an alternative where other
nations continue on their current course. [4 lines not declassified] (C)
Brown first asked Stan Turner for an estimate of Soviet reactions to
the various free world build-­ups presented. Turner replied specifically
with regard to the chart on strategic balance indicators that showed
a steady and substantial Soviet advantage from ’75 to ’81, followed
by a significant erosion of that Soviet advantage from ’81 to ’87. (The
indicator in question presented the ratio of residual forces following
a Soviet first-­strike counterforce and a U.S. retaliation counterforce.)
Turner noted that this particular indicator showed a much earlier and
more dramatic erosion of the Soviet advantage than other analyses with
which he was more familiar. Others agreed with this observation. (S)
Brown replied that this particular indicator is merely one measure.
It emphasizes the effects of U.S. advantages, particularly in cruise mis-
siles and SLBMs, and perhaps overemphasizes them. [9 lines not declas-
General Jones thought the paper useful as a whole but thought
that it understated our difficulties in the strategic balance. In partic-
ular he thought that looking only at ratios of residual strategic force
obscured the heavier weight of the Soviet attack in megatons, assumed
away current deficiencies in C3, and assumed that the U.S. five-­year
program would continue on schedule contrary to what has happened
in the past. Russ Murray said that some monies were added in the
financial accounting to cover C3 improvements and other moderniza-
tion, and that needed readiness improvements were funded before
2 See the attachment to Document 214.

force structure growth. General Jones replied that in his view the anal-
ysis underestimated the resources needed to correct C3 deficiencies and
readiness shortfalls. (C)
Harold Brown and Jim McIntyre both noted that difficulties in
increasing U.S. military manpower will eventually constrain force
structure increases. Russ Murray indicated that the analysis recognized
this difficulty and chose programs which minimized the need for addi-
tional military manpower. Much of the increase in armored division
equivalents, for example, was obtained through modernization rather
than increases in numbers of divisions per se. Brown and McIntyre
expressed skepticism as to whether further increases in pay could
attract commensurate increases in recruits. (U)
In Brown’s opinion the key issue raised by the paper is the role of
the other free world countries—­what can we expect they will do, how
should we proceed to encourage them to do more, and what should
we do if they fail to respond as we would want them to. [5 lines not
declassified] (S)
Jim McIntyre thought the FRG was more apt to react in a way best
calculated to protect its East European trade. [7 lines not declassified] (S)
Muskie then asked what we were to do if the Allies in fact do not
make an increased contribution. Brown replied that was indeed the cru-
cial question and that in his judgement [11 lines not declassified] (S)
[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
(Secretary Muskie left at this point.)
[1 paragraph (9 lines) not declassified]
[1 paragraph (7 lines) not declassified]
[1 paragraph (11 lines) not declassified]
Brown then turned to the Nuclear Land Attack Tomahawk pro-
gram. There is concern that moving to procurement in this program in
FY–82 could complicate implementation of NATO’s LRTNF program.
Brown proposed that by retaining $3–4 million in RDT&E we could
protect a FY–84 IOC and minimize any potential difficulty. This was
agreed by all. (S)
Brown raised the question of the proper level of military con-
struction in Southwest Asia for FY–82. Bartholomew voiced concern
that the currently proposed levels are systematically below those that
we have previously announced to Oman, Somalia, Kenya, and to the
United Kingdom for Diego Garcia. Brown replied that the levels pro-
posed were chosen in light of a judgment that the Congress would
only finance a limited amount of military construction in Southwest
Asia and the reductions from previous goals elsewhere were needed
to fund the Ras Banas construction in Egypt. Bartholomew, in response
to a question from Brown, expressed confidence that we could have an

access agreement for Ras Banas with Egypt in time for Congressional
action in the spring. Welch expressed concern that there was disconnect
between what was needed in facilities and what appeared feasible to
get Congress to fund. Brown agreed but said we cannot get out of the
game and must proceed as best we can. (S)
Brown raised the general issue of funding for joint programs with
our European allies, the problem being that we will not be able to pro-
vide funds for these programs as expected in all cases. In particular, for
Roland he proposed that we request only $65 million in FY–82 vice the
$355 million planned and defer the rest of the planned program into the
out years. It appears as though the FRG may also fall out of the Roland
program due to the need to finance cost growth in the Toronado fighter
bomber. This proposal was accepted. (S)
Brown pointed out that POMCUS set 7 was being delayed because
of a lack of sufficient equipment and that the siting of set 6 was not
yet firm, raising the possibility of a delay in that set also. Brown asked
whether State was agreeable to defer POMCUS set (pre-­positioned
Army unit equipment) 7. Bartholomew agreed, stating that that was
consistent with the general decision to let capability shortfalls appear
With respect to the security assistance enhancement package for
Southwest Asia previously recommended by the SCC, it was noted that
State has filed its formal support with OMB. McIntyre suggested that
OMB chair an inter-­agency group to review this issue in detail prior to
the scheduled 8 December meeting with the President on the defense
and foreign affairs budget. This was agreed. (C)

219.	 Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to
the Special Coordination Committee1
Washington, December 3, 1980
SUBJECT
Basic Strategy Issues [portion marking not declassified]
1. Harold Brown’s paper recommending the development of a
basic national strategy is a super idea.2 [portion marking not declassified]
2. The strategy recommended is based on two premises:
a. that the United States has insufficient military power to handle
the European, Asiatic, and Persian Gulf theaters simultaneously; and
b. that a coalition strategy is therefore essential to protect even our
vital interests. [portion marking not declassified]
3. The second premise is flawed. Historically, coalitions have been
useful primarily in wartime because it is then that the vital interests of
the partners coincide. Coalitions have not been useful in developing
and executing peacetime strategies. To the extent that NATO has had
success in peacetime over the past 30 years, it has only been because
NATO policy was so dominated by the policies of the United States that
it simply mirrored it. Now that NATO is moving swiftly away from
American domination, it will, before long, be a matter of form and not
substance as far as peacetime strategy is concerned. [portion marking not
declassified]
4. It is highly unlikely that the members of any coalition would con-
sistently agree that what was vital to the United States was vital to them
also, except the defense of their homelands. No one would imagine that
the Soviet Union would mortgage its vital interests to the voluntary
support of the Poles, for instance. If we are willing to place our vital
interests at risk to the cooperation of our allies, the world will simply
perceive that we do not place as much value on our vital interests as do
the Soviets on theirs. In fact, since our European allies have perceived
that the U.S. nuclear umbrella no longer was a sure deterrent to a Soviet
invasion, they have been less and less cooperative on Alliance matters.
The U.S., by a combination of military strength, non-­military leverage
and perceived will to act, must reassume that burden of protection of
our, and their, vital interest. This does not mean that we should neglect
their contributions to protecting our joint interests, but that we cannot
2 See Document 214.

afford to let the Soviets perceive that if they could separate us from
our allies on issues vital to us we would not stand up to them. [portion
marking not declassified]
5. Where this is of particular import is with respect to vital interests
of the U.S. outside of Europe and Japan. What strategy can we have,
though, if we do not have adequate military force to handle our vital
interests in the three primary theaters simultaneously? We must have a
capability to apply the military forces we do have selectively and rap-
idly wherever they are needed. Complementing this, we should also
be able to exercise leverage with our economic power. A strategy built
on these capabilities recognizes that the United States is not contig-
uous to its principal allies (excepting Canada), markets and areas of
competition with other nations, and therefore must have the ability to
move military forces to areas of immediate or continuing concern and
to establish a military presence which can project power, if necessary.
At the same time, it recognizes that our economic power can be brought
to bear against both the immediate enemy and those who may be pro-
viding support to him. Such a strategy acknowledges that we are now
unprepared in the Persian Gulf area precisely because of our preoccu-
pation with fixed military strategies in Europe and Asia over the past
three decades. [portion marking not declassified]
6. A rapidly deployable military strategy comprises more than the
present concept of an RDF. It would depend on two types of forces:
a. Land-­based air and ground forces that were lightweight and
packaged for self-­sustaining capabilities.
b. Naval forces to ensure a line of communication, to secure ports
and airfields for the introduction of ground and air forces into a hostile
environment, and to project power directly ashore with air or ground
forces. The ability to project power directly from the sea with carrier
aircraft or marine amphibious troops is the preferred mode under this
strategy whenever the requirements can be met from the sea alone.
When the opposition is too sizeable for that, they can be used forcibly
to secure a port of entry for mobile air and ground forces. Otherwise,
we are dependent on having made advance arrangements for bases.
While bases are desirable, they limit the areas of potential deployment
to those in which we have had the foresight and the ability to obtain
basing rights. In addition, base rights are too uncertain politically to
be an essential ingredient of our strategy for protecting vital interests.
[portion marking not declassified]
7. The ability to project force almost anywhere on the globe is
important to us for several reasons:
a. The definition of what will be considered “vital” to us in the
future is almost unpredictable. In the past, we have fluctuated from
any area where the Soviets were intervening (directly or through sur-
rogates) only to areas where the intrinsic value of individual countries
to us appeared to be great. We will fluctuate in the future. In defining

our “vital interests,” we also may need to consider the precedential or
“domino” effect of not protecting our interests in some countries of lit-
tle intrinsic interest. In either case, there may be a wide geographical
spread between areas where we wish to project force.
b. It is easy to conceive of conditions in which a rapidly deployable
ground force could face superior force, e.g., Iran. The ability to coun-
terattack at some distant point more to our advantage could be import-
ant here. “Horizontal escalation” may require that we be able to move
ground, air, or naval forces quickly to widely dispersed areas to cut off
the supply line from the Soviet Union or its surrogates to governments
hostile to us, e.g., points of egress into the open oceans and areas in
which they hold advance positions such as Cuba, Libya and Ethiopia.
[portion marking not declassified]
8. What are the non-­military elements of this strategy? It is a recog-
nition that one of our greatest strengths is the potential of our agricul-
tural and industrial prowess to exert influence around the world. It is
a willingness blatantly to use our agricultural surpluses and advanced
industrial technologies to pressure other nations into conformance with
our objectives. It is a capability that neither the Soviets nor most other
probable adversaries possess. The negative side of a policy of economic
sanctions is that it is difficult to execute, and the results problematic.
Experience suggests that positive economic inducements are more
likely to be successful than sanctions. A full and coordinated economic
strategy has never been attempted. Despite the attendant uncertainties,
it is a unique American potential that is worth considerable effort to
explore. [portion marking not declassified]
9. The attachments discuss some of the specific steps to move into
a strategy of mobile military and economic leverage. [portion marking
not declassified]
Stansfield Turner3

Appendix 1

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency4
Washington, undated
Steps to move to a mobile military strategy for the United States
in the 1980s:
1. Establish a sense of strategic priorities:
3 Turner signed “Stan Turner” above this typed signature.
4 Secret.

—In peacetime, until there are signs of specific threats elsewhere,
the Persian Gulf-Middle East theater should be our first concern for
deployment. Any draw-­down of forces to provide for this should
come from the European theater first and the Pacific second. We bear
the exclusive defense burden in the Persian Gulf-Middle East theaters,
and our allies in Europe should be made to recognize the impact of
our shortfall. Specifically, as many naval forces as necessary would be
drawn down from the Mediterranean. This would have minimal impact
on the war-­fighting capability of NATO. The psychological impact on
the Alliance would be alarming, though salutary. Specifically, land-­
based air, and ground forces presently in Europe would remain there,
but only on the assumption that the allies would accede to their rapid
deployment to a crisis area when necessary to meet U.S. interests.
—In the event of general war with the Soviet Union, Western
Europe would have to call on almost all of our forces from the other
theaters (e.g., a return to the Navy’s “Swing” strategy). This is similar
to our concentrating on one theater strategy of the early years of World
War II when our forces were inadequate to do more.
—In the event a vital interest were endangered in any theater, and
a decision made to defend it, mobile forces would be concentrated on
that problem. [portion marking not declassified]
2. This strategy would establish extensive bases in both Israel and
Egypt as forward staging points for land-­based air and ground forces.
This reassurance for the security of Israel would be part of the price for
Israeli acceptance of the settlement with the Arab world from which we
would hope to gain greater access to other facilities in the Middle East
area. [portion marking not declassified]
3. There would be a necessary reorganization of existing U.S. mili-
tary forces and a remodeling of future forces to fit this strategic concept.
[portion marking not declassified]

Appendix 2

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency5
Washington, undated
Steps to move to an economic strategy for the United States in the
1980s:
1. The U.S. is totally unprepared to conduct a coherent economic
strategy against a specific adversary. The first step in pursuing such
a strategy would be to establish a mechanism empowered to coordi-
nate and control economic warfare (including export/import controls,
5 Secret.

economic assistance, business relationships, etc.). [portion marking not
declassified]
2. The use of economic warfare in the near and middle term may be
difficult and highly dependent on specific circumstances because our
economic leverage is limited. However, in the far term that leverage
will be greater because, especially in the agricultural area, scarcities
will put a premium on resources and in some cases will mean the differ-
ence between survival and starvation. [portion marking not declassified]
3. Therefore, we should begin now developing both a strategy and
the mechanisms to conduct such economic warfare/strategy. [portion
marking not declassified]
4. Economic benefit offers the greatest incentive to other nations to
modify their behavior in ways congenial to our interests. Whether sanc-
tions will work under any circumstances is problematical; any hope of
their succeeding depends upon Western and Japanese support. [portion
marking not declassified]
5. Any successful economic strategy will require the explicit
exploitation of intelligence to identify opportunities. [portion marking
not declassified]

220.	 Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1
SUBJECT
Basic Strategy Issues
PARTICIPANT
meeting took place in the Cabinet Room. Carter wrote in the upper right corner of the
minutes: “Zbig—This is approximately correct, although many nuances are wrong. We
need a clear, definitive & forceful PD on this subject. J.”
2 See the attachment to Document 214.
The President
The Vice President
State
Secretary Edmund Muskie
Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher
Defense
Secretary Harold Brown
Deputy Secretary W. Graham Claytor
Joint Chiefs of Staff
General David Jones, Chairman
Central Intelligence Agency
Stansfield Turner, Director
Office of Management & Budget
James McIntyre, Director
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
National Security Council
BGeneral William E. Odom
MINUTES OF MEETING
The President opened the meeting by explaining that he has read
Brown’s paper2 as well as the comments by Muskie and Turner.3 He set
them as a point of departure in order not to use the meeting simply for
repeating old points. He said he would like to hear stated what differ-
ent is being recommended for our strategy. He also noted that there are
sharp differences between State and Defense. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski proposed that Brown should begin with a brief sum-
mary of his paper followed by comments from Muskie and Turner. (C)
The Vice President asked what the final purpose of the paper and
the meeting would be. The President answered that he wanted to leave
a record of what our defense strategy should be. A Presidential Direc-
tive could do this. As he understands the paper, it is obvious that we are
doing most of the things that it suggests, i.e. encouraging Japanese rear-
mament; shifting our military resources emphasis from Europe to the
Persian Gulf. The discussion today should be aimed at stating changes
that we might want. (S)

The President went on to say that President Ford and President
Nixon had signed many more NSDMs than he has signed PDs. Many
of the NSDMs carried over into this administration’s policy. We did
not rescind them without a considerable review. Therefore, a Presiden-
tial Directive might well have a significant policy impact on the next
administration. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski further explained that the process of reviewing the
NSDMs led to retention of many NSDMs and considerable parts of oth-
The President said that he has a responsibility to look at the larger
economic requirements above and beyond those mentioned in Brown’s
paper. He said he has come to believe that the Defense appetite for a
larger budget is insatiable. Reagan will be constrained by economic
limits when he tries to increase defense spending. The President went
on to explain his disapproval of the tendency of our military leaders to
castigate ourselves for military weakness. When the Secretaries of the
Services and the Chiefs of the Services denigrate our military strength,
it creates a generally persuasive conviction by the public, domestic and
foreign, that we are weak. The President said that he is not convinced,
but the average American certainly believes our defense is weak. When
the Chief of Staff of the Army says in testimony to the Congress that
the Army is hollow, that has a devastating impact. It hurts us with our
allies as well as with the American public. Why should our allies do
more if we insist that we are so weak? I know from a closer look at some
of these statements that there is balance to them which was not pointed
out by the press, but the press won’t emphasize the balance, only what
is said about our weakness. In town meetings again and again I ran into
this belief among the public. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski suggested that the discussion should address two
points. First, the threat that we will face in the 1980s, and second, how
we will defend the three strategic zones to which we are now commit-
Harold Brown began his summary, noting that resources are lim-
ited, that we have not only traditionally prioritized them in the budget
but also prioritized them geographically. The paper assumes that we
recognize our interests lie beyond the continental United States—­in
Europe, the Middle East, and East Asia. There is a natural tendency
to prepare to meet military contingencies in all three areas simultane-
ously. The Soviets, of course, probably will not initiate actions in all
zones at once, but the question is left for us to decide where to put the
priority. (S)
We have been shifting towards Southwest Asia. A Soviet attack
in Europe risks nuclear war. That is well known and generally under-
stood. A Soviet attack in Southwest Asia would less likely risk nuclear

war, but the Soviets might gain a hold on both Europe and East Asia
if they could achieve control of the oil resources in the Persian Gulf
region. Therefore, this region would be more attractive for a Soviet
offensive. Thus it makes sense for us to give it higher priority in build-
ing a deterrent capability. (S)
One way to pressure the Europeans and the Japanese to do more
for defense is to make our emphasis on Southwest Asia explicit to them
and tell them that they must fill the gap we are leaving by shifting the
priority on our reserves for deployment abroad. If they don’t build up
to replace our reserves, then they create greater risks for themselves. (S)
The President said that is a key point—­how firmly to push our
allies. We could inform them that we reserve the right to move our
forces from Europe to the Persian Gulf, make that explicit to them. (S)
Brown replied that this is further than his paper goes. (C)
The President continued that although legally he can pull U.S.
forces from Europe, threatening the allies with a greater risk of Soviet
aggression, we have not yet succeeded in getting them to do more to
defend themselves. Perhaps it would be more proper for the U.S. to say
that these troops are subject to call to the Persian Gulf. Therefore, you
must do more for your own defense. (S)
Brown said that is very strong, if it is believable, but how believ-
able it is, he doesn’t know. If they do not see it as a credible threat, we
would be worse off. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski said that the President had made an important point
but not one he is sure he agrees with. If our purpose is to defend the Per-
sian Gulf, the Europeans may let us do that while they pursue detente
with the Soviet Union in Europe at the expense of defense of Europe.
Dr. Brzezinski said that he prefers that Europe be included in helping
us defend the Persian Gulf, thereby denying the allies the option to do
less in Europe. (S)
The President said that these two points are not incompatible.
Europe has been getting worse, not better in the defense area. We have
reached the limit with our allies. We have also reached the limit in the
forces we can hold for contingency purposes for East Asia and the Per-
sian Gulf as well as in Europe. It is easy for us to tell the Europeans not
to slacken their efforts, but it may not have any effect. (S)
The President continued that our primary goal is not to force
the Europeans to do more but to defend the Persian Gulf within the
resources of this country. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski agreed but insisted that we must also get them to do
more. He said he did not know how specifically, but it is essential. (S)

Brown argued that it may be easy for the allies to do more to
defend themselves than to contribute more to the defense of the Per-
sian Gulf. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski disagreed. He fears that would lead to more detente,
not more defense in Europe. (S)
The President said that he wanted to underscore a second major
point. In his State of the Union Message he said that an attack on the
Persian Gulf would be met by all means including U.S. military force.4
It is obvious that we do not have adequate forces to respond and defeat
a Soviet attack in the Persian Gulf. The press was quick to point that out.
He said he has made some statements and also authorized Dr. Brzez-
inski and Harold Brown to make some, pointing out that we would not
confine our response to the Persian Gulf alone. We would look for other
areas as well. There is no way to defeat the Soviets in the Persian Gulf
with conventional forces. We have not made it clear to the world that
a Soviet attack there would necessarily lead to a wide conflict, that we
would not confine our responses to that region alone. (S)
Brown said that it is hard to find other places to threaten the Sovi-
ets where the costs would be as great to them as the loss of Persian Gulf
oil would be to us. (S)
The President admitted that it is hard, but the Soviets have vulner-
abilities with their allies and with access to the seas. (S)
Brown argued that this is not a credible deterrent unless the threat
is of an equal loss. (S)
The President said that this may be so, but that the Soviets will be
confronting a broader response. Turner’s comments about an economic
strategy are good. We have tried that to a degree, not all the way to eco-
nomic warfare. The President noted that he is not constrained legally in
taking economic sanctions. At least this was the case in post-Afghani-
stan and in connection with Iran. The law gives the President very great
power in the economic area. (S)
What has been spelled out as the “Carter Doctrine,” the President
continued, disavowing any enthusiasm for that label but noting that
it has some currency, has not been understood fully in all its ramifi-
cations. The press rightly pointed out that we cannot meet the Soviets
with conventional forces and match them successfully in the Persian
David Aaron asked Brown why he believed nuclear weapons
would not be a credible deterrence in the Persian Gulf but would be
credible in Europe. (S)

Brown responded that the deployment of tactical nuclear weap-
ons and our force organization in Europe would make resort to their
use almost automatic. In the Persian Gulf, where no such infrastructure
exists and where no such threat of nuclear weapons use has been made,
the threshold is much higher. (S)
Aaron responded that we should make it seem more likely that
we would use them in the Persian Gulf. Six and a half divisions are
certainly not enough to defend the region. (S)
Brown said that we have about the same force ratio against the
Soviets with that many divisions in Iran as we had for a long time in
The President said that he would make a point entirely for the pri-
vacy of this meeting. It is hopeless to believe that we can match the
Soviets with conventional forces in Iran. We simply cannot do it. We
cannot defend them without the use of nuclear weapons. (S)
Brown argued that short of the use of nuclear weapons we might
stabilize a conflict in Iran with limited conventional forces. We get oil
from Saudi Arabia which might not necessarily be invaded. We could
escalate either vertically or horizontally. (S)
The President agreed that we should be prepared for both hori-
zontal and vertical escalation as well as economic sanctions. We must
convince the Soviets that we will do more on all fronts, that they will
face a worldwide response, that they cannot narrow the conflict to the
military front in Iran. (S)
Brown said that the more conventional forces we deploy there, the
more credible that worldwide response will be to the Soviets. The Pres-
ident responded by saying that he hates to consider the conventional
defense of Iran. He recalled the military options which were planned
against Iran last winter—­how much air power it took and the opera-
tional difficulties [less than 1 line not declassified]—­the more familiar he
became with the military operational difficulties and realities, the more
he became convinced that a conventional defense there is beyond our
capabilities even if we expanded our forces considerably. (S)
General Jones reviewed for the President briefly a recent JCS dis-
cussion of5 [14 lines not declassified]
General Jones continued that one of the most helpful things we
could do would be to have NATO look into an operational buildup in
East Turkey. If NATO provides the umbrella for this effort, it might pos-
sibly succeed. The President asked if the Turks would permit this. Jones
answered that with NATO behind the effort, the Turks are more likely
to agree to it. The Turks need the confidence that all of NATO is with
5 No minutes of this meeting were found.

them. They do not want to risk war with the Soviets outside of NATO
in support of our Southwest Asian operations. (S)
The President said he did not want to throw cold water on this
idea, but his experience in the past four years leaves doubt about our
depending on our allies. To predicate the use of Turkish bases for cross-­
border operations against the Soviet Union is not a safe assumption.
The Turks may never have the temerity to permit us to attack their
neighbors from their soil. (S)
Brown said that the Turks have some capability to let us operate
early, i.e. before the outbreak of hostilities from their bases. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski agreed with the President that the allies will not be
dependable except in the event that their vital interests are directly at
stake. He went on to argue, however, that the size of the forces, whether
they be six and a half divisions or four divisions, may be less critical to
convince the Soviets that we are serious than our unwillingness to com-
mit some divisions. The President said he could not agree with this. (S)
Brown explained that more lift is needed, not more divisions. If we
had more divisions today we could not get them there in time to make
a difference. Added lift is the critical need. (S)
The President said then that he wanted to think out loud and to
clear up in his own mind the strategic challenges to be met. He said
that because he does not work with these questions daily, he does not
have it as firmly in his control as the other members of the NSC who
devote more time to the details. He believes we should proceed with
the assumption that we will get little help from Turkey and Saudi Ara-
bia. The allies won’t help much either, even if the Persian Gulf region is
attacked. [2 lines not declassified]
Brown said that lift from Europe requires about the same as lift is
required for forces from the United States. If we draw from our forces
in Europe for Southwest Asia, it should be a second and later deploy-
Dr. Brzezinski said why not say to the Europeans that X plus Y
forces are needed for the Persian Gulf. We are providing X and you,
therefore, should provide Y for that contingency. If you do not, we will
have to take Y from Europe. (S)
Brown said that he feels assured that we might have some French
and British ground forces in the Persian Gulf contingency, but we will
get nothing from the Germans. If we say we are unwilling to put our
ground forces in Southwest Asia without German forces as well, this
would not work. (S)
The President asked about including Israeli forces. Brown said
maybe, but is it worth the political liability? Israeli forces would not
help much against the Soviets. (S)

General Jones said that we don’t plan to remove divisions from
Europe in any event. They are not trained for it nor are they equipped
for it. Our contingency plans and military strategy since World War II
have been concerned with war in regions; Europe being the primary
region, Korea the second region. Now we have a third region in South-
west Asia. The strategic lift is the same for all three regions. We might
take a calculated risk by removing things like bombs and some support
equipment from Europe, but not divisions. It is doubtful that that kind
of shift from Europe would put much pressure on the allies. (S)
The Vice President asked if General Jones agrees that we will build
no more divisions in the United States. Jones answered that there are no
plans now to do so. Even if we did, we could not deploy them because
of the lack of lift. Another major constraint, he added, is our industrial
mobilization weakness. It would require about three years to gear up
for increased aircraft production. Tanks, artillery, and aircraft would
not be produced in significant numbers for several years. Therefore,
the size of our forces could not go up if you gave us all the money we
The President said that he does not see from this discussion what
we would do differently from what we are now doing in our military
strategy. (S)
Jones said that one difference would be to take a global look and
plan for contingencies in both Korea and the Persian Gulf, but only one
at a time, not both simultaneously. (S)
David Aaron mentioned another difference as preparation for
horizontal escalation. General Jones replied that other than some lim-
ited naval operations, there is little promise in such an effort. Brown
repeated that we cannot find an even swap in horizontal escalation
with Iran. (S)
Brown continued that we might make our strategy first priority for
Europe, second priority for Asia, and as a third priority, deal with the
Far East through building up our relationship with China to include
military cooperation. (S)
Turner, noting that the President had asked what he would put in
a Presidential Directive that we are not now doing, agreed with Harold
Brown and General Jones that lift is the most important thing to empha-
size and also an increased priority for Southwest Asia. In a Presidential
Directive the President could direct that a new acquisition of forces and
training, the emphasis should be on third world contingency. The Pres-
ident asked at the expense of what? (S)
Turner responded, Central Europe. You do not have the option
to deal militarily with the Persian Gulf and other non-European areas
because of 30 years of tradition of preparing for the defense of Europe.
We need to reverse this basic concept in our strategy. We have assumed

that if we build heavy forces for Europe, they will meet any third world
contingency. But this has not been a sound assumption. We should
instead build lighter and more flexible forces. They would have a major
impact. We are putting so much emphasis on Southwest Asia, that I
believe that you will want your successor’s successor to have the capa-
bility to deal with Mozambique, Nicaragua, and any other such contin-
gency, not just reinforcement of Europe. We need to get off the kick that
Europe is first priority. (S)
Brown asked Turner what he meant by mobility. Do you mean
mobility to get there? Or after they get there? Turner replied that he
meant both. Easy lift to the third world but also good mobility after
forces arrive. Because we have built the wrong kind of aircraft car-
riers, that is, large nuclear powered ships, we cannot afford to risk
one of them in the Persian Gulf. To lose one there will be a catastro-
phe. If we had built small carriers, we could put them there. We need
smaller and more mobile forces. Brown replied that our forces must
be prepared to fight against Soviet forces and, therefore, not simply in
Mozambique. (S)
The President returned to what we would want to do differently.
He said he thought we were doing most of what Turner suggests.
Brown said yes, this is true. We decided last year to put more prior-
ity on non-European contingencies. McIntyre recalled the debate last
year about our “heavying up” our divisions. The President said that
if we have modified our strategy, we need to write that down. If we
have not, we need to write down in a Presidential Directive what we
are doing. (S)
Brown said that the JCS proposal to move Europe to second prior-
ity and to put the emphasis on the Persian Gulf is new. Dr. Brzezinski
added that vertical and horizontal escalation are also new. (S)
The President turned to Muskie for his comments. Muskie had two
points. First, the paper shows what we have been attempting to do by
putting priority on the threat in the Southwest Asia region. Second, it
shows that events could affect us very adversely in that region. Now
with the crisis in Poland, we are shifting our attention back to Europe.
Against this background we must avoid laying down a policy we have
not supported and not followed in the past. It is important to spell out
what we are doing. We may also indicate future directions and identify
underlying risks that we face. But we should not confuse what we have
done with the new directions and the attendant risks, especially if we
have not addressed those risks with our actions in the past. A second
part of a policy could spell out the responsibilities of the allies, what
their share of the burden is. We did that to a considerable extent this
past year. The allies are very reluctant to make a defense effort outside

of Europe. The President added that they are also reluctant even in
Brown said that we should avoid a shift in strategy in a new Presi-
dential Directive but that we could codify what we are doing, things we
have been doing since 1977. They are fairly clear and straight-­forward.
First, we have been trying to improve the defense posture in Europe.
Second, we have given a higher priority to the Persian Gulf region.
Third, we have begun a close relationship with China in an effort to
lessen the requirement for U.S. contingency forces earmarked for that
Dr. Brzezinski explained to the President that at the SCC meeting
on Security Framework yesterday a draft PD had been circulated, one
more narrowly focused on the Persian Gulf region.6 It sets forth the
President’s commitment in the State of the Union Address7 and elabo-
rates on a strategy for meeting that commitment. In light of the discus-
sion today we could broaden it to deal with strategic challenges of the
The President said there were two other points not addressed in
Brown’s paper which he was concerned about and should be addressed
in any directive. The first was about our relationship with the Peoples
Republic of China as the next administration might deal with it. We
have pursued it on an economic, political, and cultural basis. The new
administration might even reverse much of that. We need to emphasize
to Governor Reagan what is at stake. But to move another step and to
sell military equipment, this we cannot resolve even among ourselves.
Brown interjected that we have gone further in that direction than the
President suggests. We have not discouraged the French and the British
from direct military sales to the Chinese. The President said that indeed
we had transferred some computers and dual-­use technology which
we would not give the Soviet Union. (S)
The second point, the President continued, is to put emphasis on
arms control. A point not mentioned in Brown’s paper. He went on to
say that he has come to doubt that the8 MX missile will ever be devel-
oped9 although it should be. Too many obstacles—­environmentalists’
concerns, design problems—­are being voiced by the critics. We may
even become inferior in strategic forces to the Soviet Union as a result.
The President said he would like to leave office encouraging the next
6 For the summary of conclusions of the December 16 SCC meeting on the Per-
sian Gulf Security Framework, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East
Region; Arabian Peninsula, Document 97. PD/NSC–63 “Persian Gulf Security Frame-
8 Carter inserted the word “mobile” before “MX missile.”
9 Carter crossed out the word “developed” and replaced it with “deployed.”

administration to keep both SALT and the MX deployment. He added
that he would never forgive General Haig for coming back from NATO
and stabbing us in the back by testifying against SALT. Haig admitted
in testimony that he had not even read the treaty. (S)
The President said he would like to leave arms control as a pol-
icy for the next administration. We simply cannot go on with arms
expenditures. We cannot manage them economically. Jim McIntyre will
agree. With minimum social security, housing, and other social pro-
grams growing to unsupportable levels, I do not see how we will meet
more defense. For us to slough over the arms control alternative for the
coming decade is a mistake. We must try to contain the defense costs
through arms control. (S)
The Vice President noted that the United States has been humili-
ated several times in the past four years by third rate powers because the
President has so little discretionary resources for military and economic
assistance. He needs at least one half billion dollars for this purpose. It
will give him the latitude necessary to handle emergencies rapidly. (S)
Brown returned to the President’s comments about arms control
and emphasized that the paper assumes SALT II limits. The President
admitted that he had missed that point. He then reemphasized the two
points: our relationship with China and arms control. We have so many
advantages with SALT. If we could establish strategic equality with the
Soviet Union, we could whip them badly economically, politically, and
culturally. They have so many problems which we need to exploit. (S)
Brown said yes, this is true, but as long as they pursue an arms
buildup we must keep up with them. The President said that point
must be put in the Presidential Directive. (S)
The next administration must understand, the President contin-
ued, that the Soviet Union will meet great threats to its own power. The
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan is a demonstration of the failure of the
Soviet system. As Dr. Brzezinski has pointed out, over a 150 countries
in the world have favored our human rights policy. Human rights has
placed great strains on the Soviet system. After four, five, or ten years,
I don’t know what they will do. They don’t even equal human rights
achievements of Egypt.10 If we can get by the next five years without
war, we will win the peaceful competition. This is my view after four
years in this office. Governor Reagan needs to understand this. (S)
Brown said that the United States public also needs to understand
this. The President went on to say that to compete with the Soviet mil-
itarily11 is to get into the brier patch with them. That competition is not
10 Carter wrote a question mark in the left margin next to this sentence.
11 Carter inserted the word “only” before “militarily.”

good for us. The public won’t support it.12 In a war, the American public
would support a military buildup. But we should seek to push the Sovi-
ets into the realm of peaceful competition. (S)
One more point the President added is that the Europeans might
not even meet three percent increase for defense. He said he is not even
confident that LRTNF will be deployed—­in Italy for example.13 (S)
Warren Christopher observed that energy is overlooked in Brown’s
paper. Unless we do develop energy independence, we will omit a fun-
damental building block in our overall strategy. Although this is a mili-
tary strategy paper, Christopher admitted, the energy element needs to
be included. (S)
Turner noted that Governor Reagan does not seem to understand
the energy issues, judging from briefings CIA has been giving him. He
believes we just have to drill more wells in the United States. (S)
The President added one more point about our military strategy
that concerns him. That is our presence in the Caribbean. We have this
ninety-­man JTF headquarters in Key West. We played around with
moving the USS Forrestal into the Caribbean. Should we strengthen
our forces there? We need to assess that, he added. (S)
Brown said that the JTF was only a headquarters. We have,
­however, shifted some of our East Coast training further south toward
the Caribbean in order to create a growing presence in that region. We
should not, however, divert forces from Europe or Southwest Asia.
The President added that we should not divert forces. Rather he is
more interested in where our forces in the United States are located
and the possibility of relocations in the direction of Key West. He
said he would like to create quietly a significant military shift which
would then be discovered by the New York Times and pointed to as of
great significance. It would send a proper signal to Cuba and reassure
our friends in the region. (S)
Both Brown and McIntyre commented briefly on the possibility for
base consolidation and other CONUS force shifts that might contribute
to this effect. The President said he was interested in a symbolic14 sig-
nal, not a major force shift. Claytor pointed out that Roosevelt Roads
in Puerto Rico is a key training area which might be used to contribute
to such a signal. The President once again said that he would like the
public to know that the United States has quietly moved some of its
training to the Caribbean. (S)
12 Carter amended the sentence “The public won’t support it” to read “It will be
difficult to sustain public support.”
13 Carter changed the period after “example” to a comma and added “or even
Germany.”
14 Carter crossed out the word “symbolic” and replaced it with “clear.”

The President then summed up his evaluation of Brown’s paper.
Overall, it is good. Its thrust is good. Muskie made an important point
about a Presidential Directive reaffirming what we should be doing as
distinct from what15 we have done. It is probably not feasible to include
Japanese strategic dependency on the PRC. The President said that he
did, however, believe he had been right about withdrawing16 our forces
from Korea  in17 1977. Everyone in the government was against him,
and when the President is alone he cannot act. (S)
General Jones told the President that tomorrow he departs for Jor-
dan and Israel where he intends to try to achieve two things. First, he
wants to give them greater confidence about our power in the region,
and second, he wants them to understand better our Southwest Asian
strategy. (S)
The President noted that apparently the Saudis are satisfied with
our response on the F–15s. Jones said that this seems to be the case,
but Brown noted that the Sultan said that we owe them a letter on the
matter, something we should provide because when Haig comes in he
may have political ambitions that will make him less sympathetic to
the Saudis. The meeting ended with a chuckle over Brown’s comment
15 Carter inserted the word “just” before “what.”
16 Carter inserted the word “phased” before “withdrawing.”
17 Carter inserted the word “beginning” before “in.”

221.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 8, 1981
SUBJECT
Directives on National Strategy
As you directed after the NSC meeting on basic strategy issues,2
I prepared two Presidential Directives and discussed them with Har-
old Brown and Ed Muskie. Harold and I agree on a common draft.
Ed prefers different language and substance in a number of places. I
have attached a draft that will allow you to make a choice in each case
between the NSC/Defense version and the State preferred changes
(Tabs A and B).3 If you want to know Ed Muskie’s reasons for these
changes, you will find them elaborated at Tab C.4
I am also attaching a memo to you from Ed (Tab D) in which he
objects to the idea of Presidential Directives. When you review it, you
may want to reconsider your original decision to issue these directives.
I believe, however, that for the collective interest of this Administration
and for your interest in particular you ought to have clear legacy of
strategic purpose and rationale.5
date is handwritten. Carter wrote next to the heading: “Zbig—Proceed. Let Harold & Ed
check final texts. J.”
2 See Document 220.
3 Tab B, attached but not printed, is a draft of PD/NSC–63, “Persian Gulf Security
Framework,” the final version of which is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol.
XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula, Document 98.
4 Tab C, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Need Changes in the
PDs,” outlining Muskie’s revisions to PD–62 and PD–63.
5 Brzezinski wrote at the end of this sentence: “Harold also feels this way.”

Tab A

Draft Presidential Directive6
Washington, undated
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of The Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Energy
The Director, Office of Management & Budget
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
Modifications in U.S. National Strategy
I set forth U.S. National Strategy in 1977 in Presidential Directive/
NSC–18. It remains our strategy, but in light of increased projection of
Soviet power which threatens U.S. vital interests in the Persian Gulf
region, it has become necessary7 to modify emphasis and priority in the
strategy,8 and to elaborate and codify our progress in building a secu-
rity framework for the Persian Gulf. (S)
Greater Readiness Required
Given the increased risk of major local or regional conflict involv-
ing key U.S. interests in the 1980s we must increase the priority given
to readiness in defense resource allocations.
Shifts in Priority for General Purpose Forces
Presidential Directive/NSC–18 put the focus for our general pur-
pose forces on Europe but also called for capabilities for contingen-
cies in Korea and the Persian Gulf region. Soviet actions in [the Horn
of Africa and]9 Afghanistan have, in the interim, increased substantially
the threat to our vital interests in the Persian Gulf region. [Moreover, the
chaotic situation following the Iranian revolution, the Iraq-Iran war and the
6 Secret. Brackets are in the original.
7 Carter inserted “through a serious of individual directives” after “necessary.”
8 Carter changed the comma after the word “strategy” to a period, struck out “and
to,” and began a new sentence with the words “This Directive will.”
9 Carter deleted the brackets around the phrase “the Horn of Africa and,” and wrote
“ok” in the left margin next to it.

intensifying intra-Arab and Israeli-Arab tensions have increased the instabil-
ity in the region. This has also increased the risk to U.S. and Allied interests,
both directly and by giving the Soviets added opportunities for interference.]10
At the same time, our success in normalizing relations with the Peo-
ple’s Republic of China has improved our strategic position in East
Asia. Given the danger that Soviet success in asserting influence over
the oil producing status of the Persian Gulf region could undermine the
viability of NATO and Japan, cause enormous economic disruptions in
Europe, Japan, and the United States, higher priority must be given to
developing adequate strategic lift, general purpose forces and facilities
access for Persian Gulf contingencies. (S)
Approve State preference (deleting portions underscored in brack-
Approve NSC/Defense preference (no deletions)11 _____
While NATO will retain first call on force deployments in peace-
time for wartime operations, the Persian Gulf shall have highest prior-
ity for improvement of strategic lift and general purpose forces in the
Five Year Defense Program. [East Asia will have third priority for resources
and wartime operations.]12 This priority calls for maintaining improved
relations with the People’s Republic of China, accelerated growth of
Japan’s defense capabilities as a contribution to U.S.-Japanese security
ties, and improved relations with the ASEAN states. STATE ALTERNA-
TIVE—ADDITION: . . . ASEAN states, “and greater progress in getting our
NATO Allies to bear a larger share of the burden of defense in Europe.”
Approve State preferences (deleting portion underscored in brack-
ets and adding portion underscored in quotes)13 _____
Approve NSC/Defense preference (no changes) _____
Soviet projection of power in the Caribbean region with Cuba’s
assistance over the past two years has created another area of increased
security concern. In support of the objectives of Presidential Directive/
NSC–52, it is necessary to achieve quietly a stronger military presence
in the region by gradual shifts in our military exercise activities and
basing of U.S. forces in the Southeastern part of the United States and
its territories in the region which will be perceived by Cuba and the
Soviet Union as evidence of our determination to limit Soviet and
Cuban regional influence. (S)
10 Carter deleted the brackets around this sentence and wrote “ok” in the left margin
next to it.
11 Carter approved this option.
12 Carter deleted this sentence.
13 Carter approved this option and wrote in the left margin next to it: “Smooth the
Transition.”

Sharing the Security Burden with Our Allies
Because the Soviet military buildup and the projection of Soviet
military power have increased our strategic requirement, we must
make more effort and devise better ways of sharing the economic and
military burden with our allies. We must insist that our European Allies
take up the slack on the NATO front while we give greater priority to forces
and lift for the Persian Gulf. [We must insist that our European Allies under-
take the programs and make available the resources needed to make up for the
reduction in U.S. force comments14 caused by our effort oriented toward the
Persian Gulf]. At the same time, our NATO allies, particularly the British
and French, should contribute forces to the security framework for the
Persian Gulf.
Approve State version (sentence underscored in brackets)15 _____
Approve NSC/Defense version (sentence underscored in tics) _____
Germany, other members of NATO, ANZUS, and Japan should
contribute non-­military resources such as economic assistance to the
security framework. Two countries which flank Southwest Asia and
would be most important recipients of this economic aid—­as well as
of military aid from selected donors—­would be Turkey and Pakistan.
Our European and regional Allies should provide overflight, transit and
staging for U.S. forces moving to Southwest Asia. Procedures should be estab-
lished to facilitate overflight and refueling clearances.
[Our friends and Allies should be called upon to facilitate overflight, tran-
sit and staging for U.S. forces moving to Southwest Asia. We should work to
improve the prospects for receiving positive responses to our requests for over-
flight and refueling clearances.]
Approve State version (paragraph underscored in brackets) _____
Approve NSC/Defense version (paragraph underscored in tics)16
Arms Control
Arms control negotiations which promise to constrain Soviet
forces—­strategic and general purpose—­and particularly to limit
resources that both sides must commit to the strategic competition
will be pursued vigorously. This latter element of our strategy must
be exploited to the extent possible for alleviating both the economic
burdens of defense and for reducing the likelihood of the use of nuclear
weapons. (S)
14 Carter circled the word “comments.”
15 Carter approved this option
16 Carter approved this option.

Persian Gulf Security Framework
Presidential Directive/NSC-_____ elaborates U.S. strategy for the
Persian Gulf and Southwest Asia region. (C)

Tab D

Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to
President Carter17
Washington, January 7, 1981
SUBJECT
Draft PDs on “U.S. National Strategy” and on the “Persian Gulf Security
Framework”
I have three reasons for urging most strongly that you not issue
PDs on “U.S. National Strategy” and the “Persian Gulf Security
Framework.”
1. When these directives become public, as I believe they inevi-
tably would, the reaction among reporters, members of Congress and
the public would almost certainly be strongly negative. It would cloud
your last days in office and detract from your farewell address to the
nation.18
—We would be seen by some as simply having neglected to issue
appropriate directives at the outset of the Southwest Asian effort of the
past year. And obvious questions would be raised about the issuance of
orders to the Departments on long-­term issues by a President who had
only a few days left in office.
—We could be accused by others of a clumsy attempt to force a set
of policies on the incoming Administration.
—Instead of leaving office with much-­earned credit for having cre-
ated the security framework, you and your Administration would end
up publicly embarrassed.
2. They could have a negative effect on the new Administration’s
policies.
—The incoming Administration would no doubt feel challenged
by these directives, and would move to rescind them as soon as the
Administration had something to put in their place—­if not sooner.
17 Secret.
18 Carter delivered his farewell address to the nation on January 14. See Foreign Rela-

3. The PDs are loosely drafted. When public, they would irritate
our relations with, among others, our Allies (especially in the Pacific)
and the Saudis. For example:
—We should not single out East Asia as an area where all is well
and which can now be made a third priority. This would harm our rela-
tions with Japan, China, and other East Asian friends.
—Public reference to Turkey as a potential “threat-­in-­being” on the
flank of Soviet aggression would eliminate what chance there now is of
getting the Turks to be more cooperative.
—The formulation “comprehensive, regionwide use of Saudi
wealth” would cause us nothing but grief if the Saudis learned of it.
—We would only damage the security framework if it became
known that the DCI was organizing a “regional integrated intelligence
program.”
I have supplied Zbig with further specific comments on the drafts.
222.	 Presidential Directive/NSC–621
Washington, January 15, 1981
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of The Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Energy
The Director, Office of Management & Budget
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
Modifications in U.S. National Strategy (U)
NSC–62. Secret. Carter signed the top of the directive. Brzezinski sent the final version
of the directive to Carter for his signature under cover of a January 14 memorandum in
which he described two slight changes that Brown recommended (changing “maintain-
ing improved” to “continued improvement of” relations with the People’s Republic of
China; and adding Australia to the United Kingdom and France as countries to contrib-
ute forces to the Persian Gulf security framework) and of which Brzezinski approved.
Brzezinski went on to say that “Ed Muskie chooses not to comment on the wording of
the directives. He maintains his previous position recommending that the directives not
be issued.” (Ibid.)

I set forth U.S. National Strategy in 1977 in Presidential Directive/
NSC–18. It remains our strategy, but in light of increased projection of
Soviet power which threatens U.S. vital interests in the Persian Gulf
region, it has become necessary through a series of individual direc-
tives to modify emphasis and priority in the strategy. This Directive
will elaborate and codify our progress in building a security framework
for the Persian Gulf. (S)
Greater Readiness Required
Given the increased risk of major local or regional conflict involv-
ing key U.S. interests in the 1980s we must increase the priority given
to readiness in defense resource allocations. (C)
Shifts in Priority for General Purpose Forces
Presidential Directive/NSC–18 put the focus for our general pur-
pose forces on Europe but also called for capabilities for contingencies in
Korea and the Persian Gulf region. Soviet actions in the Horn of Africa
and Afghanistan have, in the interim, increased substantially the threat
to our vital interests in the Persian Gulf region. Moreover, the chaotic
situation following the Iranian revolution, the Iraq-Iran war and the
intensifying intra-Arab and Israeli-Arab tensions have increased the
instability in the region. This has also increased the risk to U.S. and
Allied interests, both directly and by giving the Soviets added oppor-
tunities for interference. At the same time, our success in normalizing
relations with the People’s Republic of China has improved our strate-
gic position in East Asia. Given the danger that Soviet success in assert-
ing influence over the oil producing status of the Persian Gulf region
could undermine the viability of NATO and Japan, cause enormous
economic disruptions in Europe, Japan, and the United States, higher
priority must be given to developing adequate strategic lift, general
purpose forces and facilities access for Persian Gulf contingencies. (S)
While NATO will retain first call on force deployments in peace-
time for wartime operations, the Persian Gulf shall have highest priority
for improvement of strategic lift and general purpose forces in the Five
Year Defense Program. This priority calls for continued improvement
of relations with the People’s Republic of China, accelerated growth of
Japan’s defense capabilities as a contribution to U.S.-Japanese security
ties, improved relations with the ASEAN states, and greater progress in
getting our NATO Allies to bear a larger share of the burden of defense
in Europe.2 (S)
Soviet projection of power in the Caribbean region with Cuba’s
assistance over the past two years has created another area of increased
security concern. In support of the objectives of Presidential Directive/
2 Carter drew a checkmark in the left margin next to this paragraph.

NSC–52, it is necessary to achieve quietly a stronger military presence
in the region by gradual shifts in our military exercise activities and
basing of U.S. forces in the Southeastern part of the United States and
its territories in the region which will be perceived by Cuba and the
Soviet Union as evidence of our determination to limit Soviet and
Cuban regional influence. (S)
Sharing the Security Burden with Our Allies
Because the Soviet military buildup and the projection of Soviet
military power have increased our strategic requirements, we must
make more effort and devise better ways to share the economic and mil-
itary burden with our Allies. We must insist that our European Allies
undertake the programs and make available the resources needed to
make up for the reduction in U.S. force commitments caused by our
effort oriented toward the Persian Gulf. At the same time, certain of our
Allies, particularly the British, French, and Australians, should contrib-
ute forces to the security framework for the Persian Gulf.3 (S)
Germany, other members of NATO, ANZUS, and Japan should
contribute non-­military resources such as economic assistance to the
security framework. Two countries which flank Southwest Asia and
would be most important recipients of this economic aid—­as well as of
military aid from selected donors—­would be Turkey and Pakistan. (S)
Our European and regional Allies should provide overflight,
­transit and staging for U.S. forces moving to Southwest Asia.
­Procedures should be established to facilitate overflight and refueling
­clearances. (S)
Arms Control
Arms control negotiations which promise to constrain Soviet
forces—­strategic and general purpose—­and particularly to limit
resources that both sides must commit to the strategic competition
will be pursued vigorously. This latter element of our strategy must
be exploited to the extent possible for alleviating both the economic
burdens of defense and for reducing the likelihood of the use of nuclear
weapons. (S)
Persian Gulf Security Framework
Presidential Directive/NSC–63 elaborates U.S. strategy for the
­Persian Gulf and Southwest Asia region.4 (C)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
3 Carter drew a checkmark in the left margin next to this paragraph.
