964 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II OES is now undertaking with CEQ a year-long study on world population, resource and environment factors in response to President Carter’s initiative.5 The main problems and key issues are known (innumerable such studies have been done.) In some cases, even the technical or scientific solutions are clear. The problems are leadership, resource allocation, economic priorities and managerial innovation. We should not await the outcome of this study, but proceed now to deal with these problems. Natural Disasters There exists a vast array of scientific knowledge and technology to deal with a range of natural disasters including earthquakes, floods and tidal waves. For example, we have considerable knowledge of earthquake prediction, but this knowledge still is not applied to many areas of high risk. Also, much more can be done in the fields of warning, communications, and relief using new technology. AID focuses on LDCs, IO on the UN Disaster Relief Organization, but no one is concerned with broad international cooperation, or short and medium term cooperation to develop and deploy new techniques to deal with the full range of natural disasters. (See draft memo of Sandy Vogelgesang on this subject.)6 Energy There are so many areas for US action and so many problems it is hard to characterize all that needs to be done. One area certainly is the “management” of nuclear power around the world for nonproliferation, economic and environmental reasons. Increasingly, we will have to look for international “solutions”—i.e., international control over reprocessing, waste management, transportation and the full bag that comes under the term “safeguards”. One important initiative we have to examine is the potential global benefits of acceleration of solar energy research and development. A major crash program in this sector can provide a low-cost alternative to nuclear power and to increasingly high-cost imported oil especially for the LDCs. This option could provide a number of political and security benefits. It will be important to work with the new Energy Department to encourage emphasis on such new sources. But this would require major domestic en- 5 Reference is to the May 23 environmental message; see footnote 4, Document 284. 6 Presumable reference to a July 11 action memorandum Vogelgesang sent to Christopher, wherein Vogelgesang outlined various U.S. initiatives in the area of disaster relief. According to a notation on the memorandum, all of Vogelgesang’s action recommendations were approved in August. Lake added the following handwritten comment at the top of the memorandum: “Sandy—what now? TL.” (National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 2, TL 7/1–15/77)
