964
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
OES is now undertaking with CEQ a year-long study on world
population, resource and environment factors in response to President
Carter’s initiative.5 The main problems and key issues are known (in-
numerable such studies have been done.) In some cases, even the tech-
nical or scientific solutions are clear. The problems are leadership, re-
source allocation, economic priorities and managerial innovation. We
should not await the outcome of this study, but proceed now to deal
with these problems.
Natural Disasters
There exists a vast array of scientific knowledge and technology to
deal with a range of natural disasters including earthquakes, floods
and tidal waves. For example, we have considerable knowledge of
earthquake prediction, but this knowledge still is not applied to many
areas of high risk. Also, much more can be done in the fields of
warning, communications, and relief using new technology. AID fo-
cuses on LDCs, IO on the UN Disaster Relief Organization, but no one
is concerned with broad international cooperation, or short and me-
dium term cooperation to develop and deploy new techniques to deal
with the full range of natural disasters. (See draft memo of Sandy Vo-
gelgesang on this subject.)6
Energy
There are so many areas for US action and so many problems
it is hard to characterize all that needs to be done. One area certainly
is the “management” of nuclear power around the world for non-
proliferation, economic and environmental reasons. Increasingly, we
will have to look for international “solutions”—i.e., international con-
trol over reprocessing, waste management, transportation and the full
bag that comes under the term “safeguards”. One important initiative
we have to examine is the potential global benefits of acceleration of
solar energy research and development. A major crash program in this
sector can provide a low-cost alternative to nuclear power and to in-
creasingly high-cost imported oil especially for the LDCs. This option
could provide a number of political and security benefits. It will be im-
portant to work with the new Energy Department to encourage em-
phasis on such new sources. But this would require major domestic en-
5 Reference is to the May 23 environmental message; see footnote 4, Document 284.
6 Presumable reference to a July 11 action memorandum Vogelgesang sent to Chris-
topher, wherein Vogelgesang outlined various U.S. initiatives in the area of disaster re-
lief. According to a notation on the memorandum, all of Vogelgesang’s action recommen-
dations were approved in August. Lake added the following handwritten comment at
the top of the memorandum: “Sandy—what now? TL.” (National Archives, RG 59, Policy
and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot
82D298, Box 2, TL 7/1–15/77)
