1108  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
(3) In President Eisenhower’s visit to Latin America the President 
proposes to reach the very doors of Peru and then about-­face and return 
home the way he came.3 In so doing he will unintentionally reinforce 
the old idea of the importance of the “ABC bloc”4 in Latin America, 
and appear to slight Peru. The President was able to visit Kabul;5 it is 
hard to understand that he cannot find time to visit Lima. Peru’s disap-
pointment is the keener for Peru’s record as foremost among the United 
States’ friends of World War II.
The Peruvian people’s sense of injury in these matters poses the 
Peruvian Government with serious political problems which it hopes 
the United States Government will help dispel.
(At this point Ambassador Hoyos Osores launched into a lengthy 
polemic on the Peru-Ecuador boundary dispute, terming it “the most 
serious of these matters” and accusing the United States of obstruct-
ing action which Peru justly desired—see separate memorandum of 
conversation.)6
Mr. Rubottom—Thank you for having spoken of these mutual prob-
lems with the same frankness that has always characterized my talks 
with Peru’s representatives, Mr. Grau as Chargé d’Affaires, Ambassador 
de Lavalle, Admiral Llosa and—last December 15 Ambassador Belaunde 
in New York.7 I shall answer with the same frankness.
I, of course, regret, deeply the existence among Peruvians of any 
feeling of resentment against the United States. It is understandable 
that Peruvians might interpret some U.S. actions, particularly in the 
field of trade, as directed against Peru itself, but such an interpretation 
obviously is wrong and I hope the Peruvian Government would make 
the facts known. The extremes to which popular misconceptions can 
go are shown today in Cuba, which is becoming a problem for all the 
American states. I remember the pitch that popular opinion in Peru had 
reached—when Under Secretary Dillon and I passed through Lima in 
August of 19578—in reaction to a bill pending in the U.S. Congress cov-
ering lead and zinc imports. The Peruvian people had not been told that 
this was merely a bill proposed by certain individual Congressmen rep-
resenting their own constituents, as a national deputy from Arequipa 
3 For documentation on President Eisenhower’s trip to South America, February 
23–March 7, 1960, see Documents CH–28–30, 32; PE–37; UR–12–14.
4 Reference is to Argentina, Brazil, and Chile.
5 President Eisenhower visited Kabul, December 9, during his eleven-­nation world 
tour, December 3–22, 1959; for documentation on his visit to Afghanistan, see volume XI.
6 Not printed; 622.233/1–2360.
7 Not printed; 362/12–1559.
8 Messrs. Dillon and Rubottom passed through Lima en route to the OAS Economic 
Conference in Buenos Aires, August 15–September 4, 1957.
