714
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
266.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated
AFGHAN FIGHTERS DESTROY SOVIET EQUIPMENT WITH
SOVIET EQUIPMENT
The Soviet Army is being destroyed by Soviet weaponry in Afghan-
istan. For many years the Soviet Union provided military aid to the
Afghan Army. Although there can be political benefit in providing
military equipment to a border state, the sudden change of circum-
stances in Afghanistan has proved that this can also bear bitter
consequences.
After the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan last December, the Afghan
Army began to dissolve. Rather than fight their fellow Muslims and
assist the Soviet invaders, Afghan soldiers, and in many cases full
units, began to rally to the tribal forces. When these units changed
sides they took with them critical Soviet anti-aircraft and anti-armor
equipment, particularly anti-tank rockets which can be fired by one
soldier.
Reliable reports reaching Afghan exile leaders indicate that Soviet
armor and vehicle losses have begun to mount dramatically as a result
of the insurgent use of these Soviet weapons. Sources with access to
the rebel forces report, for example, that Soviet units in the Herat area
of western Afghanistan in April lost several armored vehicles due to
attacks by anti-tank rockets. One rebel source described a particularly
successful but simple technique used by the Afghans as they become
accustomed to the anti-tank weapons. Some Soviet armored vehicles
have rubber tires. The rebel soldiers fire on the tires thereby immobiliz-
ing the vehicle. Once immobilized, the vehicle is destroyed by the
rebels with their new rocket ability. Soviet vehicle losses have reached
rates which reportedly are beginning to alarm Soviet leaders.
Rebel sources also report that the Afghan fighters are beginning to
enjoy increased success against the once feared Soviet MI–24 helicopter
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 12, C–367, 1 Jan–30 Jun 80, Afghanistan. In a
May 9 covering letter to Komer, attached but not printed, Carlucci wrote: “Dear Bob:
Try this one on for size.” In a routing sheet addressed to Carlucci, May 8, also attached
but not printed, [text not declassified] Deputy Chief of the Near East Division, Central
Intelligence Agency, wrote: “Per your request this morning, suggest the attached might
be of use. We can live with the substance of something like attached which contains the
guts of the Spot Report (insurgents’ effective use of anti-armor and anti-aircraft weapons)
but protects our equities (no appearance of government leak and protection of the
sensitive ultimate source). Our only suggested caveat is that no US source be identified.”
The Spot Report is printed as Document 260.
