1606 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement tests to assure that adequate data is obtained to assess the phenomena involved and possibly to discover some characteristics which might allow long range detection of such decoupled tests.”  (signed) Lloyd V. Berkner Chairman, Panel on Seismic Improvement Enclosure Report Prepared by the Panel on Seismic Improvement March 24, 1959 Certain Aspects of the Concealment of Underground Explosions 1. Method. It is proposed to reduce the seismic signal from an under­ ground explosion by setting the explosion off in an underground cavity of such size that the pressure on the wall of the cavity never exceeds the plastic yield stress of the surrounding medium. To reduce the pressure on the wall, it is proposed to fill the cavity with gas in such a manner that the explosive force is transmitted by radiation rather than by a gas shock. This requires a light gas such as hydrogen, or reduced gas pres­ sure, or both. 2. Estimate of Seismic Signal. The seismic signal generated in the medium has been estimated by applying the theory of elasticity to the medium. This is justified, as the medium never suffers a non-­elastic deformation. Elastic theory permits us to calculate the energy per unit frequency E (ν) for which we find

) ) ( ( ν = π δ γ − ω E 3 2 c W 1 1 2 5 2  (1) where δ is the density of the medium, c its sound velocity, W the energy released in the explosion, γ refers to the equation of the state of the gas and ω is the circular frequency. It will be noted that (1) is independent of the radius of the hole; once the hole is big enough to insure elasticity of the medium, it no longer matters how big it is chosen. It is further seen that the amplitude of the elastic wave which is proportional to (1) is directly proportional to the energy released and is also proportional to the frequency. The latter dependence will hold as long as the frequency is less than the characteristic frequency of the hole, c/R, where R is
