Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
281
“Tonight we have four distinguished news reporters from the four
major networks in our country. And I want to welcome you here as an-
other opportunity for me to speak to the American people with tough
interrogations from those who understand our country very well.”
The President subsequently fielded questions about his upcoming
trip (see Document 60), the Middle East, the potential for a strategic
arms limitation agreement in 1978, and domestic issues related to the
Federal Reserve and the economy. In response to a question posed by
Walters as to the administration’s top priorities for 1978, Carter indi-
cated that the status of the Panama Canal Treaty existed as one of the
most important issues to resolve:
“About 75 years ago in the middle of the night the American Secre-
tary of State signed the Panama Canal Treaty that presently is in exist-
ence. No Panamanian has ever signed it; no Panamanian ever saw it be-
fore it was signed. It was signed by a Frenchman who benefitted
financially from the terms of the treaty on behalf of the Panamanians.
“That treaty gave us a chance to do a tremendous job in building
the Panama Canal, keeping it open for international shipping. It’s
helped our country a lot. It’s something of which we can be proud.
“Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy recognized that the present
treaty was inadequate. President Johnson started negotiations to
change it. Presidents Nixon and Ford continued. And we concluded it
this year.
“It’s one of the most difficult political questions that we’ll have to
deal with. It’s going to take a lot of time in the Congress to pass it.
“What we wanted was one that treated us and Panama fairly, and
we got it. We wanted a treaty that did not put a financial burden on the
American taxpayer, and we got it. We wanted treaties that would guar-
antee proper operation of the Panama Canal itself, for us and for for-
eign shipping, and we got it. We wanted treaties that would also guar-
antee us permanently the right to take what action we think necessary
to keep the canal safe, to defend it, and to keep it open for us to use, and
we got it.
“We wanted treaties—two treaties there are—that would give us
the right for expeditious passage in time of need or emergency, for our
ships to go to the head of the line and go through the canal without
delay, and we got it. We wanted treaties also that would be acceptable
in the eyes of the international community, particularly in Latin
America, and we got them.
“So, this is what we have tried to do under four Presidents, and we
have finally succeeded. And I would say that would be one of the most
difficult challenges that we have politically this year. It is absolutely
crucial that the Senate ratify these treaties, and I think the terms are
very favorable to us and to Panama.
