National Security Policy  1121
Another area in which present measures do not provide a solu­
tion to the internal security problem involved has to do with the 
acquisition of Unclassified strategic data by Soviet Bloc diplomats 
and official personnel. Present U.S. policy provides that we are to 
place restrictions “on the basis of strict reciprocity” upon travel, photo­
graphing, sketching, and such activities of Bloc representatives, as a 
means of deterring their acquisition of such information. The imposi­
tion of these reciprocal restrictions is coordinated by an inter-agency 
group chaired by State. In the Planning Board discussion, State 
referred to the difficulty in applying strict reciprocity in our dealings 
with the Bloc countries. The Status Report also reflects the view of 
Commerce Department (which has a responsibility for seeking equi­
table exchanges in return for Soviet bloc acquisition of publications) 
that any restrictions on Soviet access to Government Printing Office 
materials might seriously interfere with the operations of U.S. publi­
cation procurement officers in Russia.
There are also limitations on the program for the development 
and use of devices to detect the presence of nuclear materials com­
ing into the U.S. at selected ports of entry. Present devices, while 
improved, cannot positively identify nuclear materials as such—and 
the prototype of such a discriminating device will not be ready for 
testing until early in 1961. Steps to improve the operational use of 
present devices await completion of the review of Continental Defense 
policy. Meanwhile, under present policy when the devices indicate 
the presence of a radioactive source in an accompanied Soviet bloc 
diplomatic pouch, the pouch is not challenged unless the device reg­
isters the presence of uranium, plutonium or other neutron source. 
In any event, the devices cannot be used on baggage which is put 
on airplane flights which are pre-cleared by U.S. Customs in Canada 
and at Bermuda, Searches of unaccompanied Soviet bloc diplomatic 
baggage, effects and [illegible in the original] to be made by Customs 
under present policy.
4. This concludes a summary of the highlights of the Status Report.
