514  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Having raised these concerns about the mobile MIRVed ICBM pro-
posal Senator Nunn and I have made to you, we nonetheless believe 
that the uncertainty and conflict that now exists in Congress over 
ICBM modernization could result in cancellation of both programs. We 
believe that our proposal offers less risk than does the status quo.
Finally, since our proposal has less risk than the current budget 
proposal, it may now be appropriate to consider a broader approach 
that would include elimination of other MIRVed ICBMs. You may wish 
to consult with Secretary Cheney and other senior advisors about the 
possibility of a proposal that would eliminate our MX system, both rail- 
and silo-­based, in return for the Soviet elimination of all SS–24’s and, 
most importantly, all SS–18’s. The tabling of such a proposal would 
raise few, if any, additional Congressional concerns beyond those raised 
by our mobile MIRVed ICBM proposal. At the same time, a successful 
outcome along these lines would meet the long-­term U.S. goal of truly 
enhanced strategic stability.
83.	
Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff 
(Ross) to Secretary of State Baker1
Washington, March 8, 1990
SUBJECT
MIRVed Mobile Initiative in START
Summary
While moving ahead on schedule with the Soviets in START, we’re 
encountering criticism at home that the Treaty as it now stands is overly 
modest compared to today’s momentous political changes, out of step 
with U.S. programs (especially mobiles) given budgetary realities, and 
lacking in a strategic vision for the future. None of this would put rati-
fication in doubt. But it could make it more contentious, reduce support 
for some programs, and diminish the value the public attaches to START.
1 Source: Department of States, Office of the Under Secretary for Arms Control, 
International Security Affairs. Secret. Copied to Bartholomew. A typed notation at the 
top of the memorandum reads: “This is the out-­of the system paper from Dennis for your 
3:00 pm meeting re: START. Paper from Reg B. is attached.” An unknown hand wrote beside 
this notation: “3/9/90.” The paper from Bartholomew was not attached.
