National Security Policy  217
Secretary Dulles pointed out that Sandys’ statement was no mere 
informal effort. It had been formally submitted to the Cabinet, which 
had apparently acquiesced in Sandys’ subsequent publication.
Mr. Quarles asked what Sandys’ alternative was. The Secretary 
replied that it was total disarmament, which no responsible official 
considered seriously.
Secretary Dulles said that he quoted Sandys as representative of 
leading statesmen in Europe. He could quote plenty of others to the 
same effect. Indeed Sandys’ doubt is a rational doubt. No one knows 
what a future President will do. There may be future moods of isolation 
in the US. No nation likes to have its national existence depend on a deci­
sion which may involve the destruction of another nation—­so thought 
is being given in Europe to alternatives. Sandys’ alternative is fantastic. 
But Prime Minister Macmillan thought it was good propaganda.
The Secretary said there seemed to be two serious alternatives 
under consideration—­separate national nuclear weapons programs or 
neutrality. The Secretary said he had no definite answers to this prob­
lem. He did feel that a strategic concept, which was wholly dependent 
on a US decision to incur nuclear devastation, would not be gambled 
on by our allies. We must think of alternatives. He has no cure for the 
problem and no special competence in this field.
Secretary McElroy asked if the Europeans think that we would 
withdraw our forces from Europe. If they do, that would really be bad. 
But our forces in Europe are developing an increased tactical weapon 
capability. In the event of war, how would it be possible for the US 
nuclear forces not to be drawn into action.
Secretary Dulles recalled a Sunday afternoon in December 1950. It 
then seemed possible that the American divisions in Korea would be 
wiped out. Radical alternatives were considered, but no thought was 
given to using nuclear weapons. Who was to say that the same situation 
might not come up in the future in regard to our divisions in Europe.
Mr. Gates asked if this situation warranted a reconsideration of pre­
ventive war. Secretary Dulles said it did not in his judgment. This might 
be a logical alternative, but it was not practical in view of the beliefs of 
the American people and their form of government. He said he wanted 
to make it perfectly clear that he was not backing down nor did he have 
any feeling of fear. Mr. Quarles said that we didn’t have any freedom of 
choice about preventive war. Mr. Gates said he had in mind preventive 
strikes after a European ally is attacked. Secretary Dulles said that is 
different. If our allies thought that “we could shoot the works” without 
getting badly hurt they might have more confidence in us. Mr. Quarles 
said that is our present policy. General Twining confirmed this. General 
Taylor said that he had some doubts that this was our policy.
