723.2515/1660½: Telegram
[Document 240]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 29, 1925—5 p.m.
For Pershing: The Chilean Ambassador called at Department today and left copy of
instructions he had received from Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs which is in
substance as follows:
Popular feeling in Arica is excited and ripe for a rupture. This state of mind is
caused by General Pershing’s suggestion to reduce number of troops in way
considered vexatious. This is also sentiment in Chilean delegation. If
immediate instructions were given to accept, no matter under what
reservations, General Pershing’s plan would have unpleasant effect on
populace, and without doubt would have bad effect on timid or wavering
element in province. It seems advisable to Chile to employ time as factor in
directing her action in Arica or to afford opportunity for opening way to
conciliatory solution. Government of Chile proposes to call Edwards to
Santiago and in consultation with him there to seek conciliatory solution. The
Government of Chile needs an assurance that during Edwards’ stay in
Santiago, session of Commission will not be called, and Mathieu was
instructed to ascertain if suggestion to this end could be made to Pershing by
Department. In meantime, Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs was willing
to give some practical evidence of accepting guarantees by making some
changes in provincial authorities and by reductions in number of carabineers
and police force. He desired immediate answer from Mathieu as Pershing had
intimated advisability of meeting on Saturday.
Mathieu requested that I suggest to you that you give assurance asked for, and that he
thought Edwards would not be absent more than 10 or 12 days. He said that Minister
for Foreign Affairs has precisely same view as he himself holds, that your resolutions
must be complied with, but that Barros Jarpa has not yet been able to bring Edwards
around to it.
This is reason why he is sending for him to come to Santiago, and he hopes that
outcome of Edwards’ visit there will be clarification of situation. The Ambassador was
informed that I could make no promises whatever, that you were on ground charged
with carrying out plebiscite, and that you are the one in position to judge what is
