1977  91
Minutes
Secretary Brown: I want to start with some introductory remarks. 
This part of the PRM–10 effort was not designed to produce specific 
force postures. Rather, the approach was based on creating analytical 
building blocks for various geographical areas of the world or fields 
of conflict. These were put together to create illustrative strategies, or 
AIMS, to see what the overall strategy would look like and the kinds of 
forces that would be required.
The study did not define national objectives. It did not investigate 
theater nuclear forces. It did not look into the problems of mobilization 
and industrial bases.
A set of questions emerged from the study that I want to discuss 
here today and that I hope to use to elicit guidance from the President. I 
don’t believe this study provides a basis for overall military strategy and 
force posture decisions. We in DOD will be taking a look at where we 
are today, where we want to be, and what sorts of incremental changes 
we should be making, depending on what emerges in the future.
Let’s turn to the first question. Zbig, would you like to begin?
Dr. Brzezinski: First, I would like to ask: How do the AIMS relate 
to the questions? I noticed that on page two the study leads off with a 
description of the AIMS.
Secretary Brown: Well, let’s take Europe as an example. AIMS E, 
F and G all have the property of blunting a Soviet attack but losing 
territory. H and I would be more demanding; in these AIMS we would 
recover lost territory and would be able to sustain conflict for 90 days. 
In AIMS J we would sustain conflict indefinitely. And in AIMS M 
we would counterattack on the flanks. AIMS E, F, and G correspond 
roughly to what we can do today. AIMS F Variant corresponds to what 
we say we can do today. The rest of the AIMS are more than we can do 
today.
Dr. Brzezinski: Just to get things going, I think that US military 
strategy for Europe ought to be neither intimidation nor deterrence but 
some degree of ambiguity so that Soviet military planners can’t calcu-
late precisely what would happen if they attack. This implies the main-
tenance of our strategic forces and the current relationship of theater 
nuclear forces to conventional forces and strategic forces. If deterrence 
fails, our posture ought to be to blunt the Soviet attack. It is unreason-
able to hope to restore boundaries. The Europeans simply won’t spend 
the money to accomplish that.
Secretary Brown: How would you handle this policy with West 
­Germany? Our present declaratory posture is forward defense.
Dr. Brzezinski: What matters is how the Soviets view this posture. 
If we can blunt them and stalemate the conflict, then the Soviets would
