80  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
— Mentions problems with verification of RV loading (noting dis-
agreement over the extent of such problems);
— Says that we are accepting poor verifiability of ALCMs and 
bombers since (a) we want to protect our programs and (b) these are 
stabilizing systems;11
— Says START won’t add requirements for unique NTM assets; 
and
— Says conclusions on verifiability are premature.
We think the paper is useful background, but misses the central 
issue: If the paper is correct in its assessment of the monitoring and 
verification problems we face, is this the road we want to walk down? 
If so, everybody should be prepared for the possibility that two years 
from now we will be testifying on a treaty that we will assert is in our 
interest even though not all provisions of that are fully verifiable.12 If on 
the other hand, this is not a road we want to walk down, the President 
should either:13
— Direct a radical change in our START objectives to focus on an 
incomplete, but verifiable, set of limits;
— Direct massive new intrusive verification measures (which may 
or may not help and will be opposed by many on security grounds); or
— Plan on substantial new expenditures for collection systems 
(which may or may not actually solve any problems).
If “verification” means knowing how many systems or warheads 
the Soviets have or what those systems are armed with, it is almost 
certain that we will not be able to verify many of the START limits. 
The Deputies meeting offers us the first chance to force the new senior 
leadership to face up to that fact. Ultimately (but not at this meeting) 
we will have to decide what we mean by “effective” verification. We 
may find we have to accept a standard of “good enough,” even though 
“good enough” is quite low in traditional terms.
We suggest you avoid getting into a discussion of specifics and 
seek to focus on the basic question. You might suggest that the goal is 
not to solve problems but to make certain that we’re marching ahead 
with our eyes open.
Defense & Space Talks. The paper raises the right question: Do we 
want to retain as the fundamental objectives of Defense and Space 
11 Gates drew a vertical line in the left-­hand margin beside this point, and wrote in 
the left-­hand margin beside the first four points of this section: “W/o serious JCS assess. 
of mil-­risk of cheating scenarios—­no ratif as long as verif. prob.”
12 Gates underlined “we will be testifying on a treaty that we will assert is in our 
interest even though not all provisions of that are fully verifiable.”
13 Gates wrote “chg. definition of verification” in the right-­hand margin beside this 
paragraph, and drew two short vertical lines in the left-­hand margin.
