Human Rights
395
An HRF will institute a positive, action program for human rights compa-
rable, say, to the activities of AID to promote economic development.
—Our human rights policy generated unrealistically high expecta-
tions in some quarters. The press now reports that the Administration
has “abandoned” or “sacrificed” human rights to other priorities. There
is a surprising, but continuing belief on the Hill that without constant
Congressional pressure there would be no human rights policy. A posi-
tive initiative such as HRF will help substantially to dispel that myth. We
face many contentious human rights issues in the coming Congres-
sional session (e.g., application of the Harkin Amendment to inappro-
priate institutions,3 more strictures on the IFIs, etc.). Any improvement
in the current mood would be an important political plus. By proposing
an HRF, the Administration can mobilize the heterogeneous human rights
constituency behind a constructive proposal.
—While human rights is certainly not a new concern, it is a new
policy issue, and it lacks the necessary solid intellectual base. Our frustra-
tions in the PRM–28 exercise4 provided excellent evidence of the need
for basic research on the varieties of human rights and on the most ef-
fective means of promoting human rights in diverse social and cultural
contexts. Those inside the government do not have the time to develop
such a base. It is best done outside the government—in academia, think
tanks, etc. An HRF can provide the central direction, support and motivation
for a successful, and relevant, scholarly effort.
—Human rights has been pretty thoroughly woven into our for-
eign policy bureaucracy, but this will not last long should one of your
successors not share your concern for this issue. The new procedures
could be undone as quickly as they have been created. An independent
HRF, funded by Congress, is some insurance that human rights will be an en-
during concern. Much as ACDA and the Peace Corps embody major for-
eign policy initiatives of previous Democratic Administrations, the
HRF would be an important institutional legacy of the Carter
Administration.
—Polls have shown that your human rights policy is strongly sup-
ported by people all over the world, even in places where the government
opposes it. The lasting success of the policy will depend to some extent on our
ability to cultivate that support, particularly through non-governmental
and semi-governmental organizations of all kinds. While USIA can
contribute to this goal to a limited degree, activities aimed at focusing
3 Presumable reference to the Harkin amendment to H.R. 9179; see footnote 6, Doc-
ument 108.
4 PRM–28 is printed as Document 46. The response to PRM–28 is printed as Docu-
ment 73.
