1044 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —A number of potential initiatives are identified in the following section of this paper. Based on comments and recommendations received from the involved agencies, these initiatives will be announced or assigned for further action as appropriate. Further action could include assigning higher priority to an ongoing effort, assignment of the appropriate Department for preparation of an implementation plan or establishment of an interagency committee to develop a recommended approach. The most important opportunity for inclusion in the Administration’s planning is through the OMB Spring Planning Review. Therefore, it is important that general guidance with a sense of relative priorities be available to OMB by early April. This schedule does not require immediate specific programmatic recommendations or that potential organizational questions be resolved during the first phase of this review. —The remainder of the year would be planned to accomplish the necessary studies, and to seek opportunities to encourage efforts to improve world health and to strengthen coordinative activities, including within the U.S. Government, with and between international organizations, and with private sector organizations. Proposed Initiatives The initial review of international health, conducted by Peter Bourne’s staff, and comments received from the relevant agencies led to selection of areas where improvements may be made in the U.S. approach to international health. Outlined below, these potential initiatives are discussed in more detail in the following section. 1. Expand U.S. involvement with health-oriented activities of international organizations. 2. Encourage and facilitate private sector involvement to complement international health programs. 3. Expand capacity for knowledge development and use. —Upgrading the Fogarty International Center. —U.S. Global Health Consortia. —Foreign Research and Training Centers. 4. International health manpower. —Presidential Scholars in Global Health. —Global Health Cadre. —International Health Services Corps. 5. Presidential priorities in prevention. —World Blindness. —World Water Supply. 6. Coordination of U.S. Government activities in world health.
