Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
723
In this context, the Delegation should reiterate the elements of our
arms restraint policy.
The Chairman of the Delegation is authorized to make use of the
attached Presidential statement as he deems appropriate, in order to
demonstrate the commitment and support of the highest levels of the
United States Government in this effort.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Attachment
Presidential Statement2
Washington, undated
President Carter has asked me to make this statement on his
behalf:
This is an opportunity to convey my personal concern, and that of
the United States Government, over the growing world trade in con-
ventional arms, and the urgency I attach to international cooperation to
reduce that trade. The unrestrained transfer of conventional weapons
represents a serious and continuing threat to peace, and a diversion of
resources badly needed for economic and social development.
As great powers, and as the world’s leading arms suppliers, the
United States and the Soviet Union have a special responsibility to curb
this traffic in armaments. We have distinct but common interests in
doing so. Moreover, without US-Soviet restraint, others will not alter
their arms transfer practices and opportunities for meaningful multi-
lateral restraint will be lost. And without multilateral restraint, no
single supplier could be expected to sustain such a policy for very long.
Restraint does not mean an end to arms sales. Obviously, the legiti-
mate defense needs of friends and allies must be fulfilled. Neither of us
would have it otherwise. Restraint does mean that we take steps in
common—in cooperation with suppliers as well as with recipients—to
prevent sales from increasing the risk of war or inflaming regional and
global tensions. Regional conflicts cannot be solved by arms transfer re-
straint alone. But restraint can contribute to the resolution of such
problems and help avoid future conflicts.
Our common responsibilities in this area flow naturally from the
basic tenets of our relations—from the principles accepted by the
2 Confidential.
