August 8–September 17, 1978 15 organizations. A certain level of displeasure on the part of the Israelis and their supporters is inevitable; it will be the price of keeping Sadat and the moderate Arabs with us. What we will need to do is find ways to minimize the repercussions. The first step we need to take in our preparations for Camp David is to arm ourselves with texts that the President could use with Sadat. We should have a series of texts, running from the most acceptable to Sadat to one or two that we judge to be on the borderline of what Sadat can accept. Responsibility for the preparation of these texts should be put in Atherton’s hands since he has much more direct experience in negotiating the principles than any other member of the group. Arrangement should also be made for Atherton to have a serious session with the President before Camp David to brief the President on the fine points of the positions and the sensitivities of the two sides as regards the language of the Declaration. Our other main project will be to figure out how to get with the least possible damage from here to the statement of our position acceptable to Sadat at the end of the conference. Getting To Where We Want We start from the given that we cannot simply lay our proposal on the table at the outset. As much as possible, our ideas must seem to emerge from a genuine process of negotiation. We should recognize however that this is an ideal which is probably attainable only in part at best. —We can expect Sadat and Begin to meet and talk with one another, but it would be unrealistic to think that they will negotiate in the technical sense of the word. —If we try to force them into a negotiating situation we risk heading the talks into an impasse and a breakdown. Hearing the Israeli position in all its starkness could cause Sadat to react as he did after Leeds. —Begin knows our tactic and will be armed to meet it. No matter how long we get Sadat to sit down and talk with him he will always say that not enough time was allowed for negotiation. Begin’s fuse will be long and slow. Sadat’s short. In brief, very early in the Camp David talks we risk coming up against a contradiction between our need to have our positions emerge from the course of the talks and the need to get them out in such a way that they will have the desired impact on the Arab side. We will be faced then with the choice between: —dropping the fig leaf of negotiations; and —stringing out presentation of our proposals or so watering them down that we are seen by Sadat as failing to fulfill our commitments.
