The Gaffir Tax was established by a Decree of November 10, 1884, as a police regulation for the security of rural property, and as a true complement of the land tax. Article 49 of this Decree provides in intent that “collectors of taxes are also charged with the collection of the Gaffir Tax and that the Sarrafs of the villages shall inform the authorities of the names of persons who refuse to pay their quota, in order that they may be treated as those who are in arrears with their taxes.” Subsequently the Gaffir Tax was extended to cities by a Decree of February 17, 1896, which, at the same time established “joint and separate liability between proprietors and tenants of each house for the payment of his quota as a contribution to the Gaffir Tax.” In taking this position the Egyptian Government has kept within the limits which were imposed upon it by international agreements concerning real property of foreigners. Article 2 of the Ottoman Law of the 7th of Safar, 1284, specifies in intent that “foreign proprietors of landed property, city or rural, are likened to Ottoman subjects in all that concerns their real property, and that this assimilation is for legal effect: “1st. It binds them to conform to all laws, and to all police or municipal regulations which govern at the present time, or will govern in the future, the possession, transmission, legal conveyance of property to another, and the mortgaging of landed property. “2nd. To pay all charges and taxes, under whatever denomination they are levied, or shall hereafter be levied, on city or rural property.” Now it is manifest that all this taxation applies as well to the owner as to the tenant of city or rural property, and that, therefore, it is perfectly right that the Government address the tenants as well as the proprietors for payment. To insure the collection of this tax, the Egyptian Government orders the seizure and administrative sale against the tax-payer. But these methods of procedure are necessarily slow, and in order to avoid all difficulty or delay during the war, the General Commander-in-Chief of the forces of His
