September 1953–December 1954
937
3. The Communist Tudeh Party, having suffered a series of set-
backs, will be in no position to challenge the government seriously in
the next 12 to 14 months. Indeed it may be hard pressed to maintain an
effective organization. Nevertheless, it is the only political opposition
group in Iran which has some organization and discipline, and it is
likely to re-emerge as an active threat unless the government both con-
tinues effective suppression and succeeds in allaying popular griev-
ances. (Paras. 15, 21, 35–37)
4. The resumption of oil production, together with interim US aid,
will provide Iran with substantial funds for an economic development
program which could do much to meet popular aspirations. However,
the ultimate effectiveness of any such program will depend not only on
the money available but also on the way in which the government
tackles the managerial and political problems involved, and on the
Shah’s willingness to provide firm support. This, in turn, is likely to de-
pend on the ability of the US and UK to work together effectively and
influence the Shah and other Iranian leaders against allowing the pro-
grams to be unduly weakened by corruption, mismanagement, and po-
litical maneuvering. (Paras. 29, 38, 42–44)
5. In any event, Iran is likely to remain for a number of years a bas-
ically unstable country, plagued with continuing economic and finan-
cial difficulties. Its underlying social and economic problems are of a
sort which can be solved only over a relatively long period of time and
which, in the process, will generate new tensions and strains. The dis-
ruptive potential of popular discontent acompanying such tensions
and strains will probably be increased unless the ruling group adjusts
to a sharing of power with growing middle class elements. (Paras. 27,
30)
6. In time Iran will almost certainly seek increased participation in
the management and profits of the oil industry. However, the oil ques-
tion is unlikely to re-emerge as a burning issue so long as oil company
policies pay due heed to Iranian sensitivity and aspirations and Iran re-
mains reasonably stable and pro-Western in outlook. (Paras. 32–34)
7. The Shah and many Iranian leaders are convinced that Iran must
maintain close ties with the West if it is to avoid isolation and eventual
Soviet domination. They are probably genuinely interested in eventu-
ally participating in a Western-backed regional defense arrangement.
However, they are unlikely to make such a commitment until: (a) the
Iranian forces have been substantially strengthened, and (b) they are
confident that such a move would not encounter serious opposition
within Iran. Neither condition is likely to be met within the next year or
two. (Paras. 56–57)
8. So long as the Iranian Government continues to expect US eco-
nomic, financial, and military assistance, it will remain responsive to
