his opinion in the matter, to call upon me to discuss ways and means by
which the situation might be remedied and the bondholders satisfied. In due
course of time these two gentlemen appeared at the Legation both of them
informing me that I had made a profound impression on the Minister of
Finance who had outlined my position to the Permanent Legislative
Commission, informing that body at the same time that he was exceedingly
grateful to me for the courteous, although emphatic manner, in which I had
expressed myself and that he felt convinced that I had the welfare of his
country at heart in the position I had taken.
Mr. Dobbie informed me that if it met with my approval, the Permanent
Legislative Commission had decided to provide, by decree, for the payment
to the bondholders of one coupon either immediately or on the regular
interest day in January and follow that up by the payment of a second
coupon six months later, Mr. Hord having assured them that with the money
now available additional sums could be deposited to secure these two
payments and that he felt confident that he could make the necessary
arrangements to secure by monthly deposits in the banks a sufficient sum of
money to insure regular payments thereafter, providing however, at this
time there would be no demand made for the payment of additional
amounts for sinking fund purposes. Mr. Dobbie communicated by telegram
with Mr. Archer Harman, President of the Guayaquil and Quito Railway
Company, who is now at Huigra, and secured his consent to this
arrangement with also a statement by Mr. Harman. that sinking fund
requirements might be deferred until all back interest payments had been
met. In accordance with the agreement arrived at between myself, Mr.
Archer Harman and Mr. Dobbie, the Permanent Legislative Commission
was notified that we expected the first coupon payment to be made on
January 2nd, the regular interest paying date.
… I am inclined to feel confident that the action I have taken in connection
with this matter was opportune and may, in all probability, result in a
settlement of this old source of irritation and complaint. It is, of course,
understood that the above arrangement, if carried out, will meet with the
entire satisfaction of the bondholders and induce them to withhold further
complaint against the Government of Ecuador.
