Note on U.S. Covert Actions
XLIII
Another new document used during the Carter administration
was the “Memorandum of Notification” (MON). MONs were initially
used to introduce higher-risk, significantly higher-cost, or more geo-
graphically-specific operations under a previously-approved world-
wide or general objective outlined19 in a Perspectives document. Like
Perspectives, MONs had to be coordinated between the CIA and the
Department of State, but they also required broader interagency coor-
dination within the SAWG or SCC. MONs subsequently came to be
used for significant changes to any type of finding, not just worldwide
ones. Entirely new covert actions continued to require new presidential
findings. The Hughes-Ryan amendment stipulated that Congress be
notified of new findings “in a timely fashion,” but did not specify how
much time that meant. During the Carter administration, the CIA typi-
cally notified Congress of new covert initiatives within 48 hours, in-
cluding those outlined in Perspectives or MONs.
In October 1980, the Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
1981—also known as the Intelligence Oversight Act of 1980—scaled
back the Hughes-Ryan amendment’s provisions for congressional
oversight of covert action. While the requirement to notify Congress
about presidential findings remained in place, the new Act limited the
committees of Congress that had to be briefed to the two intelligence
committees, and also explicitly clarified that this requirement to keep
the committees “fully and currently informed” did not constitute a re-
quirement for congressional approval of covert action or other intelli-
gence activities. Moreover, the new Act stipulated that if the President
determined it was “essential to limit prior notice to meet extraordinary
circumstances affecting vital interests of the United States,” the Presi-
dent could limit prior notice to the chairmen and ranking minority
members of the two intelligence committees, the Speaker and minority
leader of the House, and the majority and minority leaders of the
Senate—a group that came to be known as the “Gang of Eight.” If prior
notice of a covert action was withheld, the President was required to in-
form the two intelligence committees “in a timely fashion” and provide
a statement of the reasons for not giving prior notice.20
19 Executive Order 12036, “United States Foreign Intelligence Activities,” January
24, 1978, Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Vol. 14, No. 4 (January 30, 1978), pp.
194–214. Since E.O. 12036 governed foreign intelligence activities, all references in the
E.O. to the “SCC” were effectively references to what was known in practice as the SCC
(Intelligence), or SCC–I.
20 PL 96–450, Sec. 407 (October 14, 1980). See also the description of the Hughes-
Ryan amendment and its replacement by PL 96–450 in: Richard A. Best, Jr., “Covert Ac-
tion: Legislative Background and Possible Policy Questions,” Congressional Research
Service, RL33715, December 27, 2011, pp.1-2; and L. Britt Snider, The Agency and the Hill:
CIA’S Relationship with Congress, 1946-2004, Washington: Center for the Study of Intelli-
gence, Central Intelligence Agency, 2008, pp. 280–81.
