1220 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 363. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, April 26, 1980, 12:04–12:27 p.m. SUBJECT Summary of the President’s Meeting With Ambassador Sol Linowitz PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Special Representative of the President Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (notetaker) The President said that he thought there were going to be negotiations for 40 days, and several had gone by! Ambassador Linowitz said that there have been discussions going on at lower levels. The President said he had been disconcerted by the report of the SCC2 on Ambassador Linowitz’s trip. There seemed to be no clear-cut decisions. Maybe he has a distorted view, but this is his impression. He is concerned that there is an apparent timidity about using Ambassador Linowitz’s 10 day trip to the area. The Ambassador should be strong, clear, forceful, and aggressive. Ambassador Linowitz said that this is what he got out of the meeting. He doesn’t know what is in the minutes. He will not be timid. He will see Begin first thing on arriving in Israel, and take on Begin’s four points.3 Since we did not actually reject them while Begin was here, Begin is saying in Israel, in effect, that we accepted them. Begin is using the notion that the President is known to view them as candidates. The Ambassador will discuss this with Begin. Begin knows that we have an alternative view on points one and two; and the Ambassador had talked with Burg about three and four. He will hit Begin hard on all four points. The first is on making the SGA an administrative council; the second is on the number of people on the SGA equaling the number of functions; the third is on Israel’s having jurisdiction over all its citizens in the West Bank and Gaza; and the fourth is the combining of external and internal security under Israel’s authority. The President said that he preemptorily rejects all four points. Ambassador Linowitz said that he will do it. On the third, he will try out our idea on Status of Forces. 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Box 37, Serial Xs—(4/15/80– 4/30/80). Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Oval Office. 2 Reference is to the April 24 Senior Level Meeting, printed as Document 361. 3 See footnote 5, Document 357.
