378  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
to be extremely complicated, but we are making progress. It was not, 
of course, the solution I recommended and we will pay a price in both 
clarity and logic in the treaty for the strange formulation OSD forced 
us to adopt. We will start changing treaty text to implement the new 
formulation this week. The changes required by unit-­of-­account issues 
provide an opportunity to clean up some inconsistencies in definitions, 
counting rules, etc. and we hope to do this.
SLCMs
6. Things look brighter than ever before on SLCMs. The Soviets are 
clearly moving toward our declaratory approach. The solution looks 
like it will be some sort of declarations, parallel or joint, beefed up a 
bit from our current position. The big issue is to what extent they will 
be “binding”—­a concept which has more subtlety than meets the eye 
at first glance. For example, are the declarations legally or politically 
binding, for how long, with what right to revise? Verification could still 
be a problem, but seems to be receding as an issue.
Linkage
7. SNP’s O-I shows that you are fully engaged on this issue. I believe 
the Soviet bottom line, as I have said for a long time, is a unilateral 
statement threatening withdrawal from START if we violate/withdraw 
from the ABM Treaty. They clearly do not need our “approval” for this 
and will drop that silly part of their current position. I see no reason 
why that should not be a solution we can live with and would only 
point out one pitfall we need to avoid. We reserve the right to with-
draw from the ABM Treaty, at any time we choose, without even any 
provocation from the other side. This is the meaning of the President’s 
statement that we will deploy SDI when it is ready, whether or not the 
Soviets agree. We have this right, of course, but we cannot at the same 
time claim that there is something evil in a Soviet statement that they 
reserve the right to withdraw from the START treaty if they determine 
that U.S. ABM activities jeopardize their supreme interests. We would, 
I assume, reject their unilateral statement when it is formally made, but 
that would not change the real situation.
8. The other objection one hears is that this solution will hold 
START hostage to the Soviet (i.e., the narrow) interpretation of the ABM 
Treaty. This is true and is not at all an ideal situation, but is certainly 
not surprising. Whose interpretation of any treaty would any country 
use to judge compliance?—­its own, of course. The real point is that it is 
dangerous to allow different interpretations of key aspects of a treaty to 
persist. However, those who make the above objection to the emerging 
solution are the same people who oppose any attempt to reconcile the 
two interpretations.
