Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 637 open to question, even challenge.52 Specific problems: (1) Outside the Department, you still are not adequately a part of the decision-making process in the intelligence field (sensitive collection and covert actions) or in the strategic policy (witness Phil Odeen’s study). Anything more that you can do to inform key Department personnel, on a thorough and systematic basis, of meetings that you hold outside of the Department (examples: on the Hill, with Stan Turner) would enable the bureaucracy to serve you better.53 Similarly, more should probably be done to find ways to have senior Department officers accompany you to key meetings.54 If they are with you when decisions are debated, their roles at working levels in the inter-agency process are enhanced. (2) Inside the Department, you may want to consider weekly meetings on new subjects of interest to you, such as energy and North/South relations.55 If you had agendas and brief papers prepared for these meetings, you would thereby force the Department’s attention to these areas in a decisive way. E. The Foreign Service: The new Foreign Service Act is likely to pass, and this measure will result in a more productive and more professional corps.56 There are, however, additional ways for you to strengthen the performance of the career service in the months to come. Appointing the most promising FSO’s, with years of service before them, to key policy positions in the Department is one way to promote excellence and continuity.57 Authorizing “stretch assignments” for out- 52 Vance underlined most of this sentence. 53 Vance placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this and the previous sentence and wrote “you are right.” 54 Vance placed a vertical line in the right-hand margin next to this sentence and wrote “you are probably right.” 55 Vance placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this sentence and wrote “yes.” 56 On June 21, Vance testified before a joint hearing of subcommittees of the House Foreign Affairs and Post Office and Civil Service Committees on the administration’s proposed Foreign Service reform legislation. (Kathy Sawyer, “Vance Unveils Proposals To Alter Foreign Service” The Washington Post, June 22, 1979, p. A–3) On June 28, Fascell introduced the Foreign Service Act of 1979 (H.R. 4674), which was referred to the House Committee on Post Office and Civil Service. On July 9, Church introduced the Senate version of the bill (S. 1450), which was referred to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Neither bill made it out of the respective committees. In March 1980, Fascell re-introduced the legislation in the House (H.R. 6790). The legislation, with amendments, passed the House and Senate in September; the House and Senate both adopted the conference report in late September–early October. The President signed the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (P.L. 96–465) into law on October 17. The act eliminated the Foreign Service Reserve category, established a Foreign Service “bill of rights,” created a new Senior Foreign Service, and outlined new pay guidelines. (Congress and the Nation, vol. V, 1977– 1980, p. 93) 57 Vance underlined this sentence. He placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to it and wrote “yes.”
