1980 925 220. Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1 Washington, December 17, 1980, 1–2:30 p.m. SUBJECT Basic Strategy Issues PARTICIPANT 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Staff Secretary, Handwriting File, Subject File, Box 33, President’s Comments on Memos: Incomplete, 12/21/80–1/13/81. Secret. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room. Carter wrote in the upper right corner of the minutes: “Zbig—This is approximately correct, although many nuances are wrong. We need a clear, definitive & forceful PD on this subject. J.” 2 See the attachment to Document 214. 3 See Documents 217 and 219 The President The Vice President State Secretary Edmund Muskie Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher Defense Secretary Harold Brown Deputy Secretary W. Graham Claytor Joint Chiefs of Staff General David Jones, Chairman Central Intelligence Agency Stansfield Turner, Director Office of Management & Budget James McIntyre, Director White House Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski David Aaron National Security Council BGeneral William E. Odom MINUTES OF MEETING The President opened the meeting by explaining that he has read Brown’s paper2 as well as the comments by Muskie and Turner.3 He set them as a point of departure in order not to use the meeting simply for repeating old points. He said he would like to hear stated what different is being recommended for our strategy. He also noted that there are sharp differences between State and Defense. (S) Dr. Brzezinski proposed that Brown should begin with a brief summary of his paper followed by comments from Muskie and Turner. (C) The Vice President asked what the final purpose of the paper and the meeting would be. The President answered that he wanted to leave a record of what our defense strategy should be. A Presidential Directive could do this. As he understands the paper, it is obvious that we are doing most of the things that it suggests, i.e. encouraging Japanese rearmament; shifting our military resources emphasis from Europe to the Persian Gulf. The discussion today should be aimed at stating changes that we might want. (S)
