National Security Policy 501 169. Prior to the Hungarian revolution and the Polish coup, the Soviet leaders clearly underestimated the strength of forces within the Satellites seeking reform and change. Moscow apparently did not recognize or seriously attempt to cope with Satellite ferment evoked by the denunciation of Stalinism at the XXth Party Congress, until June, when the riots in Poznan (and the Polish regime’s disagreement with Moscow over the causes of the riots) demonstrated the dangers of loosening the reins. But the damage had already been done in the two Satellites where nationalism was strongest and where party fac­ tionalism was most disruptive. Faced in the fall with a new and defi­ ant regime in Poland and a popular revolt in Hungary, the USSR was forced into unwelcome decisions, adopting a policy of accommodation in the former and of repression in the latter. 170. The reason for the differing Soviet treatment of Poland and Hungary lay in the USSR’s determination to preserve Communist regimes in Eastern Europe and to keep the states of that area in the Soviet Bloc. When Hungary suddenly declared its neutrality and its intention to leave the Warsaw Pact, the Soviet leaders felt compelled to intervene in the only way they could, through military action. In Poland the USSR was reassured by Gomulka’s promises that Poland would remain in the Bloc. Thus, though disliking the Gomulka regime, the USSR concluded that it was more tolerable than the political risks involved in a military attempt to unseat it. 171. In the light of the Hungarian and Polish crises, the USSR now seems determined to go slow in any further evolution of its relation­ ships with the Satellites and, above all, to avoid if possible any repeti­ tion of the Hungarian or Polish experiences. It has shifted its emphasis toward attempts to combat the influence of those forces—­principally nationalism, anti-Sovietism, and economic distress—­which have been responsible for most of the Satellite ferment. Major reliance will still be placed on Satellite parties that will subject themselves—­voluntarily, if possible—­to Soviet ideology, Soviet directives concerning foreign and defense policies and Soviet leadership in general. In exchange for their fealty, the orthodox Satellite leaders can anticipate some Soviet eco­ nomic aid, perhaps a measure of internal autonomy, occasional grants of recognition and prestige, and support for their own power positions and party policies. 172. Although the security of the Satellite system is thus upper­ most in their minds—­with measures to insure this security given first priority—­the Soviet leaders do not seem to view a return to Stalinist severity and conformity as either necessary or desirable; they may even regard it as infeasible. There is unlikely to be any Soviet attempt to resume the previous degree of economic exploitation of the area.
