206 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV The needs of the public for privacy and protection have been recognized and publicized. This has created a market for security devices to protect: —Banking (Electronic Fund Transfer) —Personnel Data —Medical History —Data Communications —Voice Communications This field is called public cryptography. The Government, to protect National Security matters, has developed and employed devices that protect a similar range of information. The methods employed for protection are highly classified because they reveal our capability to retrieve intelligence from foreign communications. Once the methods are revealed, the foreign target can thwart our intelligence gathering. Recent academic/industrial work, stimulated by the public market, has produced a well-­publicized concept for an “unbreakable” cipher system which could economically cater for the public need. The National Bureau of Standards, with classified help from the National Security Agency, has produced an “encryption” standard which is proposed for public use. The NBS system, because of classified input, is invulnerable to mathematical attack. The public work, however, is vulnerable to attack using classified methods. The academic/industrial community is unaware of this because of classification and is unwilling to accept the restriction on academic freedom that dealing with classified information represents. The public has been suspicious of the NBS standard because the classified methods employed to test and strengthen it have not been revealed because of impact on signals intelligence and National Security. Further, the academic community is concerned that the Government plans to inhibit their cryptologic research. They have become aware of ITAR (International Traffic in Arms Regulation), a regulation that inhibits export of munitions and cryptography. The U.S. controls export of cryptography to prevent the spread of good protection to those foreign targets that now yield valuable signals intelligence. The academic community wants clarification of the portions of ITAR which seem to inhibit international publication of cryptographic research and appears to infringe their academic freedom. The following issues may need policy determination: —Academic world needs immediate clarification of ITAR and how it affects their academic freedom.
