206  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
The needs of the public for privacy and protection have been rec-
ognized and publicized. This has created a market for security devices 
to protect:
—Banking (Electronic Fund Transfer)
—Personnel Data
—Medical History
—Data Communications
—Voice Communications
This field is called public cryptography.
The Government, to protect National Security matters, has devel-
oped and employed devices that protect a similar range of information. 
The methods employed for protection are highly classified because 
they reveal our capability to retrieve intelligence from foreign commu-
nications. Once the methods are revealed, the foreign target can thwart 
our intelligence gathering.
Recent academic/industrial work, stimulated by the public mar-
ket, has produced a well-­publicized concept for an “unbreakable” 
cipher system which could economically cater for the public need. The 
National Bureau of Standards, with classified help from the National 
Security Agency, has produced an “encryption” standard which is pro-
posed for public use.
The NBS system, because of classified input, is invulnerable to 
mathematical attack. The public work, however, is vulnerable to attack 
using classified methods. The academic/industrial community is 
unaware of this because of classification and is unwilling to accept the 
restriction on academic freedom that dealing with classified informa-
tion represents. The public has been suspicious of the NBS standard 
because the classified methods employed to test and strengthen it 
have not been revealed because of impact on signals intelligence and 
National Security.
Further, the academic community is concerned that the Govern-
ment plans to inhibit their cryptologic research. They have become 
aware of ITAR (International Traffic in Arms Regulation), a regulation 
that inhibits export of munitions and cryptography. The U.S. controls 
export of cryptography to prevent the spread of good protection to 
those foreign targets that now yield valuable signals intelligence. The 
academic community wants clarification of the portions of ITAR which 
seem to inhibit international publication of cryptographic research and 
appears to infringe their academic freedom.
The following issues may need policy determination:
—Academic world needs immediate clarification of ITAR and how 
it affects their academic freedom.
