Human Rights 499 2. For USUN: The draft reflects the valuable contributions which we have had from USUN. Any additional comments or suggestions will be welcome. 3. Since we want to come up with a final version in IO as soon as possible, hope to have all comments by the end of this week from Geneva and USUN. 4. Scope paper—Human Rights Issues—33rd UNGA (1978) The Setting The preliminary list of items to be included in the provisional agenda of the 33rd UN General Assembly contains a standard number of human rights items (14, with a number of sub-items). Many of the items are repetitive, having appeared on the agendas of the past several UNGA sessions. The totality of the items will reflect somewhat more heavily than usual the theme of racial discrimination, with a major focus being the report on the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.3 A special item marking 30 years of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is scheduled for plenary discussion. This item on the 30th anniversary, as well as the items (A) on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and (B) alternative approaches and ways and means within the UN system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights stand out as being of special interest to the United States. Another repeated item with important human rights content will be the report of the Economic and Social Council. Under this item the question of Chile will be considered, as well as almost any other human rights issue which members of the General Assembly may choose to raise. Factors Limiting U.S. Positions With respect to a number of the items, the ability of the United States to take a positive position is circumscribed in advance: A. The two related items on implementing the program for the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination4 and the report on the World Conference—the United States is a nonparticipant in the Decade and the World Conference. B. The item dealing with adverse consequences for the enjoyment of human rights of assistance given to Southern Africa will feature a final report by a special rapporteur—the earlier drafts of this report have been strongly critical of the Western group of nations, which in turn have opposed the Special Rapporteur’s findings and conclusions. 3 See Document 159. 4 See footnote 6, Document 63.
