1178  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
problem for the United States, particularly because of the geographic 
proximity of Cuba to the United States. He said he believed, however, 
that it was not just a problem of Cuba but of the whole Caribbean area. 
He referred particularly to the Dominican Republic (called it Santo 
Domingo) as another part of the Caribbean problem. The Minister 
said he believed that it would be necessary for the United States to 
try and determine the causes of the trouble in the area. He suspected 
that these causes were economic and that a settlement of the economic 
situation might have important repercussion in the political field in 
the Caribbean.
The Secretary then commented on the problems in our relations 
with Cuba which are of immediate concern and are important because 
of the effect they may have on our relations with that country. First, it 
will soon be necessary to determine whether or not to send Ambassador 
Bonsal back to Cuba. If the decision is made to send him back, and he 
is then subjected once again to insults or is hindered in carrying out his 
official mission, he would be withdrawn very very quickly. Obviously 
this problem and its solution could have an important hearing on nor-
mal relations with Cuba. Secondly, there is the question of the Sugar 
Act which expires this year. The Secretary emphasized that this is better 
for Congress to decide and that the Executive Branch, therefore, cannot 
predict the outcome. The Secretary outlined for the Foreign Minister 
the advantages which Cuba obtains through its special position in our 
market including the sale of three million tons of sugar at the United 
States domestic price which is about 2 cents above world price. This 
means about 150 million dollars to Cuba annually.
The Foreign Minister again expressed his understanding of the 
very difficult problem. He said that Uruguay also had been studying 
the problem very carefully as evidenced by the fact that Uruguay had 
not as yet replied to the approach made by the Cuban Ambassadors 
who were here last month and who had invited Cuba to attend the con-
ference on under-­developed countries. Martinez Montero did not state 
categorically that Uruguay’s reply would be negative although he did 
give that implication.
The Foreign Minister pointed out that Cuba is very active in 
espousing its own cause, and that we can expect a continuance of 
Cuban activity in this respect. He mentioned that Cuba had, after con-
siderable length of time, suddenly named diplomatic representatives to 
vacant posts, including Uruguay. He also said that the 150th anniver-
sary of Argentina’s independence might furnish another propaganda 
forum for the Cubans because Argentina is inviting the countries of 
the hemisphere to attend celebrations of this anniversary. The Minister 
concluded by expressing the hope that the United States, through its 
“very able diplomacy” would be able to solve the Caribbean problem.
