Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 ballistic missiles in Europe. We should focus our defense spending on the most important weapons that show our strength. Our substance is sapped by non-weapons spending in the defense budget. We should also consider the proportion of the Soviet budget that goes to meet China, to control Eastern Europe, and to build a continental air defense that we don’t have to depend on. We have done too much equivocating with Congress on defense. Brown: Efficient management is important. But we cannot simply pick three or four important weapons. The total amount of money we spend determines our military capabilities. Soviet expenditures are efficient. We don’t think much of Soviet air defenses, but they have a different doctrine and this expenditure contributes to their sense of security. Brzezinski: Two points: 1) we have to make measured responses to the Soviets on the defense level; 2) politically, we are in one of those periods of friction with the Soviets which in the past have tended to produce new rules governing the relationship. The Soviets may learn from the costs they are now incurring, e.g., developments in the non-aligned movement and the Chinese move into Africa and now Europe. So we need to exercise considerable caution in how we handle the Soviets in this period of friction. We should insulate SALT and other arms control matters as much as we can. But we should be wary of initiatives that invite the Soviets to forget what has happened (the difficulties they have created) and make sure we make them reflect on the political costs of their actions. If we do this it may result, as it has in the past, in greater restraint in their future behavior. We must let them know that Third World turbulence will be with us for a long time and that their relations with us will be affected by how the Soviets behave. I think we are on the right course and we should keep on it. The President: Other than increasing the defense budget, what else should we do to improve relations with the Soviets? Vance: The key still is SALT. I think nothing will improve the relationship unless we have a SALT agreement. Brzezinski: SALT may no longer be so decisive in the overall political and military relationship. Brown: The relationship may get somewhat worse without SALT. But will it get better with SALT? I doubt it. The Vice President: We have pursued human rights for more than a year. Is it a net plus or what? By pouring it on the Soviets on human rights, do we strengthen the people we don’t want to come to power? U.S. opinion thinks we have overdone it with the Soviets on human rights. Brzezinski: What actually have we done? We have been restrained in terms of government acts and have not talked much about human
