Human Rights We think this is the right approach in the IFIs. To accept a tradeoff of economic progress or equity for a government’s locking up its opposition would run counter to American principles, and could undercut public support for the human rights policy. It would mean lowering our sights and abandoning the principle that American resources should promote American values. But to go beyond our present policy, and oppose international developmental assistance to countries which do not meet our standards of political liberty (a parliamentary democracy; a free press) would be going too far toward imposing our standards on the rest of the world. This reflects the point, stated in your Atlanta speech,23 that building democracies is a longer-term proposition than putting a stop to torture. The present approach does, however, involve problems. Some we probably have to resign ourselves to living with; others we can try to do something about. We must expect the resentment of LDC governments over a policy which clashes with their view (and possibly that of many of their citizens as well) of the requirements of their present state of economic and political development. We will encounter charges (some specious, some sincere) of moral arrogance and of insisting, once again, that we know what is best for other people. But we need not resign ourselves to the present lack of appreciation (or even understanding) of what we are doing to promote economic human rights, especially through the basic human needs focus of the AID program. We should try harder to get this message across. We also need to intensify our efforts to find ways of promoting political rights. As noted above, the “punitive” approach would be inappropriate here; and it is far harder to devise positive action than to react to loans on the IFI agendas. Moreover, some of the possible ways of promoting the economic pluralism that can lead to political openings (e.g., economic assistance which would strengthen the middle class or labor unions in a society that now is an oligarchy), could run counter to the basic human needs approach to AID. This might give us legal problems in dealing with some of the countries where such development might do the most good. But promotion of political rights should not take a backseat to personal and economic ones just because it is harder and because progress will be slower in coming. V. Bureaucratic Complexities The human rights policy is not only complicated substantively; it also is complex and difficult bureaucratically. It crucially affects our bilateral relations with foreign governments—the bread and butter of 23 See Document 39.
