1956 647 China, he noted that two-­thirds of total have already been permitted leave. 60. Wang said if we view this matter in light of terms of American offenders in China he might well cite case of Father Rigney who had been sentenced to ten years. However, he only served five years and was granted release. Rigney was released five years in advance expira­ tion of term. Was this not case of expeditious return? Wang would say it was very expeditious indeed. 61. Wang said however, PRC nationals residing in US find selves in very different situation. US Government has thus far not furnished PRC side with name list of all Chinese nationals in US nor has it given assistance Indian Embassy to carry out its functions. Nor has US Government given any account of Chinese imprisoned in US. Yet US Government been coercing Chinese students in US to secure entry permits Taiwan. 62. Wang said recently many exposures been made in cases of ­Chinese students in US who being obstructed from returning China. Chinese could not feel satisfied with this state affairs. All this violation of agreed announcement. They demanded that US faithfully implement provisions agreed announcement and withdraw any requirements that run counter to agreement. 63. In reply I said I not clear what Wang’s allegation was. Agreed announcement says no obstruction will be offered to departure civil­ ians. I had told Wang in detail of steps we had taken implement that. Agreed announcement says anyone who desires return but feels he encountering obstruction will be free communicate Indian Embassy. I had assured Wang that any Chinese in US free do so. I knew of no alle­ gation or evidence that anyone been prevented from communicating with Indian Embassy. 64. I said I not clear therefore as to whether his statement referred to freedom communicate with Indian Embassy. Indian Embassy entirely free investigate any such case. I knew of no case in which Indian Embassy has stated it being obstructed in carrying out this func­ tion. Agreed announcement says that US will accept representations from Indian Embassy when it feels there has been any obstruction con­ trary to agreed announcement. As I had already stated this morning, thus far US had not received any communication from Indian Embassy with respect any such case. If we did, Wang could be sure it would be promptly acted upon. 65. Wang said as far as Chinese in US concerned they had learned that some of them have not been informed of agreed announcement, others find their freedom communicate obstructed. This state affairs must be improved by US. Compulsion of Chinese students in US to
