Afghanistan 145 ZB: For the minutes: the SCC will recommend to the President that he issue a finding involving these three items subject to Pakistani assent. GB: And we do not have to report anything to the Congress until the President signs the Finding. ST: I see one possible glitch. As my COS starts talking to the Pakistanis—he will be encouraging Pakistani support of the Afghan rebellion. GB: There is nothing wrong with a little salesmanship. FC: We have had a couple of rulings out of your department that didn’t recognize that.6 ST: You say he is trying to influence the Pakistanis to take a more forward position. This gets to be a very fine line . . . DN: How would you describe the survey team and its proposals in your report to the Congress? FC: “Survey team” is too formal a description. We might step up our collection in collaboration with the Pakistanis. We are not going to mass a group of people together to do this. GB: I suggest you drop the word “Survey team” and say you are going to assess the situation. ZB: That is highly desirable. We could be dealing with a bunch of frauds. RJayne: I am worried that the Pakistanis may simply tell us to buzz off. If that is the case, we ought to amend the three items so that we can consider some other avenue of support. ZB: Yes, but in that case we would have to reassess what we might try. I am not against covert action, but it has to have some relationship to foreign policy in general or it makes no sense. RJayne: What if the Pakistanis say we do not want to have anything to do with these activities, but we will let you come and do whatever you want—go ahead. ZB: That would be a different problem. FC: What is likely to happen is that they will say we will explore this but we want to talk about the 1959 agreement you have with us. ZB: That has some advantages. Let us sum up what we have decided. Let us say that the SCC has voted to approach the Pakistanis to determine whether they have a positive attitude toward radio broadcasts, U.S. financial assistance of a type yet to be specified as to size and means of conveyance and recipients and on the issue of assessing the nature of the Afghan insurgency . . . and subject to the absence of 6 Not further identified.
