Romania
643
207.
Report Prepared in the Department of State1
Washington, undated
The Romanian Defector Case
The Counsellor of the Department of State, Matt Nimetz, visited
Romania on September 8 as a Special Emissary to discuss the case of
Ion Mihai Pacepa, the Deputy Director of Romanian Intelligence, who
defected to the West in August. The Romanians have been particularly
upset by this defection because of the close personal relationship Pacepa
had with President Ceausescu.2 They say that in light of the current
very positive state of US-Romanian relations and the April 1978 visit
to the United States by Ceausescu, it is impossible for them to under-
stand our accepting this defector and initially demanded that we return
Pacepa to Romania through extradition or otherwise.
Despite the Romanian concern, we do not believe that the defection
will affect our basic relationship with them in the long term. Romania
has a strong need for special ties to us as they pursue a foreign policy
independent of the Soviets, and the Nimetz trip proved highly useful
in demonstrating our continuing interest in maintaining just such a
relationship.
In Bucharest, Nimetz made the following points to Foreign Minister
Stefan Andrei:3
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
I–026, Romania—JEC. Secret; Sensitive. Sent under an undated covering memorandum
from Tarnoff to Brzezinski. Gates forwarded the memorandum to Brzezinski and wrote:
“Zbig—Regarding page 4: Given what the Romanians did to those RFE broadcasters
(the CIA report last week), I would not trust them at all—especially in light of Ceausescu’s
personal sense of betrayal concerning Pacepa and his apparent weakness for revenge.”
Brzezinski forwarded the memorandum and the note to David Aaron adding “DA Stress
to Carlucci the need to protect Pacepa’s safety.” Aaron wrote “Done” on the note.
2 In telegram 5568 from Bucharest, August 9, Aggrey reported that Andrei had
called him to a meeting in the Black Sea resort of Neptun to “convey President Ceausescu’s
urgent request that U.S. return to Romania, General Mihai Pacepa” and that, in Ceauses-
cu’s opinion, “should the CIA keep Pacepa this could not be considered a friendly
gesture and would not be of a nature to permit improvement of our bilateral relations.
Romania will draw the lessons it should from our response.” After conveying Andrei’s
message, Aggrey commented: “Decision not to honor Ceausescu’s request is likely to
seriously impair progress in our bilateral relations, especially in important humanitarian
and consular areas. It may well produce serious general degradation for considerable
period.” (Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Box 11, Bucharest)
3 In telegram 6321 from Bucharest, September 8, Aggrey reported Nimetz’s conver-
sation with Andrei on Pacepa and other intelligence issues. (Ibid.) Andrei responded to
Nimetz presentation the evening of September 8, when he joined Nimetz and Aggrey
at dinner. Aggrey reported in telegram 6322 from Bucharest, September 9, that the
Romanian Government had dropped the extradition demand, but was requesting that
Pacepa not be allowed to remain in the United States. (Ibid.)
