1076
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
321.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, December 4, 1978, 11:30 a.m.
SUBJECT
Population Affairs
PARTICIPANTS
Congressman James Scheuer
Mike Teitelbaum, Staff Director for Select Committee on Population
State Department
T—Undersecretary Benson
OES—Mr. Thomas Pickering
H—Mr. Tom Weston
Due to a delay in his plane, Congressman Scheuer missed his
meeting with the Secretary. Mrs. Benson explained, however, that the
time had been used for discussion by the Secretary, herself and Tom
Pickering about the need for a new approach on population matters.2
The Secretary is looking for ways to emphasize this Administration’s
commitment to population issues. Scheuer noted that on several occa-
sions, when a high-level visit to a major LDC was contemplated, he had
written letters to the Secretary asking that population be raised. As an
indication of the lack of proper emphasis, he had not even received re-
sponses to those letters. More to the point in Scheuer’s mind was the
fact that, following the meetings, he had inquired of the State Depart-
ment whether or not it had been raised. In all instances he found that it
had not been. He therefore welcomed the Secretary’s commitment to
new initiatives on population matters, but, citing the letter of October
24 from Deputy Secretary Christopher,3 expressed skepticism about the
commitment of the Department. The Secretary should exercise firm
leadership in this field.
Mrs. Benson agreed that not enough attention had been paid to the
population problem, but added that the Secretary was committed to ex-
ercising leadership in this field. If the Secretary is to provide leadership
he must have individual issues called to his attention, in this case by
herself and Tom Pickering.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Under Secretaries of State for International Se-
curity Affairs—Files of Lucy W. Benson and Matthew Nimetz: Chronological Files,
Human Rights Country Files, Security Assistance Country and Subject Files, 1977–1980,
Lot 81D321, Box 2, Lucy Wilson Benson Chron, Dec 1978. Unclassified. Drafted by
Weston; cleared by Pickering, Benson, and Reuther. The meeting took place in Benson’s
office in the Department.
2 No record of this meeting has been found.
3 See Document 318.
