856 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI and require a judgment about what we need to sign START and what we can settle for. Given what has already been agreed (on terms largely favorable to the U.S.), none would be likely to have a significant impact on the strategic balance no matter how they are decided. Yielding on too many of them, however, could foster the impression of a United States that was more eager, if not desperate, for START than a weakened Soviet Union. Backfire Everything except the number of Backfires allowed under START is agreed. In Irkutsk, Shevardnadze offered a limit of 600. In Moscow, we countered with a limit of 450. The obvious compromise is 525, but to close this issue Baker should have (and be prepared to use) the flexibility to agree to any number up to the 600 proposed by Shevardnadze. RV elimination Both sides have agreed to destroy missile launchers as part of the START reductions. The issue is what else, if anything, needs to be eliminated to minimize the political embarrassment over a reductions treaty that does not result in any weapons being destroyed. INF ratification suggests that this could be an issue on the Hill. Soviet proposals increase our potential vulnerability. The U.S. has rejected missile elimination on the grounds that expensive assets which have value for other purposes (e.g., as space boosters) should not be destroyed just to make a political point, especially when we could—­and would—­simply build new boosters in their place. The bureaucracy has come up with a scheme for the “elimination” of RV shells (described in the attached paper) in an effort to answer the political mail, but no one is enthusiastic about it. The approach is carefully designed to have a negligible effect on the availability of warheads for U.S. systems. We probably cannot stand anything more far-­reaching. But precisely because it would have so little effect on the forces of the two sides, its political impact also is likely to be negligible. Indeed, it could be worse than useless, coming in for criticism as one more START sham masquerading as arms control and opening the door to the Senate, if not the Soviets, to insist on more far-­reaching destruction measures. We should continue to resist RV “elimination” and take our lumps. Non-Circumvention This is an issue on which there is a strong difference about a principle (our unlimited right to transfer strategic nuclear systems to the British) that is likely to have no practical effect (because the British will not have any strategic modernization beyond Trident for the life of the START treaty). Nevertheless, it could be a treaty-­stopper.
