866
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Callaghan: Is your proposal for a preliminary study different from
your proposal for an international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation pro-
gram? If the final preliminary study is completed in two months, it
could in other words decide on how to establish an international fuel
cycle evaluation.
President Carter: Yes, it would be preliminary to the longer study.
Trudeau: President Carter’s case is based on the unstated major
premise that there is a danger of proliferation which we can and should
do something about. I am not convinced that all here share that
premise. All agree the danger exists, but some may not think we can do
anything about it.
President Carter: The CIA has done a sobering study on the pros-
pects of the technology capabilities of nations who might want to built
nuclear devices.3 Twelve to fifteen countries are capable of building nu-
clear devices. One premise at the end of the study might be that any
country in the future which explodes a device gets no more fuel. Such
countries include Brazil and South Korea. They see nuclear power as a
status symbol. Perhaps we did not deplore the Indian explosion
enough. If it were pre-ordained that if a country exploded a nuclear de-
vice they would get no more fuel maybe they would not try it.
Schmidt: I, as a person and as Head of Government, agree that
there is a danger which you, Prime Minister Trudeau, describe, and
that we should do something about it.
But what are the consequences of this? The effort does not embrace
the number of states and the categories of states which must be brought
in. There are four categories of states: NPT members who are nu-
clear, NPT non-members who are non-nuclear; non-NPT members
who are nuclear; and non-NPT members who are non-nuclear. If ar-
rangements additional to the NPT are agreed upon and do not include
these different groups of states with different interests there could be
difficulties.
If there were an additional arrangement, plus the NPT, it might not
include all the important groups. These countries not invited would
need careful watching.
After Germany came into being in October 1954 we signed the
Brussels Treaty which renounced nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons. We also signed the NPT. It was not easy to ratify in Parlia-
ment. I pushed ratification hard but we had to change governments in
order to do it.
There is no doubt that the peaceful use of nuclear energy by my
country is a vital means of safeguarding our energy supplies as well as
3 Not found.
