Human Rights
343
101.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Congressional Relations (Bennet) to the Deputy Secretary
of State (Christopher)1
Washington, December 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Consolidating Human Rights Policy
Our human rights policy has been in operation for eleven months.
We are administering it with increasing finesse, I believe, but the shoe
is pinching in a number of places. We witnessed the farm lobby’s reac-
tion in the PL 480 case, we are hearing from districts with substantial
arms industries; and within the State Department there appears to be
growing restlessness as people grapple with the complexities of imple-
mentation. The AFSA President’s complaint about the human rights
policy appears to have some currency among Foreign Service Officers,
and I am also told that there are questions within the Department about
the Secretary’s and the President’s fundamental commitment to human
rights policy.
Under these circumstances, the possibility of a real-politik backlash
both on the Hill and in the Department seems very real. To be sure,
Congress is still prepared to vote for extreme human rights amend-
ments. The IMF, which is hardly a viable tool for promoting human
rights, will be the next target. This kind of zealotry in the cause of
human rights could, however, ultimately make the policy ludicrous
and accelerate a backlash.
I believe our objectives for the time being should be to:
—stabilize our present position, avoiding all new legislation;
—pursue vigorously the mandate Congress and the President
have given us;
—smooth out our administrative techniques; and
—garner as much credibility for the policy as we can by broad-
casting its successes.
Here are some concrete steps which might be considered:
1. Frame a legislative strategy to forestall any further human rights
amendments during the next session. I have asked Ann Swift to work
on this. Her effort will include a review of the Security Assistance Bill
for hooks.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840088–0271. Lim-
ited Official Use; Nodis.
