1380  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
first research reactor, built by an American firm, commenced operating 
in August 1957; a second research reactor is presently under construc­
tion under contract with an American firm.
62. The Japanese have stated that the first stationary power reactor 
to be purchased from the U.S. will be an experimental water-­cooled, 
enriched-­uranium-­type of 15–20 electrical mw to be completed in 1961. 
Interest in nuclear marine propulsion has increased rapidly, stem­
ming principally from Japan’s position as a leading maritime nation 
and shipbuilder. There are tentative plans to complete two 40,000-­ton 
tankers (20,000 HP) in 1965 and 1966, but these and other reactor proj­
ects were not sufficiently firm to be accepted by the U.S. as part of the 
7,000 kgs of U–235 originally requested by the Government of Japan for 
inclusion in the proposed comprehensive bilateral.
63. Negotiations between the U.K. and Japan are still under way 
on a bilateral agreement. The Japanese have stated that they intend to 
purchase a 150 mw Calder Hall-­type power reactor from the U.K.
64. Argentina. Based on their success in building an Argonaut-­type 
reactor in their own country and fabricating the fuel elements for it, the 
Argentines have indicated an interest in building this type of reactor for 
export at a price under $100,000.
65. New Fuel Policies. In March, the Commission authorized the 
transfer of U–235 enriched up to 90 per cent for both research and mate­
rials testing reactors providing individual core loadings do not exceed 
8 kg of U–235 and that comprehensive safeguards contained in power 
bilaterals were in effect or agreed to by the cooperating nations. This 
action will make more flexible the cooperation with nations desiring to 
improve their nuclear training and development programs by making 
their reactors more efficient and economical. U.S. manufacturers experi­
enced considerable difficulty in fabricating sound 20 per cent elements.
66. In May, the Commission granted domestic producers of ura­
nium ores and concentrates the right to make private sales of these 
materials in the United States and abroad, all sales being subject to 
Commission licensing. This action enables U.S. industry to compete for 
the growing foreign and domestic market for nuclear fuel. Adequate 
safeguards must be in effect for sales of more than 1,000 kg to any one 
nation. Where such safeguards are not contained in an Agreement for 
Cooperation, a cumulative limit of 100 kg of normal uranium to a single 
foreign consignee and a cumulative limit of 1,000 kg for any one coun­
try will be in effect. This will enable foreign users of small quantities of 
uranium to continue to purchase from the U.S. source material needed 
for basic research, medical, and general industrial application.
67. Agreements for Cooperation. During the reporting period, com­
prehensive agreements with Spain and Italy came into force, supersed­
ing previous research bilaterals. Ecuador and Nicaragua ratified their
