First Responses 93 bazaaris who were the financiers of the revolution would be hard hit by economic sanctions; their support of Khomeini has already waned because of deteriorating economic conditions. [portion marking not declassified] The most immediate pressure on Khomeini could come from the cutoff of US military equipment and supplies. While he has shown little concern over the domestic economic and political difficulties created by his actions, Khomeini might be more disturbed by the loss of military equipment because of the sorry state of the Iranian military and the tense state of Iranian-Iraqi relations. The most realistic members of Iran’s military are already aware that they are no match for the Iraqis. As the US ban results in a further military deterioration, their views are increasingly likely to be transmitted to Qom where they probably will cause great concern. [portion marking not declassified] The timing of US actions will also be critical in determining the resolve of the Iran populace. US actions taken without extreme provocation would probably solidify Persian support behind Khomeini’s anti- American campaign. All economic hardships—including those suffered since the start of the revolution—are now justified by blaming the United States. In the absence of what the Iranians see as new provocations, a chance exists that in time Iranian attention will be refocused on the domestic economic situation. The revolution has not produced the hoped-for improvement in economic conditions. Indeed, it has made things worse for many, including the large number of unemployed urban workers, and disillusionment is spreading. Moreover, many Iranians are becoming increasingly uncomfortable with the fundamentalist Islamic percepts that guide today’s Iran. [portion marking not declassified] The urban workers would be the hardest hit, at least initially, by trade sanctions. These workers, who had hoped to reap substantial economic benefits from the new Islamic government, are instead finding high unemployment, rising inflation, and shortages of goods. Given the exodus of middle and high level managers and skilled technicians, industry is unlikely to be kept running at even its current low rate with the additional burden of trade sanctions. Thus, as unemployment mounted and additional shortages appeared, a trade embargo or blockade could exacerbate the frustrations of many socioeconomic interest groups. These frustrations could be vented against the Khomeini government as well as against the United States. [portion marking not declassified] Foreign Reactions and Positions to Date Foreign official reactions to the US-Iranian confrontation have been predictably low-profile and publicly balanced. Privately, foreign gov-
