488
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
4. As some specific initiatives upon which to begin and in addition
to the items contained in reftels A and B, USUN would suggest the
following:
A) Proposal for a new agenda item for the General Assembly: “im-
proving the coordination and communication among UN agencies in
the struggle to promote and protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms.” (This would include reports on human rights procedures
and activities from ILO, UNESCO, WHO, regional human rights
commissions, etc.) This proposal originated and is being developed by
IO/HR.
B) A proposal for the General Assembly to authorize and fund a re-
sumed session of the HRC in 1979 should the HRC decide that is cannot
adequately complete the “overall analysis” of United Nations human
rights programs in order to report to the General Assembly in 1979 (as
mandated by 32/130).
C) A proposal (see reftel B) to upgrade the HRD to a department,
to expand the staff of the HRD to include at least the following: four
more officers in the field of private communications, a regional human
rights field officer attached to each of the headquarters staffs of the re-
gional economic commissions, and an additional officer in the New
York liaison office.
D) A proposal to the Third Committee that the panel of experts
created in 1969 be updated, and that its mandate be expanded to in-
clude human rights good offices missions as directed by the SYG, and
that funding be allotted for such missions.
E) A strategy of presenting (or stimulating the presentation) to the
sub-commission all the available documentation on the three or four
most serious human rights national problems, in such a list seeking
both ideological and geographical distribution, and seeking to expand
the number of 1503 cases to include the worst human rights problems,
such as Equatorial Guinea and Argentina.
F) Evaluation of the FRG proposal for the creation of an Interna-
tional Court of Human Rights, that could receive complaints from na-
tional tribunals or commissions, and perhaps the sub-commission.
G) Emphasis on the promotion of local, national and regional
commissions.
H) Two meetings of the HRC per year, with a differentiated
agenda, alternating meetings between New York and Geneva.
I) Discussion of methods to streamline the General Assembly to
avoid current duplication in plenary, Third and Fourth Committees on
such topics as the Middle East, South Africa and self-determination.
5. In addition to these specifics, USUN also sees some other general
problem and or opportunity areas:
