because the Japanese claim to a monopoly would be abandoned. Furthermore, he pointed out, the consortium proposal would place on an economically feasible basis the whole wireless situation in China because the necessity for constructing two large wireless stations, where the region provided little room for such competition, would be eliminated. He urged that consideration be given to the Japanese proposal by this Government. I told him that as yet we had no information as to the attitude the Chinese Government took toward the Japanese Government’s proposal. He said that he had doubts whether his Government would hear anything on this proposition from the Chinese Government. He felt that if the Governments of Japan and the United States could reach some agreement in regard to the matter, it would have much influence toward persuading the Chinese Government to accept the proposal of his Government. I am very anxious to have this long-standing controversy settled in such a way as to protect existing legitimate American interests and to be consistent with our policy of maintaining the open door effectively. The force of the economic argument impresses me. I should not wish at this time to see China assume an uneconomic obligation, though the matter is primarily one to be decided by the Chinese Government. The Japanese originated the proposal for a wireless consortium and I recognize that before giving to it our complete consent, it is necessary to wait until the Japanese have obtained from the Chinese approval of the proposal. But such a proposal, if the Chinese approve it, involving as it does that those party to it relinquish any claim to monopolistic rights, would go far to persuade me of its being acceptable to American interests. For you to seek official information as to the Chinese attitude toward the Japanese proposal at Peking would be unwise, I realize. However, I believe you should frankly discuss the situation with Colonel Manton Davis36 and you together should canvass the situation that presents itself with reference particularly to the probabilities of anything ever being done by the Chinese toward a fulfillment of the Federal wireless contract. I also should be glad if you will give me your views as to the advisability of our accepting as the only feasible solution of this question the consortium solution or some arrangement such as the AEFG37 with all contracts pooled and monopolies relinquished.
