1955 359 argument on such procedural questions. Under agenda item two “other practical matters” we had agreed each side could raise any question it thought should be discussed so that there would be free expression of opinions. Therefore, it was not necessary limit subjects for discussion nor to fix order. Both sides could express opinions on all subjects raised and proceed take action first on points on which we able reach accord. Thus we would keep from falling into controversy over procedural matters and not hinder talks from making further progress. 5. He said on September 14 he had put forward two subjects for discussion under agenda item two: “question of embargo” and “preparations for Sino-American negotiations at a higher level.” He had explained what he meant by two subjects. He could not agree that higher level meeting was not a “practical matter.” I had said at last meeting his suggestion appeared to imply a decision even before discussion at this level that it impossible for us settle practical mat­ ters in these talks. His suggestions, on contrary, did not contain this implication at all. His proposal that each side could raise any sub­ ject it wished discuss should have removed any misunderstanding this score. Opinion his side it more practical to negotiate at a higher level such major questions as easing and eliminating tension between China and US in Taiwan area. It was definitely practical matter and fit subject for these talks to arrange such practical and feasible chan­ nels as might be needed to settle issues of outstanding importance between China and US. 6. Wang continued by saying I had maintained a higher level meet­ ing could only be held after these talks. His side had also envisaged that the higher level meeting should come after these talks were completed. That was no reason we should not arrange for convening higher level conference here. If we fail to make arrangement here it would make con­ vening higher level conference more difficult. 7. He said he also wanted to know my opinion on question of embargo. I had stated last meeting I had two subjects: accounting for US personnel and renunciation of use of force. However, I had not given any explanation of these two subjects. He found it hard to under­ stand why subject “so-­called accounting” had been raised. At outset of talks on agenda item one he had given list 87 Americans which repre­ sented all Americans in China. It included all Americans both civilian and military. If by raising subject I had intended imply there were still more Americans in China this was sheer fabrication which his side not able accept. Up to now our side had not submitted to his side list of all Chinese in US. If there was to be any accounting at all it was up to our side give him complete list Chinese.
