888 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 repeatedly throughout (attached).20 We will weave that into messages we send ourselves as well as trying certain language which might encourage the Iranians to open a dialogue. Hostage Trials In addition to the above, we will have to prepare ourselves to deal with what may be the increasing likelihood that there will be trials of some kind. We are on record as telling the Iranians in November privately and in December through the press that we will interrupt their commerce if any of the hostages are tried.21 We have also gained the ruling of the International Court of Justice that the hostages may not be subjected to trial. There is the grave danger that we have worried about continuously that even a trial which started out as a show trial could turn into one which would jeopardize the safety or even the lives of some of the hostages. Against that background, we will continue to do everything we can to discourage trials of any kind, but it is possible that we will at some point have to consider the possibility of accepting a scenario in which some sort of trial/pardon element is introduced. Clearly there would be risks in any such situation, but we will be developing a separate paper in order to help think through ways in which we might manage such a situation so as to build in the maximum number of safeguards.22 The Hostages We have used every opportunity to keep open the possibility of a medical or humanitarian visit to the hostages, but these approaches have been flatly rebuffed since the rescue mission. At the moment of a new diplomatic initiative, it seems to me that we should concentrate our energies and those of the Iranians on release of the hostages rather than settling for a visit to them. Meanwhile, extensive efforts by the Agency and our Iran Working Group continue in an effort to locate the hostages. As you know, Richard Queen’s account tended to confirm both that some of the hostages remain in the Embassy and that a number of them had been moved away from the compound, either elsewhere in Tehran or out- 20 See footnote 15, above. 21 See Document 52. The White House issued a statement on trials on December 18. See footnote 9, Document 104. 22 In the left margin beside the two previous paragraphs, Carter wrote: “We should remind UN, Western friends & others of our earlier statements. Don’t wait until we face the trials. Prevention of them is what we want.”
