Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 261 babwe.6 We have joined other members of the Security Council last week and also the Secretary General in efforts to bring about independence and democratic rule in Namibia.7 We are pleased with the level of cooperation that we have achieved with the leaders of the nations in the area, as well as those people who are struggling for independence. We urge South Africa and other nations to support the proposed solution to the problems in Zimbabwe and to cooperate still more closely in providing for a smooth and prompt transition in Namibia. But it is essential that all outside nations exercise restraint in their actions in Zimbabwe and Namibia so that we can bring about this majority rule and avoid a widening war that could engulf the southern half of the African Continent. Of all the regional conflicts in the world, none holds more menace than the Middle East. War there has already carried the world to the edge of nuclear confrontation. It has already disrupted the world economy and imposed severe hardships on the people in the developed and the developing nations alike. So, true peace—peace embodied in binding treaties—is essential. It will be in the interest of the Israelis and the Arabs. It is in the interest of the American people. It is in the interest of the entire world. The United Nations Security Council has provided the basis for peace in Resolutions 242 and 338,8 but negotiations in good faith by all parties is needed to give substance to peace. Such good faith negotiations must be inspired by a recognition that all nations in the area—Israel and the Arab countries—have a right to exist in peace, with early establishment of economic and cultural exchange and of normal diplomatic relations. Peace must include a process in which the bitter divisions of generations, even centuries, hatreds and suspicions can be overcome. Negotiations cannot be successful if any of the parties harbor the deceitful view that peace is simply an interlude in which to prepare for war. Good faith negotiations will also require acceptance by all sides of the fundamental rights and interests of everyone involved. 6 In late August–early September, Young and British Foreign Secretary Owen traveled to Nigeria, Zambia, South Africa, Tanzania, Kenya, and Zimbabwe to consult with African leaders on the question of establishing majority rule in Zimbabwe. At the conclusion of these meetings, Owen and Young returned to London. On September 1, Owen presented to the British Parliament proposals for establishing majority rule. For the text of both the proposals and a joint news conference by Owen and Young, see Department of State Bulletin, October 3, 1977, pp. 417–427. 7 Reference is to the ongoing negotiations in Pretoria regarding the future of Namibia. Documentation on the negotiations is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVI, Southern Africa. 8 See footnote 4, Document 40.
