944 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement language changes which seem to be purely editorial in nature. Would you care to speak to them, General Twining? Finally, I would like to call the Council’s attention to the unusual proposal for assigning coordinating responsibility. Instead of assign­ ing the whole paper to one agency, Defense would have coordinating responsibility for paragraph 16, OCDM for 17, and FAA for 18. 229. Memorandum of Discussion at the 430th NSC Meeting1 Washington, January 7, 1960 SUBJECT Discussion at the 430th Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, ­January 7, 1960 PRESENT at the 430th Meeting of the National Security Council were the President of the United States, presiding; the Vice President of the United States; Mr. Livingston T. Merchant for the Secretary of State; the Secretary of Defense; and the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization. Also present and participating in the Council actions below were Mr. Fred C. Scribner Jr., for the Secretary of the Treasury; the Director, Bureau of the Budget; the Attorney General (Item 1); the Secretary of Commerce (Item 1); the Administrator, Federal Aviation Agency (Item 1); and the Chairman, Civil Aeronautics Board (Item 1). Also attending the meeting were the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission; the Director, Central Intelligence Agency; the Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Special Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs, for Science and Technology, and for Security Operations Coordination; the White House Staff Secretary; the Deputy Secretary of Defense; Assistant Secretary of State Gerard C. Smith; Assistant Secretary of Defense John N. Irwin, II; Mr. Charles Haskins, NSC; Mr. Howard Sturtz, Central Intelligence Agency (Item 3); the Executive Secretary, NSC; and the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC. There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the main points taken. 1 Source: Agenda item 1: U.S. policy with respect to the development of cargo air lift. Top Secret. Extracts—10 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Drafted on January 13.
