608 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII character of the journal as a Soviet source, is that it provides too sweeping language for any new doctrine . . . a succession of slogans such as “international solidarity” rather than workable criteria. Both of these slogans did appear in the Brezhnev-Marchais statement issued in Moscow January 10 which International Department head Ponomaryev has strongly recommended to Party members for an understanding of Afghanistan.4 Both formulas also are to be found in profusion in the Soviet press immediately following the Czechoslovak invasion, beginning with the August 22, 1968 unsigned statement in Pravda entitled “The Highest International Duty.” 9. Although Soviet statements since the Afghanistan invasion therefore provide little substance for a revised Brezhnev Doctrine, the fact that Afghanistan falls into a common stage of development on the Marxist-Leninist road to Communism, along which many other countries are depicted (by the Soviets) as traveling, provides Western analysts with some basis to construct a revised doctrine. It seems to us what is missing from Soviet statements since Afghanistan which would lend itself to such an effort is a description of the circumstances triggering a Soviet decision to render its “aid” to countries of “socialist orientation”. The Brezhnev Doctrine, as cited in paragraph 4, describes the “trigger” in the case of “socialist countries” as the emergence of “internal and external forces, hostile to socialism, seek(ing) to reverse the development of any socialist country . . .” But what circumstances are germane in triggering Soviet assistance to a country of socialist orientation? 10. The deputy head of the Central Committee’s International Department Ul’yanovskiy, writing in the earlier cited Kommunist of last July, identifies circumstances which we believe could serve as the basis for a doctrine of general applicability to this category of country. Ul’yanovskiy states that a “socialist orientation” can be sustained “so long as vigilance to imperialism’s schemes is maintained, so long as rebuffs are given to insidious and dangerous neocolonialism.” “Any manifestation,” Ul’yanovskiy continues, “of a lack of confidence, but even more, of hostility to the world of socialism, any manifestation of a tendency to conciliation in relation to imperialist policy, to neocolonialists—‘beware of these latter day bearers of gifts’—usually serves as a signal of a retreat from the principles of socialist orientation.” 4 In telegram 1209 from Paris, January 11, the Embassy reported on a statement made by French Communist Party leader Georges Marchais, January 10. Marchais declared the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan was justified in order to defeat the “imperialist threat” Afghanistan faced. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800019–0600)
