1955 339 us. The new draft follows more the approach recommended in your 797 but is somewhat firmer in tone. We have to bear in mind U.S. consid­ erations of course, Congressional as well as Pentagon, & could not go quite as far in the direction of mildness as you suggested. You handled Wang at the 18th meeting on September 28 with con­ summate skill. Satisfaction at the adroitness with which you met every situation is expressed on every side. No one is unmindful of the fact it takes two to keep a discussion going and that Wang has it within his power to bring the talks to a close at any time. But we now assume that this is not likely to happen in the immediate future. Peiping would be in a highly vulnerable position if it broke while our renunciation of force statement is up for consideration. You will not be surprised to learn that the President’s illness has given the continuation of these talks added importance in the eyes of the Secretary. Various prominent newspaper and publishing people are putting redoubled pressure on the Department to give them passports for travel to Communist China. The influence mustered by some of these people makes their demands difficult to resist. No one is thinking in terms of dropping the barriers of course. But it has occurred to the Secretary that it might be useful to intimate publicly that in view of the Agreed Announce­ ment which assures the early departure of all detained Americans we are considering validating the passports of some of the newspaper and publishing fraternity who have applied to travel to mainland China. It would be added that of course no actual travel to mainland China could be approved until all the detained Americans are out, but it is assumed that this is a matter of only a short time in view of the explicit terms of the Agreed Announcement. The thinking here is that this might be added bait to the Chinese Communists to proceed rapidly with the release of all the remaining Americans. We know that they are very anxious to arrange visits by various newspaper people and authors to the PRC. Of course, we could not introduce travel as an agenda item on our side at Geneva, but a little restrained publicity along this line outside of Geneva might strengthen your hand. Do you have any comments? We do not much relish the trade embargo item on the Agenda, but since it would come after the renunciation of force, we do not anticipate that we will have to cross that bridge any time soon. If it ever comes up, we can seize the opportunity to present the rationale behind our trade controls. We are troubled at the conspicuous absence of any release announce­ ments since September 10. The blunt tie-­in by Wang of further releases with Item 2 progress gives us forebodings, as does the conversation of O’Neill with Chang Han-­fu in Peiping a week ago.
