326 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II to each of more than 30 grey area countries.4 The group often finds itself debating whether building a particular road, for example, serves the basic human needs of the population (is the ability to get goods to market a basic human need?), or what fraction of a certain loan to Argentina is going to bring potable water to poor people in Buenos Aires versus what fraction will be spent on a computer system to improve billing. There are also more basic questions—is “basic human needs” the actual services (food, shelter, health care) or is it the money to buy those things? If it is the latter, then any loan which increases employment, or even contributes to long term economic development, would have to be considered to serve the basic human needs of the people. In the absence of clear determinations or rigid criteria for ranking countries, we are inevitably led to comparisons of the countries in the grey area. But how can you usefully compare El Salvador to Romania, or Guinea to Korea? Counting instances of torture or numbers of political prisoners and executions quickly becomes ludicrous. Each country is so different in its culture, its internal and external threats, its economic status, its political traditions, its relations to the US, and its reaction to outside pressure, that the task is impossible to accomplish to anyone’s satisfaction. Finally there are questions we have not even begun to address, such as what compensating value should we place on good observance of economic rights (distribution of wealth particularly) in the same country where political rights are very poor—Korea, USSR, Iran, etc. I have gone into this at such length because this is the aspect of our policy most visible (and sometimes most important) to other nations and most open to criticism. I can’t help feeling that until we solve these problems everything else is just tinkering at the margins. Recommendation: That you forward the memorandum at Tab 1 to the President.5 4 The list of countries for whom assistance has been reviewed at the policy level (there is a working group that reviews every loan) includes: Argentina; Benin; Bolivia; Botswana; Brazil; Cameroon; Central African Empire; Chile; Costa Rica; Ethiopia; Guatemala; Guinea; Haiti; Honduras; Indonesia; Jamaica; Kenya; Korea; Laos; Lesotho; Liberia; Malaysia; Malawi; Mali; Mauritania; Mexico; Nicaragua; Niger; Paraguay; Peru; Philippines; Romania; Rwanda; Senegal; Sudan; Tanzania; Togo; Upper Volta; Uruguay; Zaire. [Footnote in the original.] 5 Aaron added the following handwritten comment: “ZB—good points. Why can’t we decide who we want to support give them 80% of our aid and divide the rest among the grey area or give nothing to the 16 baddies? PD looks all right but might be stronger on aid reorientation for the good guys. DA.”
