1980  789
maintain strategic forces and supporting elements that, in the event of 
nuclear war, could:
—Launch crippling counterforce strikes.
—Survive large-­scale nuclear attack.
—Be employed flexibly against a wide range of targets.
—Substantially limit damage to the USSR.
15. The number of Soviet weapons with good counterforce capabili-
ties is increasing rapidly:
—Conversion of 820 older silos to make them capable of launch-
ing ICBMs with multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles 
(MIRVs) will be completed in 1981.
—The latest MIRVed versions of the SS–18 and SS–19, now being 
deployed, are considerably more accurate than earlier versions of these 
missiles and have substantial hard-­target capabilities.
—Available evidence still points to Soviet programs for five new or 
modified ICBMs. The characteristics of at least some of them will prob-
ably include improved reliability and even better accuracies.
—Flight-­testing of follow-­ons to the SS–17, SS–18, and SS–19, how-
ever, is not likely to occur for a few years. The Soviets have already 
incorporated into their current systems major [less than 1 line not declas-
sified] modifications that we had expected to appear on the follow-­on 
systems, and they are still working on other modifications.
16. The Soviets are steadily improving the survivability of their stra-
tegic forces and supporting elements. Recent developments include:
—The much greater hardening of silos as they are converted to 
accommodate MIRVed ICBMs, and research and testing to make the 
silos even harder.
—The continued deployment of MIRVed, mobile IRBMs and [less 
than 1 line not declassified] development of two solid-­propellant ICBMs, 
at least one of which could be deployed on mobile launchers.
—The further deployment of MIRVed SLBMs and an increase 
in the number of SSBNs on patrol or in transit. Additional increases 
are likely in the 1980s, especially with deployment of the new, large 
Typhoon submarine and missile.
—The continued expansion and protection of capabilities for com-
mand, control, and communications by a combination of hardening, 
redundancy, and mobility.
17. The Soviets are adding to their capabilities for flexible employ-
ment of strategic nuclear forces under a variety of circumstances:
—The deployment of MIRVed missiles and the improvement of 
command and control systems are adding to Soviet targeting flexibility.
—Aerodynamic systems are being retained as part of both inter-
continental and peripheral attack forces. Backfires continue to be 
deployed. A new bomber and cruise missile carrier are under develop-
ment, but we now doubt that they could be operational until after 1985.
