442 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX to discuss this problem and especially how best to approach the White House, the Congress and interested public groups. 142. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, June 3, 1977 SUBJECT Strengthening Relations with Hungary—The Crown of St. Stephen Issue The Crown of St. Stephen, the paramount symbol of Hungary’s nationhood and Western Christian tradition, and other coronation regalia have been in our safekeeping since they were given to us by the Crown Guard at the end of World War II. We have publicly acknowledged that they are property of the Hungarian nation. Our policy that the Crown’s return will be addressed in light of improvement in bilateral relations has encouraged Hungary to move ahead with us in anticipation that we will follow through in good faith. Today only three major issues separate us from the firm working base of “normalized” relations—the Crown, most favored nation status and consolidation of USG-owned property in Budapest. So far the Hungarian leadership has made informal requests for the Crown. If we take no action during the current year, they may make a formal demand— and the United States has no legal grounds to refuse. The Communist regime in Hungary is a far cry from being democratic, but over the past few years, Hungary has developed into the most internally liberal country in the Warsaw Pact: a tolerant attitude toward dissidents, good church-state relations and a modus vivendi with the Vatican, openness to Western information, a relatively liberal travel and emigration policy, and an innovative, decentralized economic system. Party Leader Janos Kadar has so far successfully defended this position against Warsaw Pact hardliners. Domestic Political Aspects Congressional attitude is split on the Crown. Several (e.g., Vanik, Frenzel, Thompson, Bingham and Fenwick) believe the time has come 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 27, Hungary: 1–12/77. Secret. Nodis.
