International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
415
The negotiations in Geneva have been making progress on most
negotiating issues over the past few months, and the outlines of pos-
sible agreements in the various areas of the negotiations have begun to
emerge. Nevertheless, a considerable amount of work remains to be
completed, and the possibility remains that a political impasse may de-
velop on one of the key issues in the negotiations, such as market access
for U.S. agricultural products, the development of satisfactory disci-
plines for agricultural and industrial subsidies, or the achievement of a
substantial cut in tariffs.
The possibility also remains that one of the summit participants
may link agreement on a key issue in the MTN to other topics on the
Summit agenda. While we have no evidence at this point that such
linkages will be established, France in the past has made a major issue
of a link between trade liberalization and reform of the international
monetary system.
II. Using the Summit context for maximizing the MTN package
Inclusion of the MTN on the Summit Agenda makes it possible to
place MTN issues into the broader context of economic and political re-
lations among the major countries. It may be useful to pursue the fol-
lowing themes:
1. The rapid growth of trade has been a major engine of growth
during the past 30 years. We should achieve a credible result in the lib-
eralization of trade in the MTN in order to ensure that expanded trade
will continue to be a dynamic element of our economies over the next
decade or two. On the other hand, even a tariff cut in the range of 35–40
percent would be unlikely to create difficulties of economic adjustment,
since the existing levels of most tariffs are already low, key cuts are ex-
pected to be spread out over 8 years, and the possibility will remain for
postponing a portion of the cut should economic circumstances
worsen.
2. The tendency of governments to intervene in our economies to
achieve a variety of social and economic goals has grown considerably
in recent years. While this trend has made possible an improved social
environment, it has also introduced some rigidities and inefficiencies in
our economies that retard growth. The guidelines we are seeking to de-
velop in areas such as subsidies, standards, and agriculture should help
us in achieving a balance in our economies between the achievement of
social goals and avoidance of the more excessive forms of intervention
in our economies that can prove costly for economic growth.
Government policy measures involving subsidies, standards and
the stabilization of agricultural income can also have a major impact on
the trade interests of other countries, and thus tend to create political
friction among countries. A stable economic and political relationship
