of the withdrawal of Peru’s representative by calling attention to the fact that it came almost immediately after his detailed proposals for a plebiscite. Diplomatic relations were not resumed. In September, 1912, Senor Billinghurst became President of Peru. Evidently as a result of informal negotiations, there occurred on November 10, 1912, an exchange of telegrams between the Foreign Ministers of the two countries, called the Huneeus-Valera telegrams.33 These were identic and provided: (1) for the postponement of the plebiscite until the year 1933; (2) for the supervision of the plebiscite by a committee of five delegates,—two Chileans, two Peruvians, with the President of the Supreme Court of Justice of Chile presiding; (3) for the right to vote of persons born in Tacna and Arica, and Chileans and Peruvians that may have resided for three years in the territory and who are able to read and write. There are other conditions less important. President Billinghurst explained his reasons for this agreement in a message delivered at a secret session of the Peruvian Congress. When the Huneeus-Valera exchanges were made public there was a violent outburst of public opinion in Peru against President Billinghurst and the feeling thus engendered apparently contributed to the downfall of his Government in 1914. In May of that year the new government of Peru announced its succession to office and was promptly recognized by Chile. In December, 1914, Peru requested of Chile the expulsion of the former President Billinghurst from Tacna and Arica and this request was granted. In 1920, the President of Chile authorized Senor Puga Borne to negotiate informally with the President of Peru with the instruction to keep so far as possible within the limits of prior negotiations and to submit new propositions to the home government as he might think fit. Apparently nothing came of this. On December 12, 1921, the Chilean Foreign Minister made another attempt to reopen negotiations as to the plebiscitary protocol by proposing directly to the Peruvian Foreign Minister that the Huneus-Valera plan be taken as a basis for perfecting the protocol.34 Peru responded by inviting Chile to “submit jointly the entire question of the South Pacific that divides us to an arbitration, agreed to through the initiative of the Government of the United States of America.”35 The ensuing negotiations led up to the present arbitration. CONCLUSIONS AS TO THE NEGOTIATIONS The conduct of the negotiations must be viewed in the light of the rights and obligations of the Parties, under the Treaty, as already set forth. It is not necessary to discuss the merits of the positions taken from time to time on either side. The question now presented is not whether the particular views, proposals, arguments and objections of either Party during the course of the negotiations should be approved, but as to the good faith with which these views, proposals, arguments and objections were advanced. The failure to agree upon a special protocol fixing the conditions of the
