1260 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement was the time for the Venezuelan Foreign Office to press, as it should have done before this, for the extradition of Pérez Jiménez). There was no further discussion of this. The President then turned to Mr. Mann to ask him what “good news” he brought from Washington. Mr. Mann described his detailed conversation that morning with the Minister of Mines3 and said that he felt there had been a thorough discussion of the petroleum situation. Mr. Mann emphasized to President Betancourt his belief that it is extremely important for the President and the Minister to have immediate conversations with representatives of the petroleum industry in order to dissipate what Mr. Mann fears is a growing misunderstanding and fear on the part of the industry of the Government‘s plans. President Betancourt seemed obviously taken aback at the suggestion of industry fears and agreed that such conversations would be undertaken forth-­with. Mr. Mann suggested perhaps such conversations might begin with a person like Mr. Proudfit of Creole, in whom he believed the President and the Minister had full confidence, and who Mr. Mann considers to be a fair representative of the industry as a whole. In agreement with the President’s expressed position on this, Pérez Alfonso said that he would begin tomorrow conversations with Mr. Proudfit which would later be expanded to include the entire industry. With reference to U.S. restrictions on petroleum imports, the President suggested that the petroleum companies seem to have followed the position of the Communists more than they have that of the United States or Venezuelan Governments. He said that the U.S. Government feels that restrictions are necessary and that the Venezuelan Government has not protested this decision. On the other hand the Communists have protested as have also the petroleum companies. At this point the President made reference to nationalistic pressures in Venezuela and suggested that the Government would be organizing soon a national governmental petroleum company. Mr. Mann expressed the hope that this operation would not be a cause of further misunderstanding on the part of the industry in Venezuela and that the company would not engage in competitive activities. The President said that was not all his idea and explained that at a time like this when nationalistic pressures have to be answered, it is better for the government to take a small step to deflect the pressure rather than to hesitate and be forced into a much bigger step later on. He said that one of the main purposes of the company would be to provide opportunity for the training of Venezuelan technicians, who Pérez Alfonso said are in extremely short supply. The Minister said for example that 3 A memorandum of their conversations dated March 31, 1959, is contained in ARA Files, Lot 61 D 319, “Oil Imports Program.”
