Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
181
groups and institutions. To the extent our policy goals are being pur-
sued, they are being pursued unilaterally by groups and people and
without coordination. The very fact that your administration is active
simultaneously in many areas of foreign policy dictates a comprehen-
sive, long-range political strategy for winning the support of the Amer-
ican people and the Congress. To accomplish this goal, I would recom-
mend a three step process:
I. CONSULTATION. Early consultation with Congress and inter-
ested/affected constituent groups is critical to the political success of
these policies. In almost every instance, Senate ratification of a treaty
and/or military and economic support which requires the support of
Congress will be required to accomplish these foreign policy objectives.
Consequently, it is important that we invest a small amount of time on
a continuing basis in consultation with members of Congress and
groups/organizations.4
II. PUBLIC EDUCATION. Public understanding of most of these
issues is very limited. To the extent these issues are understood and/or
perceived by the general public, they are viewed in very simplistic
terms. This is a mixed blessing. On one hand, it becomes necessary to
explain complex issues to the American people. On the other hand, be-
cause these issues are not well understood, a tremendous opportunity
exists to educate the public to a certain point of view. In the final
analysis, I suspect that we could demonstrate a direct correlation be-
tween the trust the American people have for their President and the
degree to which they are willing to trust that President’s judgement on
complex issues of foreign policy.
In terms of public education, we have a tremendous number of re-
sources. They include:
—Fireside chats
—Town meetings
—Speaking opportunities for President, Vice-President, First Fam-
ily, Cabinet, etc.
—Public service media opportunities
—Groups outside government who support particular policies
—Democratic National Committee
—Mailing lists
—Etc.
III. POLITICAL PLANNING AND COORDINATION. Once foreign
policy goals are established, it is critical that political strategies in sup-
port of those goals be developed and implemented. And it is important
that the resources available to the Administration—both inside and
4 Following this paragraph, the President wrote: “Meeting this week.” The meeting
is not further identified.
