Human Rights pressing for greater consideration of human rights. Therefore one policy option for the Administration would be to take an active supporting role of European efforts in the World Bank, and an initiating role in exploring with Latin American delegations how human rights considerations can become an integral factor in the Banks’ decisions. 7. Executive Branch Organization and Personnel. The greatest need in this regard is for the appointment of individuals who will act as strong advocates for human rights. In particular, the office of the Coordinator for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs in the State Department should be given department-wide influence and direct access to the Secretary, and be filled with an individual of recognized commitment to these concerns.11 A list of possible nominees is attached.12 Interest in human rights should be a consideration in the appointment of ambassadors to countries which take the lead on international human rights actions (UK, Sweden, Tanzania, Netherlands) and to countries which have serious human rights problems (South Korea, Philippines, Haiti, Chile, Argentina, South Africa, Iran, etc.). 8. Influencing Communist Nations. While one can make a convincing case of our right as a nation to decide how we are going to spend our money in assisting other nations, the situation becomes much more complicated when we consider those nations—particularly in the Communist bloc—which we do not support, and over whom we exercise very limited influence. The more the Administration pushes its concern over violations of human rights by rightist regimes, the stronger will be the reaction in Congress (and outside it) over what will be pictured as an emerging double standard, and Administration “countenancing” of massive violations of human rights by Communist nations. In this regard, the Administration must make two important decisions: 11 Wilson, former Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, served as the Department’s Coordinator for Humanitarian Affairs from April 1975. (Memorandum drafted in D/HA, March 1976; Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1976–1977 Human Rights Subject Files and Country
