Human Rights
13
pressing for greater consideration of human rights. Therefore one
policy option for the Administration would be to take an active sup-
porting role of European efforts in the World Bank, and an initiating
role in exploring with Latin American delegations how human rights
considerations can become an integral factor in the Banks’ decisions.
7. Executive Branch Organization and Personnel.
The greatest need in this regard is for the appointment of indi-
viduals who will act as strong advocates for human rights. In partic-
ular, the office of the Coordinator for Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs in the State Department should be given department-wide in-
fluence and direct access to the Secretary, and be filled with an indi-
vidual of recognized commitment to these concerns.11 A list of possible
nominees is attached.12 Interest in human rights should be a consider-
ation in the appointment of ambassadors to countries which take the
lead on international human rights actions (UK, Sweden, Tanzania,
Netherlands) and to countries which have serious human rights
problems (South Korea, Philippines, Haiti, Chile, Argentina, South Af-
rica, Iran, etc.).
8. Influencing Communist Nations.
While one can make a convincing case of our right as a nation to
decide how we are going to spend our money in assisting other nations,
the situation becomes much more complicated when we consider those
nations—particularly in the Communist bloc—which we do not sup-
port, and over whom we exercise very limited influence. The more the
Administration pushes its concern over violations of human rights by
rightist regimes, the stronger will be the reaction in Congress (and out-
side it) over what will be pictured as an emerging double standard, and
Administration “countenancing” of massive violations of human rights
by Communist nations. In this regard, the Administration must make
two important decisions:
11 Wilson, former Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Af-
fairs, served as the Department’s Coordinator for Humanitarian Affairs from April 1975.
(Memorandum drafted in D/HA, March 1976; Department of State, Bureau of Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1976–1977 Human Rights Subject Files and Country
Files: Lot 80D177, AMGT—Establishment of Office (HA) ) In November 1976, pursuant
to P.L. 94–329 (see footnote 5, Document 1), Wilson’s title became Coordinator for
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs; he served in this position until his retirement
on April 28, 1977. In a January 26, 1977, memorandum to Vance, Christopher recom-
mended that Patricia Murphy Derian serve as Coordinator upon Wilson’s retirement: “I
believe she would serve with great imagination and distinction, with high appreciation
for the importance of human rights in foreign policy decisions, but also with an under-
standing that other considerations may sometimes prevail.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113,
Box 16, Human Rights—Early Efforts)
12 Attached but not printed. Tuchman listed the following names: Don Ronard,
John Salzberg, Don McHenry, Leonard Meeker, and Goler Butcher.
