Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I The realization that we are not omnipotent should not make us fear we have lost our power or the will to use it. If we appreciate the extraordinary strengths we have, if we understand the nature of the changes taking place in the world, and if we act effectively to use our different kinds of power to shape different kinds of change, we have every reason to be confident about our future. America’s Strengths We must begin with a clear understanding of our own strengths as a nation. America’s military strength today is formidable. I know of no responsible military official who would exchange our strategic position for that of any other nation. • We have friendly neighbors on our borders. • We have strong and reliable security relationships. Together, these allies more than double our overall military strength. • We have easy access to the sea, which enables us to have diversified strategic forces and the ready capacity to project our power. Our economy, and those of our allies, are more than three times as productive as those of the Soviets and their allies. The industrial democracies continue to lead the way in technological innovation and in harnessing that technology to serve mankind. And the way of life of our people and what we stand for as a nation continue to have magnetic appeal around the world. Because we and our allies are the engines of creative change in almost every field, because of the vitality of our political institutions and the strength of our military forces, we have a capacity for leadership— and an ability to thrive in a world of change—that is unsurpassed. The issue is not whether we are strong. We are. The challenge is to use these unquestioned strengths appropriately and effectively to advance our interests in a world undergoing different kinds of change. What are these changes, and how can we use our strength effectively? Stable Strategic Equivalence The first element of change is the evolution from an earlier period of American strategic supremacy to an era of stable strategic equivalence. We should harbor no illusion that we could return to the earlier era. Neither side will permit the other to hold an exploitable strategic advantage. Each side has the financial and technical resources to keep pace with the other. With the stakes so high, we know that both of us will do whatever is necessary to keep from falling behind. That is why essential equivalence has become the only realistic strategy in today’s nuclear world.
