348
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
117.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Economic and Business Affairs (Katz) to Secretary of
State Vance1
Washington, March 15, 1978
Effects on our Foreign Relations of Administration Inaction on
Energy and Inflation
The market is losing confidence in the dollar. It is persuaded that
the US is drifting, unable to take the critical measures to reduce its large
oil bill or to keep price increases in its economy under control. Capital
is moving out of the US, private capital inflows have fallen off, and
OPEC is shifting out of dollar-denominated assets into non-dollar de-
posits in the Euromarket. In the absence of corrective action, these
movements out of the dollar will intensify. Intervention alone will not
check these movements, as the market reaction to the US-German state-
ment on Monday demonstrated.2 Indeed, unless we take early decisive
action on energy and inflation—which are essential to restore market
confidence in our ability to manage our affairs—we may be confronted
at any time with a flight from the dollar that could swell to panic
proportions.
Inaction by the Administration to check a steep decline in the
dollar would have disastrous consequences for our foreign policy:
—The pressure on OPEC to raise oil prices directly or by denomi-
nating oil prices in SDR’s would become irresistible. The US—not
OPEC—would be blamed by all other importing countries for this
result.
—The MTN would be halted in its tracks. Our trading partners,
who are already complaining that the depreciation of the dollar is ex-
cessive, indeed deliberate, and gives the US an unfair competitive ad-
vantage, would be quite unwilling to reduce tariffs or cooperate on
non-tariff barriers.
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of Cyrus
Vance, Secretary of State, 1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 7, International Economic Policy—
1977–78–79. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Ruth Gold, Katz’s Special Assistant. The initials
“CV” are stamped at the bottom of the page.
2 March 13; see footnote 4, Document 114. A report in the March 14 edition of The
New York Times on the U.S.–FRG dollar stabilization program noted that the program’s
announcement had “failed to impress foreign exchange markets. The American currency,
which had shown strength early in the day in Europe on high hopes that significant steps
would be announced, tumbled after the measures were made public.” (Clyde H. Farns-
worth, “Plan is Announced by U.S. and Germany to Stabilize Dollar,” The New York
Times, March 14, 1978, p. 1)
