National Security Policy  51
CONTINUITY OF ESSENTIAL WARTIME FUNCTIONS OF THE 
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
20. Plans and relocation facilities needed to ensure the continuity 
of essential wartime functions of the Federal Government should be 
completed and maintained in a state of operational readiness at the ear­
liest time practicable.
a. Plans should provide a ready and certain system of attack warn­
ing, reaction and decision-­making, with adequate communications and 
provision for conducting emergency operations.
b. Emergency Federal relocation facilities should be equipped 
as required to permit immediate activation upon arrival of relocated 
personnel, and should be continuously staffed as determined by the 
President.
c. The few most critical emergency Federal relocation facilities 
should be protected against blast, thermal and radiation effects at the 
earliest time practicable. Other Federal relocation facilities in “the 
Federal arc”5 should be protected against fallout.
PROTECTION AND DISPERSAL OF FEDERAL FACILITIES
21. a. Except as otherwise determined by proper authority, new 
Federal facilities and major expansion of existing Federal facilities, 
important to national security, should not be located in target areas. 
The location of new or expanded military installations, excluding 
the Pentagon and other similar administrative headquarters, shall be 
within the sole discretion of the Secretary of Defense.
b. Fallout shelter should be incorporated in the construction of 
new Federal civilian buildings, of suitable size, designed after this date, 
along the lines stated in NSC 5807/1.
CONTINUITY OF INDUSTRY
22. a. (1) Dispersal of private industrial facilities, and the inclusion 
of fallout shelter therein, as appropriate, should be encouraged.
(2) Guidance and leadership should be provided to industries 
essential to initial recovery from nuclear attack in the development of 
plans and programs designed to insure the continuity of essential pro­
duction and services.
b. Action should be taken to determine the critical industries (such 
as drug, liquid fuel) in which construction of hardened, dispersed 
plants is essential to insure national survival.
5 Relocation sites are located in dispersed sectors within a westerly arc approxi­
mately 30–300 miles radial distance from Washington, D.C., zero milestone. [Footnote is 
in the original.]
