Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 361 Ritualistically the press denounced the trips as without purpose or focus. Three decades of habitual summitry had given us, what one might call an acute case of “Eurovision.” This view accepts as a matter of course our President’s dealing with heads of state in Paris, Moscow, or London, or for that matter any capital in Europe. Yet it becomes bewildered, bemused, or cynical when he is welcomed in Rio, Lagos, or New Delhi. Minds close and eyes glaze when it is explained that India is the 10th industrial power in the world as well as the globe’s largest democracy, that we conduct more trade with Nigeria than South Africa, or that Brazil is on the way to a global as well as regional role. This “Eurovision” perceives the non-Western world only as a ragtag collection of nonviable ministates, a concern of the Peace Corps, missionaries, and readers of the National Geographic. Yet the facts are these. • U.S. exports to the less developed countries, exclusive of the members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, constituted about one-fourth of the total U.S. exports in the past 2 years, approximately equaling what we export to East and West Europe, to the Soviet Union, and to China. • Close to one-half of our imports—about $60 billion—originate in the Third World, including more than 9 out of 13 critical minerals. • Since the early 1970’s, when our dependence on foreign oil began to challenge our complacent perceptions, we have in fact increased our oil imports by eight times and are close to importing one-half of our total oil consumption. • Countries like India, Brazil, Nigeria, Iran, and Saudi Arabia play a role on the world stage that dwarfs that of some of the countries we traditionally consider “critical.” These realities underline an essential fact—the health and progress of American society are vitally linked to the economic and political stability of the Southern Hemisphere. Yet whether we have the maturity to understand that point remains very much in doubt at present. International Institutions International institutions are another example of how America’s perceptions are not always synchronized with changing realities. America was principally responsible for the creation of the current family of international institutions. Their creation seemed a few years ago one of the most imaginative ideas ever put into practice. Yet increasingly, we see it suggested that these institutions are a nice place to visit, but one wouldn’t want to conduct his diplomacy there. Since the mid-1960’s, however, international institutions have changed enormously without many understanding the transformation. Look at the budgets. In the beginning, expenditures of the U.N. system
