Eastern Europe Region theless, we believe the problem of Eastern European indebtedness may have increasingly important implications, both for our Eastern European policy, and, more generally, for East-West relations. Accordingly, we recommend that the NSC task State, CIA, Treasury and other pertinent agencies to do a further follow-up study on the Eastern European economic situation in general and the indebtedness problem in particular. The study should take account of possible Soviet policy options; appropriate consultations with our allies in the OECD and other Western institutions; and our policy in the IMF. It should set forth appropriate policy recommendations. Implications for US-Soviet relations Conduct of our policy toward Eastern European countries bears on our Soviet relations in (a) its effects on the US-Soviet bilateral relationship and (b) its effects on the Soviet position in Eastern Europe. The Soviets are of two minds about US relations with Eastern European countries. They are apprehensive about the expansion of the US presence in Eastern Europe for two reasons: because it could tend to dilute somewhat Soviet influence and control, which are priority Soviet foreign policy objectives; and because it could tend to deflect the political and economic development of the Eastern European countries in a non-Soviet direction with long-range implications for the Soviet position and security interests in the region. While these prospects are hardly imminent, the Soviets still fear that the US (and Western) influence could contribute to destabilization of some or all of the region, facing the Kremlin with costly policy choices in the European area and in the world at large. On the other hand, Moscow also recognizes that the potential for Eastern European instability stems primarily from resentment from overly tight Soviet control and from the powerful desires throughout Eastern Europe for an improved economic situation and a higher standard of living which the Soviet Union itself cannot provide. The Soviets are also mindful of the political costs of attempting to deny to Eastern Europe the fruits of detente that the Soviet Union itself seeks. Finally, Moscow reluctantly recognizes that Eastern Europe would be less of an economic burden or more of an economic asset if its economic development were spurred by the Western connection. Consequently, the Soviet Union accepts the development of limited Western economic ties in Eastern Europe as a mixed blessing or mitigated curse, relying on close monitoring of that development and the limitations imposed by Eastern Europe’s economic needs and potential to prevent the destabilizing influence it fears. With regard to the effects of US policy in Eastern Europe, the Soviets would probably not be unduly concerned whether we pursued either Option III or Option IV, calculating that the impact in Eastern
