644
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
dent, we will claim our sovereignty and others may claim their sover-
eignty. If that happens, then the autonomy will go on. We will never
agree to refer to the self-governing authority without mentioning the
administrative council.
Let me explain why we do not want a target date. We must have a
guarantee that there will not be a Palestinian state first. This would be a
mortal danger to us. Arafat has taken over the Israeli Embassy in
Tehran. There have been meetings in Nablus, the ancient town of She-
chem. Thousands of people showed up and there was a proclama-
tion that the Arabs should liberate Jerusalem and Jaffa. In such cir-
cumstances, we cannot accept the idea of a target date. As that date
approaches, the PLO will use its Kalashnikovs to intimidate the
population.
After Mr. Saunders met with the Palestinians in Judea and Sa-
maria,18 we had to guard them to protect their lives. We cannot set a
target date, because then there would be no candidates and no electors.
It should be possible to introduce autonomy within six months, but it
might take as long as two years. This is a question of life or death to Is-
rael. We shall leave all of Sinai. But in seven hours the Egyptian army
can be on our southern border. In the east, if the PLO takes over, they
will be on the mountains with their Soviet weapons, and we will be in
the valley with only eight miles between us. All of our children will be
in the range of their guns, and all our airfields will be closed, because of
their fire. This would be a mortal danger to Israel. It would be peril to
the free world if there were a Palestinian state that became a Soviet base
in this area. The PLO sent arms to Khomeini. There would be Soviet
generals in Bethlehem. Does this free world need a Soviet base in Judea
and Samaria? With all due respect, this would not be wise, it would be
a grave danger. Israel must have iron-clad guarantees that there will be
no Palestinian state. You have said that there should not be a Pales-
tinian state in your public remarks. But some people give advice that
autonomy is just a first step, so any target date is impossible. I under-
stood from our talk last night that you might consider the phrase “as
expeditiously as possible” as a substitute.
The President: I was also talking about that as the formulation on
the timing of the exchange of ambassadors.
Prime Minister Begin: I’ll come to that. We have prepared a counter-
draft of the letter. We propose using this phrase “as expeditiously as
possible”. This is as far as we can go.
Egypt has suggested that autonomy might first be established in
Gaza. They also talk of Egypt assuming the Jordanian role. The transi-
18 See Document 100.
