International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues tion of this issue in the development of overall policy. This is in striking contrast to the manner in which other countries have successfully integrated concern for human needs into their foreign policy strategy. Only in the limited role of foreign aid to developing nations has concern for human needs any real role in the conduct of our own foreign policy. Our recommendations as a result may involve organizational changes within certain departments, particularly the Department of State. (3) We should examine various alternatives that would allow for the centralized coordination of international health policy. This might take the form of a cabinet level coordinating committee, the development of a lead agency responsibility, or a focus in the White House. Coordination of sub-functions such as research, manpower, and the relationship with the private sector needs to be considered. (4) To establish basic health goals for the next four, ten and perhaps twenty-five years with a clear cut plan as to how the United States would contribute to the achievement of those goals. It is clear that the development of such goals would have to be closely correlated with those established already by the World Health Organization. This is a function which we would not necessarily perform at this stage, but should be clearly an anticipated responsibility which the ongoing mechanism we set up would carry out in coordination with the Institute of Medicine and other groups. (5) Having established the basic blueprint for America’s role in international health we should examine the specific ways in which each agency would play a role in the overall game plan. As clearly as possible we should define the role and mandate of each Department and Agency. At the same time we would also examine the manner in which the private sector and multilateral organizations would interface with the efforts of the federal government towards the achievement of those common goals. In the long run I anticipate that we would end up with a global health plan with clear objectives and specific plans for reaching those objectives. As a derivative of that global plan we would have regional plans and specific goals and timetables for Africa, Latin America, Asia and other regions of the world, and at a third level specific goals for individual countries. These countries goals obviously would be the result of a carefully coordinated consensus between the global and regional goals which we had established and the goals which health planners in each nation had themselves established. I anticipate that in the long run the inter-agency coordinating mechanism that we recommend would then on a regular basis review our global strategy, our strategy for each region and our strategy in each individual country to insure that they were consistent with an overall plan. At those meetings the participants should have the capacity to present the entire federal effort going into a
