856
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Recommendation
That you speak to Harold Brown, Cy Vance (beginning at a VBB
lunch), plus Stan Turner, about setting up an interagency working
group to review plans for intelligence exchanges with Yugoslavia.6
6 Brzezinski did not check either box. At the November 3 VBB lunch, Vance, Brown,
and Brzezinski agreed that Defense should coordinate with Newsom on responding to
the Yugoslavs. (Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance—
1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 1, Vance/Brown/Brzezinski Luncheons—4–12/78) In a
November 7 memorandum to Aaron, Putnam provided a scenario on how the interde-
partmental coordination among Aaron, Resor, and Newsom would work for setting up
a policy recommendation on the subject. Putnam also recommended that the DCI be
informed either by Aaron or Brzezinski as “the DCI is apparently acting on the assumption
that he is a player on this issue.” Aaron approved the scenario, and suggested that
Putnam get Carlucci involved. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Office, Outside the System File, Box 51, Chron: 11/7–30/78)
260.
Memorandum From the Deputy to the Director of Central
Intelligence for Collection Tasking ([name not declassified])
to Director of Central Intelligence Turner1
Washington, November 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Yugoslav Intelligence Exchange
1. Action Requested: For your review and consideration of the recom-
mendation provided in Paragraph 7 below.
2. Background:
a. In a 26 September meeting with Secretary Brown, Yugoslav
Defense Minister Ljubicic raised the possibility of a US-Yugoslav intelli-
gence exchange on the Soviet Union. The Secretary agreed in principle,
having been alerted in advance that the matter might be surfaced.
Secretary Brown subsequently accepted your offer to undertake an
assessment of the pros and cons of such an exchange. This memoran-
dum, therefore, provides some background, addresses the relevant
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Subject Files (1978), Job 80M01542R, Executive Registry Box 14, Folder 14, Y–2: Yugo-
slavia. Secret. Sent via the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence.
