1956 1291 have asked for all along. It has seemed to us here we might also want to work in a blanket demand for information on any other US person­ nel, whether or not involved in the Korean conflict, of whose fate the Communists might have knowledge. In this connection, it might be useful for us to have whatever unclassified information is available on any US planes that have gone down near China since 1950—­plane num­ bers, crew names, etc. Probably Wang will not even give us a nibble this time. If he does respond, it will probably be with a counterattack. He can if he chooses attack the failure of the UN side to submit any accounting at all; but this line can be exploited by us against him, as it would at least be an acknowledgment that MAC business can be dealt with here. Wang could, if he chose, make a fairly good counterattack on the 14,000, even though these are not comparable to the unaccounted-­ for personnel. He could point out that the PRC has let those of the US non-­patriots wishing to do so return; he could ask whether the 14,000 have the same right; he could point out that this is a practical matter between our two countries. Of course, he would be wrong, but it might prove uncomfortable having to argue the point. However, this line of counterattack somehow doesn’t seem Wang’s style in the present pattern. I was glad to learn from your card that Joe Bennett is to be join­ ing you. He is an excellent man. As to when I might rejoin you—­the Ambassador has indicated a sympathetic understanding of my disin­ clination to stay on here if the talks assume—­or retain—­the character of an indefinite and sporadic maintenance of contact. We both feel that the next meeting ought to be somewhat more indicative than most in regard to the future of the talks. I realize, of course, that this doesn’t give you in CA much of a firm basis for planning ahead on personnel, which is another reason I’m glad Joe Bennett is coming. Helenka and the children and I had a good Christmas, and hope all of you in CA did, too. We’re taking advantage of the year-­end holidays to spend a few days in Italy, which I’ve never seen. Happy New Year to all. Sincerely, David L. Osborn Enclosures: Extra dossiers of missing personnel for Defense
