VIII Preface Carter looked toward B–52 bombers equipped with air-­launched cruise missiles (ALCMs) and the Advanced Technology Bomber (ATB, later the “B–2”) to fill the gap. Here, documentation on budget decisions reflects the Carter administration’s efforts to cut spending without damaging national security. While in pursuit of the SALT II Treaty, which he and Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev signed on June 18, 1979, President Carter exhorted his team to come up with a survivable basing mode for the MX missile. On September 7, 1979, flanked by Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, Carter announced a Multiple Protective Structure (MPS) system for basing 200 MX missiles, which would be transported among 23 shelters via specially-­constructed roadways in western states of the United States at a projected cost of $33 billion. Accompanying the planned Trident II submarine-­launched ballistic missile, the refitting of B–52s to carry ALCMs, and the pursuit of stealth technologies, MX was intended to replace the Minuteman III as the land-­based leg of the U.S. nuclear triad. The Carter administration’s attempt to modernize U.S. strategic forces is in documents such as papers prepared for meetings of the National Security Council, the minutes of these meetings, and records of the Presidential decisions that resulted from them. Dissatisfied with the implementation of National Security Decision Memorandum 242, “Policy for Planning the Employment of Nuclear Weapons,” which his predecessor Gerald Ford signed on January 17, 1974, (Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXXV, National Security Policy, 1973–1976, Document 31) Carter pressed his administration to shore up the U.S. strategic deterrent. Following an August 1978 trip to the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski informed Carter of the need for significant improvements to U.S. Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence (C3I). The concerns of Brzezinski and Military Assistant William Odom were heightened following the October 1978 crisis management contingency exercise, “Nifty Nugget,” and were incorporated into follow-­on studies to PD–18 pertaining to nuclear strategy. They also informed the national security team’s reactions to the 11–3/8 series of National Intelligence Estimates, addressing Soviet intentions and capabilities. Nuclear attack false alarms in November 1979 and June 1980 intensified the Carter administration’s concerns about the need to improve U.S. C3I systems, while the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979 led Carter to withdraw from Senate consideration the unratified SALT II Treaty. In the wake of these events, Carter signed two Presidential Directives: PD–58, “Continuity of Government,” on June 30, 1980; and PD–59, “Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy,” on July 25, 1980. Following Carter’s electoral loss to former Governor Ronald Reagan on
