3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
612
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
learned from foreign broadcasts and from the wire services. He added,
“yes, that is the way it was.” Naturally, it was in the nature of revolu-
tions that a struggle was taking place against the forces of the old re-
gime. But this did not provide grounds for outsiders to incite or pro-
voke anti-government riots. Unfortunately, such interference was
occurring. Brezhnev wanted to hope that the United States would not
participate in such actions, that instead it would develop normal rela-
tions with Afghanistan.
Brezhnev said that again and again the U.S. was raising the matter
of Soviet relations with Cuba. He wanted to say that the Soviet Union
complied strictly with the 1962 understanding. It had done nothing nor
was doing anything that would be contrary to that understanding. This
understanding should be continued without eroding or unilaterally in-
terpreting this understanding. Here and there it was asserted that the
Soviet Union was using Cubans to interfere in other areas. Nothing
could be further from the truth. Cuba was an independent country and
as an independent country Cuba rendered assistance at the request of
legitimate governments which were threatened by aggression. This
was fully in accord with international law and the UN Charter. Perhaps
those in the U.S. who were so vociferous concerning the Cuban actions
have forgotten that during the American War of Independence the
ranks of General Washington’s army contained foreign units. On the
other hand, Brezhnev could cite genuine instances of U.S. interference in
the affairs of other countries and, of course, he could draw on them to
cause tensions in U.S.-Soviet relations. But the Soviet Union had no de-
sire to do so.
One concern that the President had spoken of today pertained to a
military buildup in Vietnam. The Soviet Union could not understand
such a concern. The Soviet Union had no bases in Vietnam and had no
intention of establishing such bases. Soviet ships entered Vietnamese
ports for business and for friendly visits. Individual Soviet aircraft
landed at Vietnamese airfields. But that was normal and generally ac-
cepted practice in international relations. It was not aimed against the
interests of the U.S. or its allies. The threat to peace came from China,
which had already carried out blatant aggression against Vietnam and
which was now openly threatening to teach Vietnam a new lesson. As
for Soviet assistance to Vietnam, it was being provided to a victim of
aggression, under the friendship treaty with that country, and was de-
signed to compel China to come to its senses and to refrain from its ex-
pansionist policy.
Brezhnev continued that there was one other destabilizing factor in
the Far East, one which did not originate with the Soviet Union. He was
referring to the major military bases in Japan, South Korea and the Phil-
ippines. Many such bases were being maintained by the U.S. near the
