426  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
reason why we should not say so. Once we had done this, we could 
have better hope in discussing other matters.
36. Wang replied that US is member of UN, and that he was asking 
US to abide by solemn pledge it has made in UN Charter and other 
international documents to which it is signatory. He said that if that 
spirit can be specifically implemented with deeds, we can expect prog­
ress in the world.
37. I added that there were two indisputable facts: one, there is 
a dispute between us; and, two, the spirit of the UN Charter is that 
disputes shall not be settled by recourse to force. I said that regarding 
our specific dispute, we were willing to state we would not resort to 
force. If his government would say the same thing, then we could start 
talking about the dispute in an atmosphere free from threat of force by 
either side.
38. Wang replied that if the US would withdraw its armed forces 
from Taiwan, it would certainly create peaceful atmosphere. He said 
that he hoped I would very carefully study his propsal and put forward 
constructive views.
39. I said I had nothing to add at this time. The meeting concluded 
with confirmation our previous agreement that the next meeting would 
be Thursday, October 27, and that the usual statement would be made 
to the press.
Gowen
305.	 Telegram 924 from Geneva1
Geneva, October 21, 1955, noon
924. From Johnson.
1. At yesterday’s as well as preceding meeting Wang was relaxed 
and made no effort force pace of meeting or press discussion his sub­
jects. Yesterday words “higher level meeting” or “trade embargo” were 
not mentioned even obliquely. His entire attitude last two meetings as 
well as readiness with which he agreed my proposal for weekly meet­
ings give general impression of willingness, at least for time being, per­
mit talks continue at leisurely pace without making effort bring any 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–2155. Secret; Priority; 
­Limited Distribution.
