812 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI It also may turn out to be a sweetener to the Soviets who might see some interest in downloading SS–N–20s and/or SS–N–23s. We probably can withstand any Hill criticism of our downloading proposal (e.g., accusations that it is one more loophole on START reductions, that it enhances Soviet breakout potential). It is likely, however, that the Soviets will reject our proposal and make a counteroffer that gives them more opportunity to take advantage of downloading. Although we do not need to decide now the precise content of our next step until the Soviets respond, your meeting should set some parameters on how we treat this issue. There are four broad approaches if, as is likely, the Soviets spurn our downloading proposal: — Propose a ban on downloading (which would be inconsistent with our commitment at the 1987 Washington Summit). — Permit a larger number of RVs per missile to be downloaded (which would worsen the potential breakout problem). — Press our proposed approach on downloading (which the Soviets would see as one-­sided) and offer an offsetting concession to gain Soviet acceptance. This begs the question of what sort of concession would be necessary to make the deal. — Propose an approach that would make explicit the total number of RVs that could be downloaded. DoD has argued in the past that we should propose to ban downloading if the Soviets reject our approach. Given the program and budget pressures he is under, Cheney may now be more flexible. Your meeting needs to decide how to strike the best balance between our own downloading needs, and the ratification and breakout problems posed by Soviet downloading. Other START Issues Secretary Baker may want to discuss the status of other outstanding START issues. There are perhaps four dozen lesser issues that we are plowing through this summer. Progress could always be faster but I think we are doing okay. There also remain the three major issues remaining from the Summit: Backfire, limits on heavy ICBMs, and non-­circumvention. Baker has a proposal that would allow the Soviets a maximum of about 500 air force and naval Backfires and would prohibit giving Backfire an intercontinental capability. If the Soviets can be persuaded to take it, we will have a good deal. On SS–18s, Baker wants to exploit the flexibility the NSD gives him (i.e., take what is already agreed with the Soviets and defer further limits to START II) to get Soviet acceptance of our position on non-­circumvention (i.e., an unlimited right to cooperate with the British). You said you do not want to move to our bottom line on
