Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 2. The coordinators office needs strengthening with additional personnel. In addition, full-time human rights2 offices are needed in the regional bureaus. They continue to be part-time now. 3. Attendance at political trials at the level of a political officer is needed.3 The Embassies should be informed of such a policy. 4. With respect to our participation in the international financial banks, if discretion is left to the Executive Branch in pursuing human rights concerns (which I favor), is the government developing diplomatic approaches prior to consideration of loan applications by serious violators to ensure discussion of the human rights factors in the staffs’ papers and the Boards’ deliberations? 5. In the past, the U.S. has supported and cooperated with the Southern African Program of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law. The Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs has given grants to the International Commission of Jurists. These actions have been helpful. The Department’s affirmative position on the UN Trust Fund and on the proposed defense and aid program for Chile have also been good,4 but I’m told the results have been poor. (a) Could the Department look at the possibilities for initiating a worldwide UN legal defense and aid program5 with voluntary (including US) contributions? (b) Could the Department also examine possibilities of creating a U.S. Commission which could administer a modest amount of public funds in support of programs that strengthen the role of the private sector working in human rights field. Such funding might provide for conferences on the subject of human rights, fellowships for human rights studies abroad, and studies of special human rights problems.6 2 An unknown hand underlined “full-time human rights.” 3 An unknown hand underlined this sentence. 4 An unknown hand underlined the first half of this sentence. 5 An unknown hand underlined “initiating a worldwide UN legal defense” and “aid program.” 6 An unknown hand placed a check mark next to this paragraph and underlined the portion of the first sentence following the word “strengthen” to the end of the paragraph.
