January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1239 370. Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs1 Washington, May 13, 1980 SUBJECT Autonomy Talks (U) We may be doing enough to get ourselves past the May 26 “goal”—but I am not entirely convinced. At the very least we should follow through on the steps decided:2 —message to Sadat (done)3 and Begin (tonight);4 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 5, Autonomy Talks: 4–5/80. Secret; Sensitive. Outside the System. Sent for information. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, a stamped notation reads: “ZB has seen.” Under the stamped notation, Brzezinski wrote: “let’s have a PRC on all this. ZB.” 2 On May 12, Carter met with Mondale, Muskie, Brzezinski, Linowitz, Lewis, Atherton, Saunders, and Jordan to discuss the status of the autonomy talks in the aftermath of Linowitz’s trip and Sadat’s suspension of the talks, and to develop a strategy for continuing the negotiations beyond the original May 26 completion target. No memorandum of conversation of the meeting, held in the Cabinet Room from 8:00 a.m. to 9:34 a.m., has been found. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) Carter’s handwritten notes related to the meeting are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 3, Mid East, 4/79–12/80. 3 A draft telegram conveying a message from Carter to Sadat was prepared but not sent. On the May 12 covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter, under which the telegram was submitted for his approval, Carter wrote: “I called him [Sadat]. He will announce 5/14 that talks should resume next week. Ali will be Egypt’s negotiator. J.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 79, Sensitive X: 5/12–31/80) A summary of the May 13 telephone conversation between Carter and Sadat is printed as Document 369. 4 In his May 15 message to Begin, Carter informed the Prime Minister of the “thorough review” of the autonomy negotiations he had undertaken with his senior advisers and reminded Begin of the negotiators’ need to “concentrate intensively on the issues left unresolved at the end of Herzliya round.” Carter continued: “It is likely, in the period ahead, that other parties may strive to move the Mid East peace effort to a different forum or to disrupt our efforts to move forward with the Camp David process. More rapid progress in the talks is the best way of confounding such opposition and of silencing the opponents of our approach. At the same time, I have instructed Ed Muskie to tell the Europeans that we do not favor any alternative negotiating forum as long as the present negotiations are making progress. In that context, we will oppose any UN Security Council resolution which proposes to modify Resolution 242.” (Telegram 128532 to Tel Aviv, May 16; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880143–2026)
