1978  269
predecessors, generational differences could affect their outlook in 
ways important for the future conduct of Soviet foreign and military 
policies. To a successor leadership, the USSR’s superpower status may 
appear not so much the culmination of prolonged and costly efforts 
that must above all be consolidated, but as a point of departure from 
which to exert more pervasive leverage on world affairs. Alternatively, 
but less likely, younger leaders, lacking the conditioning preoccupa-
tion of their elders with the experience of confronting external threats 
from stronger opponents, may be inclined to give overriding priority to 
the solution of internal problems which their predecessors allowed to 
accumulate.
22. In any event, the new leaders, relatively inexperienced in man-
aging the USSR’s external affairs, will be impressionable in the early 
post-Brezhnev years and strongly influenced by their perceptions of 
the opportunities and risks of more venturesome foreign policies, on 
one hand, and of the costs and benefits of seeking more cooperative 
relations with the West, on the other. The quality and effectiveness of 
US international policies, particularly in areas of defense, in alliance 
cohesion, and in the Third World, are likely to be the principal external 
factor shaping the perceptions of new Soviet leaders.
The Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, 
agrees with the general thrust of this Estimate that the USSR will continue 
to insist on being treated as a military coequal of the United States and that it 
will be no easier—­indeed, perhaps more difficult—­to deal with in the coming 
decade. However, he believes this Estimate tends to overemphasize the Soviets’ 
perceptions of their own military power and undervalues political and eco-
nomic considerations.
Specifically, the Director, INR, believes that the Soviets have a less posi-
tive, even more ambivalent view of the military balance in Europe and would 
be less confident of the superiority of the Warsaw Pact’s forces over those of 
NATO than the net judgments of the Estimate suggest. INR believes that, in 
assessing the balance in Europe, the Soviets are very conservative in their cal-
culations and make a number of assumptions which highlight their own weak-
nesses and Western strengths; the Soviets have greater fear of Western attack 
than the Estimate suggests. For these reasons, INR would draw the following 
implications of Soviet perceptions of the European balance:
—INR believes that Soviet programs to improve tactical aviation, upgrade 
armored forces, and enhance tactical nuclear capabilities are intended to rem-
edy what Moscow evidently regards as weaknesses rather than to maintain 
or enlarge existing advantages. If so, Soviet motives would appear to be more 
compelling than the text suggests, and Moscow’s efforts may be more intense.
—We doubt that the Soviets consider themselves to be in an appreciably 
better position militarily—­and hence possibly more inclined—­than they were 
15 years ago to link a crisis in a third area to Europe. In terms of strategy, Mos-
cow could easily manage to assemble a much superior force against the Western
