158 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI To move toward a more stabilizing defense posture, some believe the U.S. could consider readopting its original position that ALCMs and other bomber weapons will not be counted or limited under START. This would entail having limits only on ballistic missile warheads and on strategic nuclear delivery systems. Heavy bombers would continue to count against the latter limit only. Others believe that this move would encourage competition in air-­breathing systems and, because of the Soviet lead in air defenses, therefore would not be stabilizing. Moreover, this move could incite strong Soviet condemnation as backtracking on a key U.S. concession and, by reopening the Reykjavik bomber counting rule, could actually decrease the U.S. ability to deploy the necessary high number of bomber weapons. On the other hand, such a move would simplify U.S. obligations under the treaty, since no distinctions would have to be made (or verified) regarding conventionally-­armed versus nuclear-­armed ALCMs, or heavy bombers equipped for ALCMs vice those not so equipped. A less radical move would be to return to the earlier U.S. position that each heavy bomber equipped for ALCMs should count as six warheads (instead of ten), regardless of the number actually carried. While this position would not simplify the treaty in any way, and could encounter Soviet opposition, it could increase U.S. flexibility and confidence in meeting targeting requirements under START constraints. In evaluating these options, a complicating factor is the reduced production rate for the B–2 and Congressional concern with B–2 costs. If the B–2 program is significantly delayed, ALCM options and flexibility could become more important for the United States. Options—Counting Rules. The following options exist: — Option 1—Accept the Soviet demand for an “as equipped” counting rule for ALCMs. — Option 2—Retain the existing ALCM attribution rule of ten per bomber, but add a limit on the maximum ALCM carrying capability of individual bombers. — Option 3—Make no change to the U.S. position on counting rules; retain the existing ALCM attribution rule of ten per bomber. — Option 4—Return to the earlier U.S. position that each heavy bomber equipped for ALCMs should count as six warheads, regardless of the number actually carried. — Option 5—Eliminate all limits on ALCMs, retaining only an overall limit on heavy bombers. Discussion—ALCM Range. The U.S. has taken the position that nuclear-­armed air-­to-­surface missiles with a range of less than 1,500 km should not be counted in START. The Soviets would establish the ALCM range threshold at 600 km. A range cut-­off of 1500 kilometers
