March 1952–February 1953 283 not (rpt not) endeavoring criticize Ala or anyone else, I was merely pointing out that unless really firm measures were taken to bring halt rabble-rousing, harm cld come to one or more Amer citizens for whose safety I had responsibility. Ala said that he understood my position and wld at once tell HIM what I had said. 4. Ala added HIM was considering advisability of replacing Qavam whose unpopularity was now (rpt now) quite evident. I replied that I was not (rpt not) asking that any particular PriMin be given power to maintain order. It was my opinion however that order wld not (rpt not) be restored in country until Shah wld permit those responsible for its maintenance to make and carry out necessary decisions. Ala said that Shah wld receive Qavam soon in audience and that he, Ala, wld try pass along to Shah what I had said before audience began. 5. Ala also referred to suggestion made by Middleton that latter and I might make joint call on Shah. Ala had some doubt re wisdom joint audience this time. Enemies Shah and of Western world might convince public that US and UK were bringing pressure on Shah. I said there some problems affecting Iran, US and UK, solution to which might be advanced by joint discussions. Nevertheless, I realized there might be misinterpretation joint approach just now. Henderson 93. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State1 Tehran, July 21, 1952, 6 p.m. 309. 1. Emissary Qavam called on me at 3 o’clock this afternoon (Embtel 308, rptd London 99).2 He said that Shah had sent msg to Qavam thru one of Qavam’s lieutenants shortly before noon suggesting that Qavam pursue following course; (a) set up cabinet at once; (b) obtain finan aid from US; and (c) endeavor to administer country with firmness on constitutional basis. Shah promised that if it shld become clear that new Cabinet cld not (rpt not) function in present situation and if members new Cabinet wld join in recommending that 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.13/7–2152. Secret; NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 12:47 p.m. 2 Document 92.
