1150 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement diagnosing it, he said, but the U.S. Government is giving more thought to it now than ever before. The Secretary concluded by thanking the Ambassador for giving him this personal account of the present situation, and assured him that the efforts he was making to increase economic cooperation between the two countries would have the sympathetic consideration of the Department. UR–5. Memorandum of a Conversation1  Washington, June 18, 1958. SUBJECT Export-Import Loans to Uruguay PARTICIPANTS Mr. Samuel C. Waugh, President, Export-Import Bank Mr. Walter C. Sauer, Executive Vice President, Export-Import Bank Mr. Hawthore Arey, Director, Export-Import Bank Mr. Vance Brand, Director, Export-Import Bank Mr. George A. Blowers, Director, Export-Import Bank Mr. R. R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Mr. Maurice M. Bernbaum, Director for South American Affairs Mr. Rubottom described in some detail the difficulties in our relations with Uruguay arising from the belief in that Government and in that country that the United States is indifferent to its problems and is not ready to be helpful in their solution. He thought that an important breach had been made in this attitude by the conversations which had taken place in Montevideo during Vice President Nixon’s visit and that it was important for us not to lose the momentum then created. He thought that this would depend largely on the outcome of current negotiations for a balance-­of-­payments loan. Mr. Rubottom said that he had discussed this problem frequently and at length with Tom Taylor of International Packers and that there was an important difference in their approaches to the problem. Whereas Taylor was indignant over the treatment accorded his firm by the Uruguayans and felt that a solution to his specific, as well as the overall problem, could be reached only 1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553, “Uruguay 1958.” Confidential. Drafted by Bernbaum. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
