9. The question of the legality of increasing the elevation of our turret guns
has already been discussed in my Annual Report,9 pages 75 and 76 and 114
to 117, to which reference is made above.10 The views therein expressed are
carefully considered views to which I ask your attention without repeating
them here.
10. Some suggestions have appeared in the press to the effect that the
elevation of our turret guns should be increased just sufficiently to equal the
elevation of the British guns. This is an impracticable suggestion, first,
because there is no treaty arrangement by which there is an exchange of
information between the British and American navies on the subject of the
extreme range of their guns; second, because there would be no assurance
that equality once having been established would not be upset by still
further increases either by one power or another; and third, our relations
under the treaty are not only with Great Britain but also with three other
signatory powers. My opinion is that there is only one satisfactory solution
to the question and that is for each power to feel itself free and unhampered
as to the extent to which it may increase the elevation of its turret guns. If
each power gives to its turret guns the maximum elevation which it
considers suitable and advisable, no other power can make any complaint or
criticism regarding that act. But if one power increases to meet the
elevations of another power and then after completing the work is again
confronted with further increases of elevation, the task of maintaining a
parity would be too complicated and expensive for all parties.
11. I have noted in the British Press statements to the effect that the treaty
does not forbid increasing the elevation of our turret guns. I also have
reason to believe that the professional opinion both in France and Italy is in
agreement with this position, although in the case of France and Italy their
interest is academic, those two powers being permitted under the treaty to
re-arm their vessels with guns not exceeding 16 inches in caliber and,
presumably, giving to those guns whatever elevation they deem most
desirable. In order to illustrate more precisely the advantage which would
accrue to our ships if the elevation of our turret guns were increased, I
caused to be prepared a memorandum in which our fleet as at present is
compared with our fleet as it might be if the elevation of the turret guns
were increased. That memorandum is attached to this letter.11
