1106 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX point in going to the Israelis to make this a quid pro quo matter: it would have little impact on them). (C) My judgment is that we should: —try for a postponement of the vote until Monday; —failing that, abstain tomorrow, with a very strong statement on settlements and explaining our opposition to the commission provision; and —go to the Israelis and explain that position, stressing hard the importance that the Cabinet reject the Hebron settlements on Sunday. (C) I recommend that you raise this with Vance at the VBB,9 today. (U) 9 No memorandum of conversation for the VBB meeting has been found. However, a February 28 memorandum from Brzezinski to Aaron and Denend, listing the decisions taken at the meeting, stated that the participants decided the United States would abstain in the U.N. vote on settlements. (Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 34, Meetings—Vance/Brown/Brzezinski: 1/80–2/80) 345. Editorial Note On March 1, 1980, the United Nations Security Council passed draft resolution S/13827 as Resolution 465 (1980), condemning Israeli settlements in the territories occupied in the June 1967 Arab-Israeli war, including Jerusalem, by a unanimous 15–0 vote. Although the participants in the February 28 meeting among Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, and Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski had decided the United States would abstain in the vote (see footnote 9, Document 344), which was originally scheduled for the afternoon of February 29, it was decided at President Jimmy Carter’s foreign policy breakfast meeting on February 29 that the United States would vote for the resolution if certain “objectionable wording,” especially references to Jerusalem, were removed from the resolution text. (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, page 441) The February 29 meeting was attended by Vance, Brown, White House Senior Advisor Hedley W. Donovan, White House Counsel Lloyd N. Cutler, White House Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan, and Brzezinski and took place in the White House Cabinet Room from 7:31 a.m. to 8:48 a.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation of the meeting has been found.
