230 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI unlikely to accept our proposal and will push for provisions that limit our ability to pursue SDI development and that delay deployment as long as possible. As Adm. Crowe noted during the June 8 NSC meeting, some people are concerned that even if our current position prevails we could live to regret it. They worry that our insistence on a right to deploy SDI after a particular date passes (e.g., seven years after an agreement is signed) virtually compels the Soviets to be ready to deploy their own defenses at that time, but that we might not be ready for a variety of budgetary, political, and technical reasons. They also worry that one such reason is that Congress will not let us take advantage of the flexibility we seek to test SDI under our current negotiating approach, but that the Soviets will labor under no such domestic political restraints. In brief, they worry about the risks that we will neither constrain Soviet missiles defenses nor successfully pursue our own. If their fears are realized, our current approach could unintentionally lead us down a road in which the Soviets have deployed missiles defenses and we had not. You will need to decide how to weigh these concerns, and whether to change our present negotiating position in two respects in order to reduce the risks of this outcome. Missile Defense Testing. To afford us the maximum flexibility to do SDI testing consistent with constraining Soviet ABM deployments, our current approach is based on the “broad” interpretation of the ABM Treaty and a series of unilateral assurances the U.S. would offer to reassure the Soviets that we were not deploying SDI under the guise of testing it. Those who would change our approach would have us instead negotiate an explicit agreement with the Soviets about what kind of testing of missile defenses by each side was and was not allowed. They argue that such an agreement would impose much more predictable constraints on the development and testing program than our “broad” interpretation of the ABM Treaty that Moscow has rejected. They also believe that an explicit agreement is the best way to counter Congressional efforts to impose unilaterally narrower limits on SDI testing. On the other hand, our efforts to negotiate such an agreement could well be unsuccessful, or we might have to accept more constraints on SDI testing than we believe the ABM Treaty imposes. Either way, the development of SDI would be hampered, and its eventual deployment would be delayed. Missile Defense Deployments. Under our current position, both sides would be free to deploy defenses at any time after an agreed period (e.g., seven years) elapses. In essence, this would waive the ABM Treaty restrictions on SDI deployments. But since it also would give the Soviets virtually no additional notice that we were going to deploy, it virtually
