Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II (3) Targeting of Foreign Assistance to Countries which Respect Human Rights The relevant statutes prescribe certain rules which must be followed in allocating US foreign assistance (including SSA, AID programs, PL–480), and political-military interests impose additional constraints, but within these limitations there is still latitude to target money and aid to countries where there is a good, or improving, human rights record. The problem is that in a sense we would be further punishing the needy who live under a bad regime in doing this. However, the reality is that there are more than enough needy people to go around, and so it can be argued that in this way we provide an additional incentive to bad governments to change (and for people who live under these governments to unseat them). We follow this policy now in theory—but certainly not in practice. The country-by-country ZBB process simply does not provide for such kinds of tradeoffs. We should be able to point to clear trends—decreases for violators, increases for others—rather than increases for Indonesia and the Philippines, Nicaragua, etc.6 (4) Overt Criticism of Offenders The President or Andy Young7 could speak out against gross violators. —Uganda: The President might suggest, in some very low key manner, that Americans might want to organize an informal, voluntary boycott of Ugandan coffee (a` la grapes and lettuce).8 We could arrange that the NGOs and civil rights groups would pick up this ball and run with it. —Cambodia: strong public criticism in a major forum. Might we raise this issue with the PRC, the only country with diplomatic representation in Cambodia? We could use their public support of our human rights policy to gently suggest that their support of this vicious regime is inappropriate, or that they should use their influence to stimulate improvements. —Vietnam: there is much public criticism of the fact that this Administration has not spoken out against what is going on in Vietnam. We could push for human rights improvements both publicly and privately with the government. 6 Brzezinski’s handwritten notations in the margin adjacent to this paragraph are illegible. 7 Brzezinski circled Young’s name, drew a line from it to the margin, and commented “or maybe the V.P.?” 8 Presumable reference to grape and lettuce boycotts either organized or supported by United Farm Workers (UFW) founders Ce´sar Cha´vez and Dolores Huerta during the 1960s and 1970s.
