262
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
(3) Targeting of Foreign Assistance to Countries which Respect Human
Rights
The relevant statutes prescribe certain rules which must be fol-
lowed in allocating US foreign assistance (including SSA, AID pro-
grams, PL–480), and political-military interests impose additional con-
straints, but within these limitations there is still latitude to target
money and aid to countries where there is a good, or improving,
human rights record. The problem is that in a sense we would be fur-
ther punishing the needy who live under a bad regime in doing this.
However, the reality is that there are more than enough needy people
to go around, and so it can be argued that in this way we provide an ad-
ditional incentive to bad governments to change (and for people who
live under these governments to unseat them). We follow this policy
now in theory—but certainly not in practice. The country-by-country
ZBB process simply does not provide for such kinds of tradeoffs. We
should be able to point to clear trends—decreases for violators, in-
creases for others—rather than increases for Indonesia and the Philip-
pines, Nicaragua, etc.6
(4) Overt Criticism of Offenders
The President or Andy Young7 could speak out against gross
violators.
—Uganda: The President might suggest, in some very low key
manner, that Americans might want to organize an informal, voluntary
boycott of Ugandan coffee (a` la grapes and lettuce).8 We could arrange
that the NGOs and civil rights groups would pick up this ball and run
with it.
—Cambodia: strong public criticism in a major forum. Might we
raise this issue with the PRC, the only country with diplomatic repre-
sentation in Cambodia? We could use their public support of our
human rights policy to gently suggest that their support of this vicious
regime is inappropriate, or that they should use their influence to stim-
ulate improvements.
—Vietnam: there is much public criticism of the fact that this Ad-
ministration has not spoken out against what is going on in Vietnam.
We could push for human rights improvements both publicly and pri-
vately with the government.
6 Brzezinski’s handwritten notations in the margin adjacent to this paragraph are
illegible.
7 Brzezinski circled Young’s name, drew a line from it to the margin, and com-
mented “or maybe the V.P.?”
8 Presumable reference to grape and lettuce boycotts either organized or supported
by United Farm Workers (UFW) founders Ce´sar Cha´vez and Dolores Huerta during the
1960s and 1970s.
