582 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII consortium package). So too would be light internal security type equipment, not tanks and advanced aircraft. R.W. Komer3 3 Komer initialed “RWK” above his typed signature. 209. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, February 15, 1980 SUBJECT India/Soviet In an interesting and very frank discussion with Mr. Nathan of the Indian Embassy, he made the following points: —Although the Gromyko visit to New Delhi was not the “disaster” it was reported to be in the Western media, he said he could assure me that what Gromyko heard from Mrs. Gandhi was the strongest opposition to the continued presence of Soviet troops in Afghanistan that he was likely to hear from any country outside the U.S.2 The Indian line, reportedly, was that they were not prepared to pass judgment on the Soviet motives in sending troops into Afghanistan in the first place, but that they cared very deeply about their continued presence there and the dangers which this posed to Indian security. The Soviets were urged to pull back their forces to about the 6,000–10,000-man presence they had prior to the invasion. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 28, India: 1–3/80. Secret. Sent for information. Copies were sent to Brement and Thornton. “ZB has seen” is stamped in the upper right corner of the memorandum. 2 Gromyko was in India February 12–14. The characterization of the visit as a “disaster” is likely a reference to several news stories that reported India’s “failure” to convince the Soviet Union to withdraw its military forces from Afghanistan. See, for example, Tyler Marshall, “India Apparently Fails to Sway Soviets on Afghanistan Pullout,” Los Angeles Times, February 14, 1980, p. B8; and Stuart Auerbach, “Soviets Reject Indian Plea to Withdraw Troops,” Washington Post, February 14, 1980, p. A24.
