1957 1409 As far as the next Geneva meeting is concerned it does not now seem likely Wang will take the initiative in raising the matter, except per­ haps by oblique reference to the Department’s statement in character­ izing them as not civilized, etc., as another example of “hostility”. I do not believe I should take the initiative in any way raising the matter, but if he should do so I would have considerable material for rebuttal that would fill up time. I could, of course, refer to his previous statement to me that they were not asking reciprocity for Chinese correspondents to visit the United States, and on the “civilized” aspect I could come back to implementation. Of course, there may be further developments by the time of the next meeting that may change the picture, but I wanted to pass on these thoughts at this time. Sincerely, U. Alexis Johnson P.S. After writing the above I have just seen in this morning’s paper an August 27 Washington story quoting the Secretary as saying that we will “consider” applications of Chinese Communist correspon­ dents. If the Secretary was correctly quoted this may put a somewhat different light on the possibilities of the subject coming up at the next meeting, and the desirability of my taking the initiative on it. I believe it is something on which I might make a little mileage. It certainly goes a long way to give Peiping a way out of the box in which they are now in if they want to use it. Of course, “consider” certainly does not mean we will grant any visas, but it would seem to me that it does mean we would accept applications to be “considered” on their merits and our laws and regulations. I know that you will send me at Geneva the full text of the Secretary’s statement, which the article I have seen in the Herald-Tribune does not give, together with as much amplification as you can to enable me to handle it with Wang whether or not you want me to take the initiative. As far as the legal aspects are concerned the only thing I find in the Regulations is section (a) of 22 CFR 41.12 which contemplates the possibility of issuing visas to holders of passports of non-­recognized governments. I suppose this frequently comes up in issuing visas to officials of non-­recognized governments to attend the UN. However, I do not know of any case in which we have issued such a visa to non-­officials although the principle would presumably be the same. Of course there is also the whole background of waivers being required for members of the Communist Party, etc. In the case of recognized Communist governments this has usually been handled by giving correspondents official visas which do not require a waiver. However, it would seem to me that this would be entirely out of the question in the case of an unrecognized government. U.A.J.
