674  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
To develop this rapidly rising curve of Soviet needs, it was assumed 
that some construction could begin at SAC bases late in fiscal 1960; this 
then first bears fruit in calendar 1961. Also in 1961, our present Atlas 
and Titan programs begin to add to the target system bases hardened 
in differing degrees. Here it has been assumed that about 1/3 of the 
Titan missiles—­all of which are expected to be hardened to 100 pounds 
of blast—­would be deployed to individual aiming points, rather 
than sited in groups of three. It has also been assumed that the Atlas 
missiles—­now expected to appear in groups of three hardened to 25 
pounds—­would either be deployed to individual sites or else hardened 
to 100 pounds. We have just heard that Defense has been examining the 
possibility of further dispersal within present programs, and we are 
encouraged.
There isn’t room on the chart to show the full effect of a pro­
gram of this kind; and certainly not room to show the effect of a more 
ambitious program of sheltering and dispersal. What has been shown 
is in fact a conservative estimate of the effect of the program I have 
described. It shows the steps toward stability which even a relatively 
simple program of passive protection can bring about. Until such time 
as the Soviets have a highly advanced missile, one hardened aiming 
point added to our target system costs the Soviets from 10 to 20, or even 
many more, missiles to negate. This factor applies to every missile of 
ours we can add to the system.
In sum, with respect to the question of force requirements, we find 
the situation now unclear. There seems to be no technical obstacle to 
creating a picture both more clear and more favorable; indeed, this 
appears possible by steps relatively much simpler than the creation of 
new weapons systems.
We can turn now to the second question—­what kind of retaliatory 
force can we get off against the USSR if he does elect to attack us? We 
have prepared a chart which attempts to answer this question under 
different a assumptions about the size of the Soviet attack.
You will observe that this chart, except in its reference to Polaris 
missiles, is directed specifically to the state of affairs in the continen­
tal United States. It is recognized that the United States does have ele­
ments of force elsewhere in the world that could, potentially, contribute 
further retaliation. However, virtually all of these forces are within the 
reach of Soviet tactical air and missiles. The intelligence has been clear 
for sometime that the Soviets have a tactical air force and tactical mis­
siles adequate to cope with any targets we may present to them. There 
is no basis for assuming that this circumstance will change under our 
present programs.
In the presence of this Soviet superiority in the tactical theater, if 
we are to make our overseas forces effective when the Soviets initiate
