378
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Minister Nier, Krabatsch and Geyer at the MFA October 6 for approxi-
mately 1½ hours.
3. Nier opened the meeting by welcoming Ms. Derian to Berlin
and stating that such meetings could contribute to promoting and
developing bilateral relations. He said the GDR attaches great impor-
tance to developing relations with the US; in that connection he noted
with satisfaction President Carter’s comments about the US interests
in developing relations during the presentation of credentials by
Ambassador Grunert on October 2.2 We have made progress in past
years, Nier stated, but not all possibilities in the bilateral field have
been exhausted. The development of US–GDR relations will contribute
to detente and peace and security in Europe.
4. Ms. Derian replied, stating that the US shared many of these
same values—we are making progress in the development of our
relations and noted President Carter’s expressed interest in developing
these relations. Ms. Derian said that she had a new task to fulfill in
the State Department in her present capacity; there are many misunder-
standings about this US human rights policy. She said that it might be
well to note first of all what US human rights policy does not mean:
It is not directed at any government or type of government. We are
concerned with human rights because the United States is a signatory
of the UN Charter, the Declaration of Human Rights, and the Helsinki
Final Act, and because American values must be reflected in US
foreign policy.
5. Ms. Derian stated that we have held discussions with all countries
[with] which we have diplomatic relations, such talks were always
held in the strictest confidence. Only in one instance had there been a
breach of confidence, and that had not come from the US side. Ms.
Derian stated that the US recognizes that the issues involved are delicate
and complex, there will always be difficulties. She noted that the US
has problems at home, citing such examples as unemployment, appear-
ance of injustice (Wilmington Ten). She stated that she would be inter-
ested in any GDR views on the situation in the US. The US human
rights policy stems from the American people and it is vitally important
to have a clear understanding in all countries of our basic policy. This
policy is complex in application. The central theme is simple: it is based
on honest humanitarian concerns; it is just what it claims to be. It is
2 After Grunert presented his credentials on October 2 at the White House, Carter
expressed his support for finalizing a Consular Convention and with the German Demo-
cratic Republic and mentioned the issue of the flow of narcotics from East Berlin to the
West, stressing his interest in cooperating on the issue. (Telegram 250621 to East Berlin,
October 2; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780403–0504)
