904
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
mise.4 He hoped Pakistan’s friends would be prepared to back it up
in these circumstances. End summary.
3. I called on President Zia at noon today, accompanied by DCM,
to carry out instructions contained in reftel. Zia, who leaves for Gulf
and Turkey early tomorrow morning, had Acting Foreign Minister
Shahnawaz and Americas Director Rana present.
4. I went through talking points contained in reftel word for word
with President Zia, emphasizing certain points and adding thought
that softening of Islamic Conference resolution would be premature.
I expanded on talking point regarding Jan 7 Radio Moscow commen-
tary and left FBIS transcript of commentary with Zia. I also left text of
Department Press Spokesman’s Jan 7 briefing dealing with Afghanistan
initiative, and in this connection I made point that we were taking
positive position in public while expressing our concerns over this
initiative to GOP in private.
5. Zia responded by briefly rehearsing how GOP had arrived at
present position. Islamic Conference Standing Committee, expanded
to include Guinea and Tunisia, had led to nowhere and Pakistan had
quite deliberately moved situation towards UN General Assembly vote
that had resulted in overwhelming call for Soviet withdrawal. Recent
initiative entirely that of Soviet Union and he could see three possible
motives for new Soviet initiative:
—A. Buying time. Soviet initiative—“if indeed it is an initiative”—
might be nothing more than a “short-sighted” maneuver to get them
past the Islamic Summit and NAM gathering.5 Similar tactics were
employed
by
Soviets
before
two
Islamic
Foreign
Ministers’
Conferences.
—B. Beset with difficulties in Kampuchea, Poland and Afghanistan,
Soviets decided it was to their advantage to show signs of flexibility
in at least one of these places.
—C. Other explanation was the Mujahidin resistance was becoming
so costly that Soviets had decided that it was to their advantage to try
4 In telegram 363 from Moscow, January 10, the Embassy reported that officials in
Pakistan’s Embassy in the Soviet Union privately considered the Soviet move as evidence
that its pressure on Pakistan had “borne fruit.” Additionally, the telegram noted “intense
pressure” placed upon Pakistan by the Soviet Union to enter into talks with the DRA
on the latter’s terms; if Pakistan did not, the Soviets “hinted” of “possible Soviet action
ahead,” presumably a veiled threat of a military attack. According to a Pakistani Embassy
official, Zia took this threat seriously in light of what he considered insufficient support
either from Western Europe or the United States. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D810014–0358)
5 Reference is to the upcoming Islamic Summit in Saudi Arabia January 25–28 and
the meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement in New Delhi
February 9–12.
