186 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV —The government shall conduct a multi-­faceted R&D program covering both system and user oriented protection approaches funded at about $15 million per year. —Phase I and II of the DUCKPINS cable program shall be completed as soon as possible and no later than in 1978. This program shall be funded at a level of about $4 million per year. —Executive Secure Voice Network (ESVN) systems shall be installed when appropriate high priority requirements can be validated. 4. Management and policy review responsibilities for telecommunication protection shall be organized as follows: a. The NSC Special Coordination Committee (SCC) shall be responsible for providing policy guidance and for ensuring full implementation of this directive, including effective protection techniques for the government and maximum assistance to the private sector to enhance its protection from interception. The SCC shall exercise this responsibility through a special Subcommittee on Telecommunications Protection chaired by the Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy, with administrative support provided by the Secretary of Commerce. The Subcommittee shall include but not be limited to representatives of the following departments and agencies: State, Treasury, Justice, Commerce, Defense, Transportation, Energy, Central Intelligence Agency, General Services Administration, the National Security Agency, and the National Security Council Staff. b. The Subcommittee shall submit a report on its activities, recommendations and findings at least annually to the National Security Council through the Special Coordination Committee. Additionally, that report shall specifically address how effectively the policy and actions specified in this directive are being implemented. c. The Secretary of Defense shall act as the Executive Agent for communications security (COMSEC) to protect government-­derived classified information and government-­derived unclassified information which relates to national security. COMSEC is concerned with protective measures designed for the security of classified information and other information related to national security. d. The Secretary of Commerce shall act as the Executive Agent for communications protection for government-­derived unclassified information (excluding that relating to national security) and for dealing with the commercial and private sector to enhance their communications protection and privacy. e. It is recognized that there will be some overlap between the responsibilities of the Executive Agents in that Defense will continue to provide some non-­cryptographic protection for government-­derived unclassified information as it does now, and Commerce will have responsibilities in commercial application of cryptographic technology.
