Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
437
as threatening to China’s security as are the Soviet forces now in
Mongolia.
The Vietnamese, probably encouraged by the Soviets, are now
making noises about U.S.-Vietnamese normalization. The State Depart-
ment said yesterday, “Our policy is clear. We are prepared to nor-
malize relations.”2
This willingness comes at the wrong time and in the wrong con-
text. It will reinforce Chinese concerns, and thus needlessly complicate
the more important task—normalizing with Peking. You need to
choose: Vietnam or China, and China is incomparably more important
to us.
If you agree, you might wish to have me send a note to the State
Department, asking that efforts to normalize relations with Vietnam be
postponed until the other issue is resolved.
B. The Middle East
We are nearing a very crucial point: once the U.S. “suggestions”
are submitted, we will have no choice but to push with all our resources
to obtain a settlement. Without such a settlement it is likely that the sit-
uation in the Middle East will deteriorate greatly.
The alternative, which the Vice President recommends, is to adopt
a less assertive strategy, playing for time and limiting damage to our re-
lations with Israel and with the Jewish community. This course would
produce less controversy, and it will be less politically risky. It will also,
however, perpetuate the Middle Eastern problem, and thus pose some
dangers to Sadat himself.
If you choose to go ahead, you will face an unavoidable confronta-
tion. Are we ready for it? Do you have the resources to prevail? What
specifically can we do to make certain that rejection of our “sugges-
tions” is too costly for the parties concerned? Cy and I are developing
some thoughts for you, but only you can decide whether we are pre-
pared for a major confrontation—without which no settlement seems
possible—later this summer and probably throughout much of the fall.
However, if you do decide to cut the Gordian Knot, a sustained
time-commitment by Cy will be needed. The Middle East issue cannot
be handled on a part-time basis. Either he will have to give it a major
portion of his time over the next several months, or you should appoint
2 Reference to press guidance issued by the Department of State on July 6 for that
day’s noon press briefing. Telegram 170745 to CINCPAC Tokyo, July 6, indicated that
Hodding Carter III had stated that U.S. policy with regard to normalization “is clear. As
we have stated at each of the three rounds of talks with the Vietnamese in Paris last year,
we are prepared to normalize relations at the diplomatic level and to exchange embassies
and ambassadors. Once embassies are in place, we would lift the trade embargo.” (Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780278–0662)
