690 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III As you know from the package that Bill Miller sent you last Friday,2 I believe that the right course is to suspend TPM. Any other decision would be seen as inflationary—thus eroding some of the gains secured from announcement of your new economic program.3 We would have sent the wrong signal to the critical labor negotiations. We would be criticized for inconsistency and for yielding to pro-inflation domestic pressures. I see no advantage in the three week postponement of your decision that STR proposes. Indeed, this might be the worst of both worlds. Publication of second quarter trigger prices in the face of US Steel’s two suits, would be criticized as inflationary, while the fact that a decision on TPM suspension was still only 21 days away would maintain the uncertainty that now discourages steel trade. The effectiveness of our anti-inflation program hinges, in the end, on people believing that we will stick to it. The steel TPM is our first test.4 2 See Document 236. 3 Carter announced a new anti-inflation program on March 14. For the text of his remarks, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 476–482. 4 The White House announced on March 19 that it would maintain the steel trigger price mechanism at the same level for 3 months. It also cautioned that the TPM would be suspended if steel producers initiated a major anti-dumping case. (Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Imported Steel Curb Unchanged,” The New York Times, March 20, 1980, p. D1) 238. Editorial Note In a March 21, 1980, letter to Roy Jenkins, President of the Commission of the European Communities (EC), President Jimmy Carter noted that his “domestic advisers are strongly and unanimously of the view that if U.S. Steel files its suits, our government must suspend the Trigger Price Mechanism (TPM) or face grave inflationary consequences.” Carter told Jenkins that “in authorizing the Commerce Department to publish the second quarter Trigger Price Mechanism at an unchanged level, I have decided that we will suspend that mechanism immediately if any major anti-dumping suits are filed.” Noting that he had not foreclosed the possibility of reinstating the trigger price mechanism, Carter expressed his “hope that this meets some of Commissioner Davignon’s concerns and that in the meantime you will be able to discourage any European over-reaction, as I have sought to resist
