1296 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement FYI We believe Castro-Leon attempt and other recent incidents Caribbean area emphasize desirability information be provided IAPC and studied by it in relation broader problem Caribbean tensions. Above would offer opportunity for Colombia provide data re GODR official requests for visas for those subsequently involved in rebellion attempt and for GOV furnish any information. GODR complicity it may have, as well as occasion for U.S. to produce relevant information its possession. Herter VE–41. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Venezuela1  Washington, April 28, 1960, 8:12 p.m. 926. Department has noted with interest three separate occasions your conversation reported Embtel 8192 on which Betancourt indicated his view satisfactory Inter-American resolution Castro problem depends on prior action re Trujillo and that he prepared take lead on Cuba, which he certain most other Latin Americans would quickly join, if Trujillo problem resolved with U.S. cooperation. We believe this frank statement made by Betancourt offers good opportunity which, in your discretion and if you believe it can be done without becoming known to Fonmin, you should pursue to endeavor ascertain from Betancourt what he and others of like view have in mind as to leadership which might take over in Dominican Republic if Trujillo resigns or is ousted. Should be clear to Betancourt that Castro or elements associated him only too ready move into Dominican Republic to establish Castro-­type regime and that in resultant situation Castro would be strengthened with consequent immediate threat to Haiti as well as to Betancourt’s own position in Venezuela. We would appreciate his thinking on manner such development might be avoided, since it obviously one to which he must have given serious thought. This is of course a major preoccupation for us. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.00/4–2760. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Jamison and John C. Hill, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs. The telegram was repeated for information to the Embassy in the Dominican Republic. 2 Not printed; 731.00/4–2760.
