Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III we would probably have to seek a permanent/indefinite appropriation, since the amount of our obligation would be indefinite.) —Authorization and appropriations would almost certainly be needed in advance if the U.S. were to assume obligations to make guarantee payments on a current basis. —Authorization might be required to raise the ceiling on long-term Treasury debt, depending on the exact arrangements negotiated on the Account’s investment of its dollar holdings. —U.S. payment of special above-market interest rates on the Account’s investments, to cover part of any interest shortfalls, technically would not require legislation, but could trigger Congressional criticism and efforts to curtail the Secretary of the Treasury’s authority to determine interest payable on the public debt. In any event we do not contemplate any such supplementary payments, and have made that position very clear. Recommendation I recommend that the U.S. take the following position at the forthcoming meetings: First, that we are prepared to support establishment of a substitution account if key questions can be resolved satisfactorily. Second, that we are not prepared to make supplemental, abovemarket, interest payments to the Account. Third, that we will support use of a portion of the IMF’s gold to meet financial imbalances in the Account, whether such imbalances arise from interest rate differentials or from exchange rate changes, subject to safeguards to minimize any interpretation that gold is being “remonetized.” Fourth, that we will participate in a shared guarantee of the Account’s financial position, to be activated upon a decision to terminate the Account, with that decision subject to veto by either the U.S. or a majority of the depositors. Fifth, that we are not prepared to agree to calls on this guarantee in advance of a decision to terminate the Account. If an arrangement along these lines can be negotiated, and there is at least a reasonable chance, the Account would entail minimal costs or potential exposure to costs for the U.S. The interest rate paid to the Account would be a market rate, comparable to what the Treasury would have to pay on borrowings from any other source. The ultimate guarantee would be shared, would be payable upon liquidation, would be subject to U.S. veto, and in all likelihood would never be called. The inter-agency International Monetary Group chaired by Tony Solomon has been closely involved in developing U.S. positions
