138 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI our fundamental NST objectives. Before the negotiations resume, you need to consider the fundamental questions: Is our current approach to a START Treaty, with its inherent verification uncertainties, well-­suited to advance our interests? Is our Defense & Space position of facilitating deployment of defenses sound? Several promising ideas in addition to those for discussion at this meeting were identified, but will require further study. 1. Defense & Space. In essence, our current Defense & Space position trades a commitment not to withdraw from the ABM Treaty for a specified period of time, in return for freedom to deploy defenses at the end of that period. During the non-­withdrawal period, the U.S. claims the right to conduct ABM tests in space, under the broad interpretation of the ABM Treaty. Two Defense & Space papers (at Tab D) are on the agenda. DST 001 discusses options for ensuring U.S. ABM testing rights during a period of non-­withdrawal from the ABM Treaty. DST 002 discusses options for protecting a right to deploy defenses after a non-­withdrawal period. DST 001—Testing rights during a non-­withdrawal period. Our current position (option 1) provides a unilateral U.S. assurance that the number of ABM test satellites orbited at any one time would not exceed 15. Further, the Parties would agree to specific notification procedures regarding those satellites. These steps are intended to address stated Soviet concerns that U.S. ABM testing in space could become de facto deployment. It would also, if the Soviets agree, obtain implicit Soviet acceptance of testing under the broad interpretation of the ABM Treaty, without subjecting the broad interpretation to negotiation. This position is designed to be fully consistent with the ABM Treaty but, as you know, there is controversy about the proper interpretation of the Treaty. Option 2 would negotiate an explicit agreement based on the terms of what is now the U.S. unilateral assurance. Moreover, it would go beyond the ABM Treaty, inasmuch as it would permit testing in space of all ABM weapons, whether or not they are based on “other physical principles.” If successful, the option could provide better protection for U.S. testing rights, constrain Soviet as well as U.S. activities, and counter congressional efforts to legislate the restrictive interpretation of the ABM Treaty. On the other hand, it could also put on the negotiating table what we already believe to be our right. Also during the non-­withdrawal period, all agencies agree we should retain our proposal to allow unlimited development, testing, and deployment of space-­based sensors. This proposal is an attempt to reconcile the increasing needs and capabilities of both sides for warning and attack assessment, with the fact that there will be no way to distinguish with NTM whether or not certain sensor satellites violate ABM Treaty provisions.
