North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 Secretary Vance recommends that we concentrate on resisting new restrictions and on avoiding renewal of those that would otherwise expire. This makes sense. Secretary Vance also proposes we consult with the Congress on the possibility of introducing floor amendments to pending bills to remove certain restrictions during this session of Congress. This course seems to OMB, NSC staff, and me to involve serious problems: —In almost all cases, floor amendments to pending bills would require an intensive lobbying effort by the Administration. —This is probably not the proper moment for raising such new budgetary issues as a Security Assistance contingency fund and expanded military assistance, in light of your concern about budget discipline and our current aid troubles on the Hill. —We need to review the restrictions in detail and obtain the views of all interested agencies before deciding which to try to repeal. Then we can undertake the Congressional consultations that Secretary Vance recommends. Accordingly, OMB, NSC staff, and I have recommended to State that when Secretary Vance testifies Monday before the House International Relations Committee4 to provide an overview of the Administration’s foreign policy and an assessment of the legislative restrictions, he: —focus on the present legislative constraints, citing some that seriously interfere with the conduct of U.S. foreign policy; —avoid giving the impression that the Administration is seeking repeal of all restrictions, without regard to underlying Congressional concern; —emphasize that the list should serve as a basis for joint Executive/Legislative branch consultations, and offer to work with Congress to see what should be done to improve present legislation and drop unnecessary constraints; —reiterate our opposition to the new restraints proposed in the FY 79 aid bills; —stress the importance of adequate funding for AID and IFI’s and the need to resist unjustified budgetary cuts in ongoing programs, since the meat-axe approach to aid funding is as much of a restraint on U.S. policy as the specific restrictions set forth in present legislation; —lay the groundwork for a major Administration effort during the next budget cycle to “remove the barnacles” on U.S. economic and military assistance programs. We will work with State on this testimony and move promptly to coordinate an Administration position on the proposals set forth in the attached memo, as well as other questions regarding these restrictions. 4 Vance’s June 19 statement focused on U.S.-Soviet relations and U.S. policies in Af-
