936
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—Retroactive terms adjustment for LLDCs and IDA eligible coun-
tries would be a constructive U.S. action that would have a positive im-
pact on our overall North-South relations, but at a relatively low cost to
the United States;
—In my judgment, the effect on the credit worthiness of devel-
oping countries would be minimal. The impact on future requests for
reschedulings is uncertain, but is unlikely to be sufficiently great to
overturn the traditionally cautious U.S. approach in creditor clubs or
other fora;
—Comparable action is under consideration by the British and the
Danes. The Dutch are pressing for this type of measure within the EEC,
as well as within the OECD. The Japanese are interested in the pro-
posal. The Danes have also indicated a willingness to consult with the
Germans on this issue. The recent Swedish, Swiss, Dutch and Canadian
debt cancellations or reschedulings (see Annex B to the Discussion
Paper, Tab II, pp. 6–7) have created a climate in which a negative US de-
cision would be unfavorably compared to other OECD approaches to
the debt issue. On the other hand, an affirmative U.S. decision would
be in step with actions envisaged by several OECD countries although
the French and Germans are said to have problems with this approach.
—Conversion of past loans to current terms has a logic that pro-
vides an excellent basis for the necessary consultations on Capitol Hill:
for example, the proposal brings terms on past loans up to the standards
now accepted by the Congress (grants for LLDCs and soft loans for other
IDA eligible countries) and is a policy that takes into account the distri-
bution of aid as well as the economic circumstances of individual coun-
tries and their development policies. The Discussion Paper suggests
that the United States seek LDC commitments to use freed resources
for agreed development objectives. Such a proviso might enhance the
proposal’s prospects on Capitol Hill. However, the amounts are small
and U.S. leverage will be slight. This factor plus the disadvantages of
setting up another accounting procedure lead me to recommend
against this form of conditionality.
By tabling the US/EEC paper and announcing its willingness to
consult with Congress on retroactive terms adjustment the USG would
give the UNCTAD secretariat a fighting chance to pull off its proposed
compromise. Secretary General Corea’s attempt to reach an interme-
diate position between the G–77 and the OECD countries (as usual, the
Soviets are at the margin of these discussions) is a significant move,
with implications for the common fund talks and future North-South
discussions. We are uncertain as to whether the G–77 will accept the
UNCTAD proposals. However, the constructive U.S. action that I rec-
ommend would greatly strengthen the hand of the moderate LDCs
within the group of developing countries. Without such U.S. action, it
