930
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ority compared to other UN conferences. We expect that posture to
continue.
There has been scattered Congressional interest in the Conference
thus far. On the other hand, various U.S. non-governmental organiza-
tions are pressing for the U.S. to play a leadership role.
It appears that most country delegations will be headed at the min-
isterial level. The U.S. Delegation might be headed by the Secretary of
the Interior (who is also chairman of the interagency Water Resources
Council). This would emphasize our interest in maintaining a focus on
water issues and intention to avoid extraneous political matters.
The Options
1. Strong Leadership Position—U.S. would use Water Conference to
set forth new directions in U.S. philosophy and intentions regarding
overall relations with the Third World, and would demonstrate its
commitment by announcing several significant new initiatives in the
water area. A Presidential statement could be read by the Secretary of
the Interior as head of Delegation.
Advantages
—LDCs would react favorably to early, positive attention by Ad-
ministration (which would be especially visible if other developed na-
tions do not intend to be forthcoming).
—Chances would be enhanced to avoid politicization of confer-
ence by LDCs, who otherwise may feel that there are no other tangible
benefits to be gained.
—Initiatives would offer positive proof of U.S. willingness to help
solve specific LDC problems in businesslike approach.
Disadvantages
—Very difficult to shape meaningful and supportable U.S. policy
statements and major initiatives in short time available.
—This level of participation may be excessive in relation to modest
expectations and intentions of other countries which will participate,
and in relation to realistic overall conference results.
—Meaningful initiatives could be quite costly, and there would be
insufficient time to examine and have approved budgetary proposals.
2. Medium Posture—U.S. would focus exclusively on water re-
sources subject matter of Conference, but adopt more forthcoming
stance than previously planned. This would require support by the Ad-
ministration for several water-oriented initiatives. From our conversa-
tions with AID officials we gather that initiatives of this kind could be
developed whose implementation would be possible within the appro-
priations which AID expects to obtain.
The Secretary of the Interior could head the Delegation and be
backed by an alternate with extensive and recent experience in
North-South meetings, and ability to advise and lead in this context.
