84
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
munist parties.3 This support has generally been a consequence of the
US initiative, of a naturally keen interest in developments close to
home, and of domestic and regional political pressures. Some, particu-
larly East European, emigres may have seen in the US-led, Western
human rights campaign evidence of a new, more confrontational policy
toward Eastern Europe, which they welcomed. (U)
Against this international backdrop, region-wide trends and devel-
opments in individual countries gave a direct stimulus to dissidence.
By mid-1976 many dissidents were undoubtedly aware that all of the
Warsaw Pact countries faced difficult economic problems, and probably
calculated that the regimes were thus more vulnerable to pressures for
concessions. (U)
The economic factor was most important in Poland, where the
workers’ riots in June 1976 dramatized popular dissatisfaction and
revealed the regime’s political weaknesses. Polish dissidents had
already become more active by late-1975, when they were successful
in modifying government-proposed changes in the constitution. In
September 1976 they seized upon the issue of the release of imprisoned
rioters to show the need for political reform.4 This attracted popular
support and, in turn, helped stimulate other dissident activity in Poland
and, perhaps, elsewhere in Eastern Europe. (U)
In Czechoslovakia, the well-publicized Charter 77 manifesto was
triggered by the publication in the Czechoslovak press in the fall of
1976 of the UN human rights covenants. Czechoslovak dissent, in
general, has been fed by the despair of those reformers who had been
purged and ostracized since 1968. Many of these persons may have
gained new hope that the stagnating economy would impel the leader-
ship to rehabilitate, among others, purged economic and managerial
functionaries. In East Germany, Rudolf Bahro’s wide-ranging critique
in August 1977 of the “system’s” deficiencies examined at length the
country’s economic shortcomings. (U)
Who Are the Dissidents?
The dissident activists in Eastern Europe have traditionally come
from the educated, articulate stratum of society, a broadly defined
3 For some dissidents, support by Eurocommunists has not been consistent enough.
Thus, a prominent Czechoslovak dissident publicly acknowledged Eurocommunist sup-
port, but said that it “could be more effective and courageous.” He called on the West
European Communist parties to publish political material by exiled East Europeans and
to establish direct contacts with dissidents in the East. [Footnote is in the original.]
4 Polish leader Gierek’s talk, in the immediate wake of the riots, about the need
for “democratization” probably helped some dissidents to believe that chances for reform
were good. As time passed, however, the regime talked less about the need for political
changes. [Footnote is in the original.]
