58
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—The existing special product controls will be used sparingly, and
then only for those products and data that reveal sensitive aspects of
the program as determined by the DCI. (S)
—For SIGINT, the special space-related product control system
shall not be used when the DCI determines that the intelligence is pro-
tected by appropriate classification or the more general special intelli-
gence control system. (TS)
—Operational aspects of intelligence space activities shall be af-
forded strict security protection within a special access program system
as determined by the DCI. (S)
—Strict control over public statements and background con-
cerning space reconnaissance will be maintained. (C)
—Further changes to the space intelligence security policy can be
authorized only by the President. (C)
b. Support of Military Operational Requirements. Support of military
operational requirements is a major space intelligence mission. Na-
tional space intelligence assets shall provide appropriate support to de-
ployed military operational forces in balance with their primary mis-
sion capabilities. In order to ensure a proper balance between the
national and tactical missions of these assets, there will be military in-
volvement in the requirements, tasking, exploitation, and dissemina-
tion functions and in the development program. The Secretary of De-
fense will, together with the Director of Central Intelligence, ensure
that there is no unnecessary overlap between national foreign intelli-
gence programs and Department of Defense intelligence programs,
and the Secretary of Defense will provide the Director of Central Intelli-
gence all information necessary for this purpose. (S)
c. Interactions with Civil Community. Selected space-related prod-
ucts and technology shall be made available to civil agencies within ap-
propriate security constraints. The Intelligence Community may pro-
vide radio frequency (RF) mapping and surveys for the civil commu-
nity under appropriate security controls. (TS)
d. Survivability. The national intelligence program shall be config-
ured to operate in a hostile environment. The guidance set forth in
subparagraph 2c. shall be aggressively pursued by the intelligence
community. (S)
4. The United States shall conduct civil space programs to increase
the body of scientific knowledge about the earth and the universe; to
develop and operate civil applications of space technology; to maintain
United States leadership in space science, applications, and technology;
and to further United States domestic and foreign policy objectives.
The following policies shall govern the conduct of the civil space pro-
gram. (U)
