Chapter 5, May–June 1990 691 Nazarkin expressed appreciation for Burt’s recognition of practical limitations, and said the Soviet delegation would have to consult with technical experts. Burt noted to Nazarkin that U.S. experts had said that the phasing schedule should result in a concave reduction curve for both sides. They had “screamed bloody murder” at the notion of a straight line curve, but had been overridden by political authorities. Burt stressed that the 100 warhead deviation allowance was his own personal proposal. — On the subject of heavy missiles, Nazarkin explained that the Soviet side had analyzed U.S. concerns about the nature and process of heavy missile reductions, and was prepared to make a statement that all heavy missiles would be reduced proportionately. Burt asked: “proportionate to what?” Nazarkin answered: “proportionate to other types of SNDVs.” Nazarkin then confirmed Burt’s rephrasing of the Soviet position that whatever the slope of the reductions line, the heavy missiles reductions line would be the same. Burt said he would report Nazarkin’s proposal, but reminded the Soviet side that the U.S. position was there should be an explicit category for heavy missile reductions. Backfire Bombers — Burt next raised the new U.S. Backfire Bomber proposal which had been introduced by Secretary Baker, reiterating two components: — A statement that Backfires would not be given a capability to operate at intercontinental distances; — A statement to include all Backfire Bombers (including SNA) in the Atlantic-­to-­the-URALs zone. Burt observed that anyone with even the vaguest understanding of the Backfire issue knew it had been a major problem in strategic negotiations. With acceptance of the proposed statements, the U.S. side would be able to remove its position that the Backfire was a heavy bomber. — Nazarkin noted that the Soviet side had already expressed its willingness to include non-SNA Backfires (in CFE). With regard to “TU–22M bombers assigned to naval aviation,” Nazarkin’s “preliminary reaction” was that they should be discussed in naval arms control negotiations which should be started immediately. — Burt acknowledged that the Soviet position on naval arms control was one of principle, as was the U.S. position on SLCMs. He said the United States had tried to be creative to find a way to respond to Soviet concerns on SLCMs, and urged the Soviets to be just as creative on handling naval Backfires. — Burt observed that it would be very hard to sell any (conventional forces) treaty which did not limit weapons deployed in Soviet Asia; it would be impossible if SNA Backfires were also excluded. The
