893.01/213: Telegram
[Document 532]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, February 27, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received 1:45 p.m.]
93. 1. The Chinese Secretary of the British Legation called in behalf of the
British Minister on February 25th to consult me regarding the long-
established question of the customs at Canton. The opinion held by the
British Foreign Office, he stated, is gravitating in the direction of early
recognition of the Canton Government, and if independence was the desire
of the people of South China and if capacity for the maintenance of a
comparatively satisfactory separate administration was shown thereafter by
them, to continue to withhold recognition would not be right.
2. As suggested in my telegram 73, February 12, 8 p.m.,47 third paragraph, I
cannot but feel that the motive which impels the British Government to
make a decision so momentous is the hope that by placating the Canton
regime, the strike and boycott can be terminated. There is perhaps also the
hope of eventually placing British interests vis-à-vis the new government in
a position of special advantage. I myself am unable to perceive in regard to
Canton and other regions of South China that any basis exists for viewing
them as a political entity which is separate from the remainder of China.
While it is true that they have for several years maintained an autonomous
administration of their own with some degree of success, all along their so-
called independence has been a political fiction rather than a reality. A
faction which had been ousted from power has in a particular section of
China maintained its organization without considering itself actually
separate, in fact, from China as a whole. For example, in representing China
at Paris it participated with the Peking Government. At times it has claimed
that it was itself the sole legitimate government of China, and assembled the
rump parliament at Canton. From time to time it has sought by military
