International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 709 nounced auto package,2 indicated reclassification will create difficulties for these efforts, and urged the USG to reduce the truck tariff to avoid disruption to trade. (Japan acted unilaterally in taking the initiatives contained in the auto package. While we told the GOJ it would be given credit for eliminating duties on auto parts in any subsequent dealing on automotive products, we made it very clear that we were not committed to initiating discussions or reducing the tariff on trucks.) Domestically this issue cannot be isolated from the problems currently facing the U.S. auto industry and its workers. In your May 14 meeting with them, Caldwell of Ford, Meyers of AMC, and Fraser all stressed the importance of maintaining the 25 percent truck tariff at this time of drastically declining sales and employment in the industry.3 May truck production was off 67 percent from last year, while May car output was off 44 percent. The 31 percent import penetration (from January to April) of the U.S. light truck market, moreover, is higher than the 27 percent import share of the car market. Additionally, the industry is concerned that a reduction in the 25 percent duty (which applies to cargo vans as well as trucks) would result in huge increases in the presently negligible cargo van imports further depressing U.S. motor vehicle sales. (None of the options below contemplates a reduction in the tariff on cargo vans nor have the Japanese requested such a reduction. If you approve an option to reduce the tariff for minipickups it will be done without reducing the tariff on cargo vans.) Caldwell has reversed his company’s previous request that the effective date of reclassification be delayed for 2½ years (until Ford’s planned U.S. small truck capacity is in operation). He claims that immediate imposition of the 25 percent duty would increase U.S. truck sales by up to 200,000 units and auto employment by up to 20,000 jobs during the 1981 model year. (There is general agreement, even by individuals in the industry, that these estimates are highly exaggerated.) GM believes the higher tariff should be enforced but that it could be used as a bargaining chip and reduced over time to induce production in the U.S. Nissan has asked that implementation of the reclassification be delayed for 2½ years when its U.S. truck plant will be in operation. Chrysler suggests the increased tariff be phased in but does not believe 2 See Document 242. 3 Carter met with automotive industry and UAW representatives in the Cabinet Room on May 14 from 1:12 p.m. until 2:58 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found. A report on the meeting was published in the May 15 edition of The New York Times. (Reginald Stuart, “Carter Promises to Act on Autos,” The New York Times, May 15, 1980, p. D1) Philip Caldwell was Chairman of the Ford Motor Company, Gerald Meyers was Chairman of the American Motors Corporation, and Douglas Fraser was President of the United Auto Workers.
