March 27–December 31, 1979 883 Jordan and Saudi Arabia to hear the views of the leaders of those countries and become better acquainted personally.3 3. You may say that in talks with President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin4 prior to the July 5–6 Alexandria session Ambassador Strauss was assured of the determination of both leaders to carry out the provisions of the Camp David Framework, and the joint letter of March 26, 1979, calling for the establishment of a self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza in order to provide full autonomy for the inhabitants. Suggest you give host government the text of the joint statement issued at the close of the July 5–6 meeting (which we are sending you by septel)5 and make following points: —We are pleased over the outcome of this session and believe important progress was made. —The decision to create working groups on election modalities and powers and responsibilities in effect establishes an agenda for the negotiations. These two working groups, and others which may be created subsequently, will provide a practical forum in which to give practical expression to broad principles and to define the full autonomy for the Palestinians of the West Bank and Gaza which the parties agreed upon last fall at Camp David. While we do not expect working groups themselves to resolve all major substantive problems, they are essential for preparing the ground for their resolution at the Ministerial level. —The presence and the efforts of Ambassador Strauss played an important role in giving impetus to the talks and helping the delegations reach agreement. Ambassador Strauss’ vigorous and successful intervention in his first appearance in the negotiations demonstrates the determination and the ability of the United States to assure progress in negotiations. —We are pleased also over the positive atmosphere that prevailed in the July 5–6 Alexandria session. Israelis and Egyptians showed an understanding of each other’s problems and both demonstrated a sincere desire to move forward. 3 No memoranda of conversation or summary telegrams of Strauss’s July 7 meetings in Amman and Riyadh with the leaders of Jordan and Saudi Arabia have been found. 4 For Strauss’s meeting with Begin, see Document 270. Following this, Strauss travelled to Egypt, where he met with Sadat at Ma’amura on July 3. No memorandum of conversation or summary telegram of this meeting has been found, though the Consulate General conveyed the transcript of the statements made by both Sadat and Strauss following the meeting in telegram 562 from Alexandria, July 4. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790303–1094) 5 The Consulate General transmitted the text of the joint statement establishing the working groups for the autonomy talks in telegram 582 from Alexandria, July 6. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790307–0174)
