Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
191
58.
Intelligence Information Special Report Prepared in the
Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, September 21, 1978
COUNTRY
Romania
DATE OF INFO
April 1978 to July 1978
SUBJECT
Efforts by Romanian President Ceausescu to Damage or Undermine Radio Free
Europe
SOURCE
[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]
1. Romanian President Ceausescu, on returning from his trip to
the United States on 18 April 1978, during which Radio Free Europe
(RFE) infuriated him by coverage that included live broadcasts of the
playing of an outdated Romanian anthem and a press conference dur-
ing which Ceausescu was required to deal with facts that had been
kept hidden from the Romanian people, ordered that the Directorate
General of Foreign Intelligence (DGIE) draw up a study of the occasions
on which RFE had presented the Romanian Government and especially
Ceausescu in an unfavorable light. The study was to deal also with
methods used by RFE for collecting information (as RFE data were
often very timely and accurate) and with the role played in the process
by the American and West German Embassies [in Romania].2 The study
would serve as a basis for lodging a protest to the United States at
some time in the future. Ceausescu asked at the same time for talking
points that might be used with West German Chancellor Helmut
Schmidt, President Walter Scheel and Chairman of Social Democratic
Party Willy Brandt in asking that RFE be compelled to quit the territory
of West Germany. Some of these points, he added might be useful in
Paris, where, he added, there was special need to put an end to the
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
I–026, Subject Files F–R, Romania. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. Henze
forwarded the report to Brzezinski under a September 22 covering memorandum. In
his memorandum, Henze noted that in August, Noel Bernard, Romanian Bureau director
at Radio Free Europe, was invited to visit Romania, and that the RFE leadership sought
approval for the visit. In light of the report, Henze recommended that Bernard’s visit
be indefinitely postponed. Brzezinski approved the recommendation.
2 These and following brackets are in the original.
