Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 479 99. Address by the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Newsom)1 San Francisco, California, November 16, 1978 The U.S. and the Third World: Partners or Plaintiffs Eight years ago I spoke to the Commonwealth Club on the subject “The United States and the Third World.” That was in 1970, the year of the 25th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. My remarks at that time dwelt on the growing influence of the newly independent nations in the United Nations and in world affairs generally. I dwelt also on growing differences which were appearing between the views of these countries and those of the United States. This was true with respect to the process of decolonization, trade, and racial discrimination. In 1970 most Americans were only vaguely aware of the potential power and influence of the developing countries. The general opinion was that the newly independent countries of this century would not, for many years to come, be major factors in either economic or political affairs. A series of events over the last 6 years has shaken that view. In 1973 the Arab oil-producing states successfully mounted an embargo against the United States. Once the oil-producing states understood their power as a result of the embargo, they moved successfully to raise the price of oil dramatically. Other developing countries, instead of expressing dismay at the impact of the price rises on their own economies, saw benefits for the developing world in general in relating similar tactics to other commodities. In 1974 in Algiers the new international economic order was born with its strong demands for greater equality in economic relations between the developed and the developing countries.2 North-South Dialogue The new international economic order in the form of a declaration of U.N. purposes and of the obligations of industrialized states to make 1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, January 1979, pp. 30–32. All brackets are in the original. Newsom delivered his address before the International Relations Section of the Commonwealth Club and the World Affairs Council of Northern California. 2 The fourth conference of the Heads of State or Government of the Non-aligned Countries, or Non-aligned Movement (NAM), met in Algiers, September 5–9, 1973, and proposed the establishment of a new international economic order (NIEO). On January 30, 1974, Algerian Representative to the United Nations Abdellatif Rahal, proposed a convocation of an UN special session to discuss development issues.
