World Hunger and Food Policy
713
the AID. Taking these two groups of countries together, the existing
and prospective demand on the United States’ scientific and technical
resources in food and agriculture is huge. These resources exist pri-
marily in land-grant universities and the Department of Agriculture
and, to a lesser but significant extent, in the private sector.
However, the United States Government is not organized to mar-
shall these resources and put them to work. For example, except for ar-
rangements which are fully financed by other countries, such as Saudi
Arabia, and particular projects financed by the AID, the Department of
Agriculture has no specific funds for international scientific and tech-
nical collaboration in food and agriculture. Although existing foreign
assistance legislation authorizes funds for collaboration by land-grant
universities and this Department on problems of food and agriculture
in developing countries, in fact these funds are not being used. The re-
sult is piecemeal efforts far short of what the NRC recommends.
In the Department of Agriculture’s budget estimates for fiscal year
1979, I will recommend funds to be used by land-grant universities and
this Department to undertake scientific and technical collaboration
with other countries—both developed and developing—along the lines
recommended by the NRC. These estimates will include funds for the
universities and this Department to develop resources for serious, sus-
tained contributions to developing food and agriculture in poor,
food-deficit countries. I don’t propose to go into competition with the
AID abroad, but I do intend to press the case for this Department’s
having sufficient funds and expertise to sustain scientific and technical
work on international problems of food and agriculture.
—I am designating a senior officer of the Department of Agricul-
ture to be responsible for organizing this Department’s participation in
and our arrangements with land-grant universities for scientific and
technical collaboration with other countries.
International Trade Arrangements
Negotiations in the International Wheat Council (IWC) and the
Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN) will begin in earnest in Au-
tumn 1977. Our basic objectives in these trade negotiations are to
dampen wide swings in prices for producers and consumers, improve
world food security, and expand trade flows of agricultural products.
The Office of the Special Trade Representative (STR) and the De-
partment of Agriculture are collaborating closely in these negotiations.
This Department is providing staff to the STR and is doing substantive
and technical analyses for the agricultural trade negotiations.
—The Carter Administration should give prominence to our agri-
cultural objectives in these multilateral negotiations, because agricul-
ture may be the knottiest area. So you can put your personal stamp on
