National Security Policy  341
capabilities have improved during FY 1958, Soviet nuclear weapons devel­
opment and improved delivery capabilities during same period, e.g., as 
demonstrated by Soviet launchings of space satellites, have made any relative 
U.S. gain questionable. Soviets are probably now capable of exploiting 
weaknesses in our defense system at very high and very low altitudes 
and of utilizing electronic countermeasures, sabotage, and deception 
to reduce the effectiveness of our defense system and contribute to 
success of their mission. During 1959, the estimated Soviet initial lim­
ited ICBM capability will provide an additional means of exploiting 
weaknesses in our defense system. The continental air defense sys­
tem cannot be expected to counter completely an all-­out attack of the 
magnitude which Soviets are capable of launching against the North 
American Continent. Solutions to following problems are being pursued on 
a high priority basis:
1. Procurement, training, and retention of highly skilled personnel 
required by modern and increasingly complex defense systems.
2. Detection of airborne vehicles at very high and very low alti­
tudes, and development and availability of weapons which can be 
effectively used at these altitudes.
3. Development and implementation of measures to overcome or 
counteract enemy electronic countermeasures.
4. Development of a system which can be used in defense against 
enemy ballistic missiles.
5. Development of an effective and integrated sea surveillance sys­
tem which will provide for detection, identification, and tracking of 
surface ships and submarines operating within missile launching range 
of the North American Continent, toward goal of development of capa­
bility to establish control over the submarine or surface ship prior to 
launching of its missile.
6. Identification and engagement of hostile aircraft as far from our 
borders as possible.
7. Means to mitigate or shorten the long lead time involved in com­
pletion of programmed improvements to systems.
[Omitted here is the remainder of the report.]
