1288 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President said good. Ambassador Veliotes said he hoped it would not show up in the Israeli press! King Hussein said that this project could be done in the context of peace. Secretary Muskie asked whether there were any problems with the authorization bill for the Maqarin Dam; Congress asks about it each year. Ambassador Veliotes said that this is a problem. The President said he knew. Ambassador Veliotes said that there is $50 million this year and previous appropriations. If agreement is not reached in this fiscal year, then we will have to tell the Congress we can’t swing it. Hal Saunders and he will discuss this with the Prime Minister. The last issue with Israel is that Israel is asking a specific figure, concerning water Jordan would take from the Yarmuk to the West Bank. This is hung up. The President said that if U.S. funds are available, we will need something for Congress to keep them. The Prime Minister said that several issues have been resolved: the Yarmuk triangle, the weir, and others. Only one remains, which Israel raised recently: water for the West Bank. The major political issue is can Israel speak for the West Bank? We can find a formula. King Hussein said that there are other issues with Syria. The President said he knew. These are his items. Perhaps they could talk privately about self-determination. He wants to understand. He has listened carefully, but does not see how His Majesty sees this in a broader context. Perhaps they should talk privately? King Hussein said: as you wish. The President suggested that they stay here. King Hussein said that they had talked about all subjects that had been raised; they should try to work them out together. Jordan’s feeling now: as far as what else happens, they accept developments and progress in some areas to establish a comprehensive peace (i.e. the Egypt-Israel peace treaty). Now is the point to think again about what to do. In the Arab world, there is a division. Some—either in their thinking or from external suggestions—want to undermine all that has been done recently. Jordan’s feeling is that what has happened has happened, and they would like to see how to go forward. Their object is a comprehensive peace settlement and security, to transfer the area to greater stability and hope. Some points were raised yesterday on the Palestinians: can anyone speak for them? This is a dilemma. The natural answer is the PLO. Then
