90
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
prevent forcible seizure of the A.I.O.C. by the Iranian Government. The
Secretary of State requested the guidance of the President and Council
in deciding what course should be followed.
He commenced by explaining that he was unalterably opposed to
lending any assistance to the British in the event that they decided to
send in troops to take up areas against the legally constituted gov-
ernment of Iran. He believed we should vigorously oppose this British
proposal, which was sheer madness. He pointed to the possibility of
such a move by the British Government opening the way to a Soviet in-
cursion into Iran by invocation of the treaty between Iran and the So-
viet Union, quite apart from the disastrous effect that the British move
would have on world opinion.
The Secretary of State indicated, however, that the United States
might well support intervention if the Communist (Tudeh) Party at-
tempted to subvert the legal government of Iran.
In general, the members of the Council concurred in the views ex-
pressed, but the point was made that we could not afford to be neutral
with respect to the controversy between Britain and Iran. We should in-
deed give vigorous support to the British in reaching an equitable set-
tlement short of any proposal to assist them if they resorted to the use
of armed forces against the present Iranian Government.
In this connection it was pointed out that the Iranian Prime Min-
ister and Government had unilaterally broken a contract and that such
a breach of contract was not only wrong in itself, but was likely to set an
example and precedent which would induce Iraq and other countries
to suppose that they could undertake similar unilateral action. This was
a highly contagious situation which we should do all in our power to
check.
The suggestion was also put forward that if all negotiations on the
governmental level failed to produce a reasonable settlement of the oil
controversy, it might be possible for private American oil men to act as
intermediaries between the British and the Iranians. Such a proposal
was strictly confined to the proffer of good offices, it being clearly un-
derstood that no one advocated any plan which involved an American
oil company taking over the operations of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Com-
pany. If such moves were under consideration by private American
business men, it was agreed that they should be discouraged.
It was further pointed out that while the United States Govern-
ment should eschew the use of force against the present Iranian Gov-
ernment, either unilaterally or along with the British, in preventing sei-
zure of the oil concession, this should not be regarded as constituting a
precedent which would prevent the United States ever undertaking the
use of military force in certain contingencies in the future. We might ac-
tually be compelled under certain circumstances to do so.
