1955 325 249. Telegram 795 from Geneva1 Geneva, September 28, 1955, 9 p.m. 795. From Johnson. 1. At 18th meeting lasting one hour 20 minutes today Wang opened with long, prepared statement. He said that after reaching agreement on first item of agenda more than half month had passed. In accord­ ance with suggestion our side he had tabled two subjects for discussion under agenda item two: 1) question of embargo, 2) preparations for Sino-American negotiations at a higher level. However, our side was still “entangling” talks on agenda item one. We had failed present our position on his points and also failed present our concrete views on subjects to be discussed under “practical matters.” This position of ours he considered entirely unsatisfactory. 2. He said I had mentioned at last meeting provision in agreed announcement that our governments would “adopt appropriate meas­ ures” to enable persons return their countries. I had also raised ques­ tion those Americans who had violated laws in China. I had expressed hope his government would act promptly to implement this provision so that we could in our talks enter promptly upon discussion agenda item two. Had I meant to imply by these statements that only when all Americans had been released would we discuss and settle the ques­ tions under item two? If this were so, his side could not agree to it. In discussion on return of civilians he had repeatedly stated that cases Americans must be dealt with individually and in accordance with Chinese juridical processes taking into account the seriousness of the individual offenses. Only in a state of improved relations between our two countries could his government make its lenient policy toward the law-­breaking Americans more lenient. He had made these statements formally and they were in the record of meeting and only after they had been made was agreement reached on agenda item one. Further­ more, during the discussion I had “demanded” release of all Ameri­ cans in China within specified time. He had categorically rejected this demand as infringement on China’s sovereignty, this had been for­ mally entered in record of meeting, and only after that had agreement been reached. 3. He said now agreement had been reached and no use to go back over that discussion. His side would faithfully implement agree­ ment. But to use implementation of agreed announcement as excuse to 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2855. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.
