1294
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
record. We need to broaden the basis for the Palestinians to assemble
and talk—only in the context of eventual self-determination.
The President said that Jordan and the PLO see self-determination
differently. The difficulty (between them) is that Jordan does not
espouse publicly an independent Palestinian state—and he believes
Jordan doesn’t want it. Assad said two years ago that this was the worst
thing that could happen, but doesn’t say so publicly, because of Rabat.9
Therefore self-determination is a phrase in Israeli minds meaning an in-
dependent Palestinian state. In Jordanian minds, it means federation
with Jordan. His (the President’s) preference is Jordan’s—confedera-
tion of the West Bank with Jordan. He had told the Israelis this. He has
no group of West Bank leaders to present their case to the American
people and himself, demanding the right of free assembly, to express
their views and demand the right to vote, to choose a congress, and to
take over administering their own affairs. No one is recognized to make
these demands. He is asking the Jordanians to help it evolve.
The Prime Minister said that without Begin, Israel might let the Pal-
estinians assemble. How can it be done? His Majesty is ready to talk to
them (the Palestinians). But if they are not allowed to assemble in
peace, with an elected body, how can it be done?
Ambassador Linowitz said that this issue has not come up in that
form in the autonomy talks.
The President said (to Ambassador Linowitz) to forget Camp David
(i.e. as the context). How can we get the limits removed?
Ambassador Linowitz said that let the Palestinians announce that
they will be involved, with a mechanism to get their views, and ask for
an assembly. We can support them in that.
The Prime Minister said that the U.S. says the Palestinians should
participate in Camp David: this is a non-starter.
The President said he does not believe they have to do it that way;
we can get around it.
The Prime Minister said that if that is just a future course of action,
then all right—but it will be necessary to get Begin to allow it. They
(Jordan) will ask.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Jordan should tell Israel it is doing
this, and is taking responsibility for a peaceful assembly.
9 The Arab League Summit Conference, held at Rabat, Morocco, in October 1974,
was attended by leaders from 20 Arab countries. On October 28, the conference voted
unanimously for the creation of an independent Palestinian state anywhere “on Pales-
tinian land that is liberated” from Israeli control. Additionally, the conference recognized
the PLO as the “sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.” (Henry Tanner,
“Arab Leaders Issue Call for a Palestinian State; Arafat Given Main Role,” The New York
Times, October 28, 1974, p. 1)
