Chapter 4, February–April 1990  571
Baker: I understand that that’s your position. I understand that you 
need an agreement on that. I frankly don’t have the authority to change 
our position, especially after we have gone from 1,500 to 800 kilome-
ters. But I don’t see why the absence of our agreement on the range 
threshold should mean that the whole package that we agreed to in 
Moscow unravels. Particularly, when we are only seven weeks away 
from the Summit. The range is an issue that we are going to have to 
resolve. I understand it’s important to you. I understand it’s a big prob-
lem. But the other elements should not unravel.
Shevardnadze: No, there is no unraveling of the package proposal. 
But, Mr. Secretary, the counting rule that we reached in Moscow does 
give you the advantage.
Baker: I don’t want to lead you to believe that we are going to solve 
the range question at this Ministerial. In fact it may be one of the last 
issues that we find an answer to.
Shevardnadze: Okay. But maybe we could try to discuss this at the 
next ministerial. As for SLCMs, it seems to me we accepted elements 
that were almost impossible before. We used to insist that the agree-
ment must be in the framework of the START Treaty. Gorbachev him-
self said that if it’s not in, there’s not going to be a treaty. Now we’re 
ready to accept a political declaration that is not in the treaty. But a 
political declaration cannot simply be just a phrase. It’s got to be a dec-
laration that has the two sides assuming certain obligations and certain 
numerical limits. There have to be some limits. We can’t have some-
thing without any limits at all. And it ought to be on the type of ships 
as well. We had an agreement that we would in fact have the types of 
ships indicated. As for verification, there is really nothing extraordinary 
happening. I would ask you to instruct your experts to look again at the 
December 1987 summit language. On-­site inspection is mentioned and 
is signed by our Presidents. But I trust that the experts will have to 
work on this one more. In principle our approach is in effect. We’re not 
going to walk back from the Moscow agreement. But really SLCMs are 
a sensitive issue.
Baker: Legally binding limits were not discussed in Moscow. The 
Joint Statement says politically binding declarations. Each side will 
state or declare the number of such weapons of its inventory. But 
perhaps we could go upstairs and let the experts wrestle with this 
problem. I worry that all this doesn’t bode well for wrapping up our 
work in seven weeks. Our military will say that they see a different 
approach than we saw in Moscow. Anyway, I mention this here, not 
in a larger group.
Shevardnadze: Please let me ask you about range. Our military com-
plains that the US has an advantage in the counting rule. The 40% more 
bombers does not compensate for the US ALCM advantage. They also
