Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX D. Discrediting and Isolating Ceausescu We see this “containment strategy” as most likely Soviet course of political action, first signs of which began appearing after Hua Kuofeng visit here in August and intensified in wake of Warsaw Pact summit imbroglio in late November. Ceausescu is vulnerable to attacks from “orthodox” Communists on his leadership style, cult of personality, his pretensions to world leadership, widespread corruption among his underlings, foreign policy “deviations,” defections of key personnel, and a variety of other real and imagined items. Soviets and their friends have already expended some effort in this direction, both in bilateral whispering campaigns attacking Ceausescu’s “demagoguery” and his “erratic” personality and in such multilateral fora as recent Sofia ideological meeting on “real socialism” where Romanians and a few others from Eurocommunist parties were isolated from “mainstream” of the over 70 parties represented there. This effort could easily increase and could go so far as to include intensive pressure in interparty fora to condemn Ceausescu as an ideological deviationist as well as to rally pro-Soviet friends in Third World to discredit Romanian efforts in this arena. Further, since every political leader undoubtedly has some skeletons in his personal closet, it is reasonable to assume that Soviets know or could find out what some of them are and publicly air them, to Ceausescu’s severe personal and professional embarrassment. A concerted campaign of disinformation and ridicule could fill in any missing links. Net result, however, could well make Ceausescu even more stubborn and tenacious on policy level without seriously threatening his hold on power. At level of ideology and dogma, Romanian defensive positions are already well prepared by years of dogged insistence on confirming and reconfirming common foreign policy “principles” with all and sundry “Socialists.” On another level, given centuries of experience in Balkan politics, we have full confidence in Romanians to hold their own in any back-alley in-fighting, aided and abetted by such parties as Chinese, Spanish, and Japanese. In short, while such a campaign would be extremely unpleasant, Ceausescu and company could live with it, and probably win an even greater measure of Western and Third World sympathy to boot. Nor do we believe that it would be in Soviet interest to carry campaign to point that Ceausescu is painted as either an unredeemable pariah or a hopeless buffoon since he does, after all, rule a country which is of some strategic importance to Soviet Union and some influence and reputation with variety of countries and parties, including ruling parties, across face of globe. 3. Economic The various steps that the Soviet Union might consider, supposing it were interested in bringing pressure to bear on Romania, are: 1. Reducing imports and exports, either overall or selectively;
