Arms Control and Disarmament 1493 399. Telegram Supnu 136 From Geneva1 Geneva, December 15, 1958, noon Supnu 136. Following text tabled today by US del as draft treaty Articles VI, VII, VIII, and IX. (Which are numbered as VII, VIII, IX, and X in present US draft). Begin verbatim text Article VI—Functions of the Commission 1. The Commission shall establish procedures and standards for the installation, operation and improvement of the detection and iden­ tification system in conformity with this treaty and its annexes. 2. The Commission shall appoint an administrator for the system, who shall serve for a period of two years and shall be eligible to suc­ ceed himself. The Commission shall approve regulations governing the appointment, remuneration and dismissal of the staff of the Control Organization. 3. The Commission shall continuously review the actions of the administrator and the operation of the system under the terms of the treaty and its annexes. 4. The Commission shall approve the locations of control posts, ships, radiochemical laboratories, bases of operation of routine aircraft sampling flights (satellite tracking stations) and regional headquarters. 5. The Commission shall establish procedures and standards for the formation, equipping, maintenance and staffing of inspection groups, for the provision of adequate communications and transport facilities for such inspection groups, and for the expeditious despatch of such groups to the locality of events which could be suspected of being nuclear explosions. The Commission shall approve the number and base location of inspection groups in accordance with the criteria set forth in this treaty and its annexes. 6. The Commission, in establishing procedures for the staffing of the control organization, shall apply the following principles: (A) No national of a state within which an inspection group is operating or a control post is located shall be included as a member of the inspection group or on the technical and communications staff of the control post. 1 Source: U.S. text for several treaty articles. Official Use Only. 8 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/12–1558.
