1268 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Laboratory, University of California Radiation Laboratory at Liver­ more and the Naval Radiological Defense Laboratory perform special analyses. These laboratories make quantitative mass spectrometric studies, alpha pulse analyses, activation studies and chemical identifications of induced activities and isotopes of the transuranium elements and fis­ sion products over a period of one to three months after the collection of the debris. All of these data are forwarded by letter report to AFOAT–1 where the final evaluation is carried out. Data received from all of these laboratories are also transmitted to the Foreign Weapons Evaluation Committee and are reviewed at periodic meetings. AFOAT–1 and the Bethe Committee review and discuss conclusions concerning the type of nuclear reactions, materials and geometry utilized by the Soviets in each specific test. 2. EXISTING CAPABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS: The Long Range Detection System of AFOAT–1 was primarily designed to detect and identify surface bursts or air bursts and sub-­ surface bursts detonated within the boundaries of the USSR. In con­ sidering its capabilities and limitations as a system for monitoring an international agreement on nuclear test limitations, the following four environments for possible test detonations within the USSR have been considered: surface or air bursts below 50,000 feet; sub-­surface tests; high altitude tests; and surface or air bursts in remote geographical locations. a. Surface or Air Bursts below 50 Kilofeet within the USSR. To date 44 nuclear tests have been identified within the USSR which are believed to have been between the surface and 50 kft and two which may have been higher than 50 kft. The remaining two Soviet tests were known to be sub-­surface, probably underwater. Table I shows the part played by each component of the Long Range Detection System in identifying the 48 Soviet tests. It is noteworthy that five of these tests were picked up by nuclear techniques only. No geophysical response was obtained. Of interest to the study of detection capability, four of the tests did not produce nuclear debris which was detectable. All four of the compo­ nents of the system seemed to be relatively successful in tests of 500 KT or higher. The absence of electromagnetic detection of some of the tests does not indicate necessarily a low capability but rather that it con­ sisted of only one station overseas and three stations in the U.S. prior to 1957 and no stations prior to 1954. Finally, the table shows a variety of combinations of the techniques which produced successful detection on different Soviet tests, thus demonstrating the value of including all four components in the system.
