1955 463 will give O’Neill a certain amount of latitude in drafting the letter so as to enable him to get around the objection that any repetition of the Agreed Announcement would seem to indicate a lack of confidence in the assurances that Chou En-­lai personally gave to O’Neill that each American had been notified. We do not know what O’Neill meant by saying that “I do not think the Chinese will allow me to act until they have confirmation that Indians in United States will receive reciprocal rights”. We are asking for clarification of this. Chon En-­lai’s conversation with O’Neill of October 29 is undoubt­ edly of considerable significance. We take it as signifying that the PRC is likely to increase the pressure for a higher level conference and that our difficulties in indefinitely maintaining the conversations at the present level will increase. You will be interested to know that Joe Alsop remarked to me on yesterday that our tactic of dragging out the talks, and our motivation for doing so, were transparently clear to him. He said that Krishna Menon had revealed in a recent conversation with him that he (Menon) also saw this clearly. Naturally Alsop thinks the Chinese Communists see this with increasing clearness, and are likely to manifest growing impatience. I hope you get some conclusive word from the Secretary on our guidance for your next meeting in time for you to map out your cam­ paign without undue haste. His visit to Madrid probably complicated matters somewhat for you. I suppose there is not now much chance of submitting our draft on renunciation of force at the next meeting, but we would hope that it could be done on November 10 at the latest. Our people are working actively with Colonel Monroe of Defense on assembling the information on the best cases among the 450. It is slow and frustrating business. Do you have in your files a copy of the DRF Intelligence Report No. 6858 of March 22, 1955, entitled “Chinese Communist Views on Taiwan”?2 This is useful background historical material. We will send you a copy at once if you do not already have it. This study shows that back in the 30’s the Chinese Communists pretty consistently took the stand that Taiwan should be independent and was not a part of China. Regards and good fortune to you, Walter P. McConaughy Enclosure 2 Drumwright is in Geneva & I am [illegible in the original] WPM of this. RHC [Handwritten footnote by Clough in the original.]
