386  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
would give us the cheapest, best all around retaliatory systems. We 
couldn’t expect the people to agree on what would come out of this 
thing, but at least we ought to examine all of the programs together. 
I thought that we would have to continue to be able to apply mili­
tary force quickly, positively, and with firm decisions whenever there 
was a local aggression or the need for the application of U.S. military 
force.
The President generally agreed but in his discussion of my remarks 
emphasized primarily his inability to control many things which were, 
such as farm subsidies, and emphasized primarily dollars.
Gen White: General White made a very short speech stating that he 
thought that our problems could be solved by more unification and a 
further reorganization towards centralization.
The President sort of agreed with him.
Gen Pate: Stated that we should be told what to do and that we would 
be very happy to do it.
The President: The President stated that he had to rely upon his advis­
ers and that we were the chief advisers.
During the course of the evening the President said several times 
that he trusted the people in this room more than he did any other 
group of people. It was quite evident that he meant the military peo­
ple. By his remarks it was evident that he believed that if the military 
people got together they could get anything done in Congress or in the 
country that they wanted to get done.
The Secretaries then spoke in general terms.
Mr. Anderson: Mr. Anderson then spoke about debts. He said that we 
were now in debt for $283 billion. That the indirect debt, and this I don’t 
understand, was close to $500 billion if we included only our indirect 
obligations to the world bank. He then went to the various interna­
tional agencies, one at a time, stating the indirect obligation that we had 
with those agencies and it amounted to a total of $1000 billion obliga­
tions which we had—­direct and indirect—­and a run on the U.S. bank 
would of course completely swamp us. It would be impossible to pay 
any such thing as this. The $283 billion direct debt was bad enough, but 
coupled with the indirect debt we were in an impossible position if the 
world ever lost much confidence in our dollars.
Then he went to the New Delhi conference and stated that every 
nation, every fiscal expert, every Chief of State that he had talked to 
was concerned not about an attack by Russia, not about the spread of 
communism, but about the economic stability of the United States.
