Human Rights Three weeks ago the Christopher Committee grappled for the first time with implementing the new provision.3 A lengthy discussion revealed that it is going to be extremely difficult to implement it in a sensible and consistent manner. Christopher postponed a decision, saying that he wanted to think about it. I subsequently made clear to his staff that NSC should be consulted in advance of any final decision. The key considerations are these: —OPIC and its programs are designed to help American business: not the country in which the investment is to be made. —In most cases, the government of the country in which the investment is to be made is not involved in the project in any way. —An OPIC decision not to insure an investment in a particular country is often viewed as a signal that the US considers that country to be politically unstable. Thus a negative decision could lead to disinvestment, greater economic instability, growing political unrest, and a general worsening of human rights conditions. —Since most OPIC-supported projects are designed to be profitmaking, the needy people exemption is very rarely applicable. —The legislative history of the new amendment indicates that an exception can also be made where there is an indirect benefit to the needy, but this is extremely hard to calculate. The SFRC Report suggested such factors as “the appropriateness of the products which they promote for local mass consumption, performance in the training of workers and managers, behavior with respect to social policy and wage rates”; etc., as criteria for making this judgment. Clearly, if the Committee were to try to apply such standards, we would be adopting a standard which we do not apply to business here at home. That is hard (if not impossible) to justify. —If the Committee were to take such detailed factors into consideration, the final results, and the overall policy as perceived by everyone outside the government, would probably appear even less consistent than it now does. The Options As I see it, there are two options: 1. Implement the law literally. This means applying the needy people exemption—for both direct and indirect benefits—including consideration of the nature of the project, the social behavior of the company in- 3 In the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s June 2 evening report, Tuchman Mathews characterized the Christopher Committee meeting that day as a “wrenching session” with regard to implementing the new OPIC legislation. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Eve-
