Human Rights
491
Three weeks ago the Christopher Committee grappled for the first
time with implementing the new provision.3 A lengthy discussion re-
vealed that it is going to be extremely difficult to implement it in a sen-
sible and consistent manner. Christopher postponed a decision, saying
that he wanted to think about it. I subsequently made clear to his staff
that NSC should be consulted in advance of any final decision. The key
considerations are these:
—OPIC and its programs are designed to help American business:
not the country in which the investment is to be made.
—In most cases, the government of the country in which the in-
vestment is to be made is not involved in the project in any way.
—An OPIC decision not to insure an investment in a particular
country is often viewed as a signal that the US considers that country to
be politically unstable. Thus a negative decision could lead to disin-
vestment, greater economic instability, growing political unrest, and a
general worsening of human rights conditions.
—Since most OPIC-supported projects are designed to be profit-
making, the needy people exemption is very rarely applicable.
—The legislative history of the new amendment indicates that an
exception can also be made where there is an indirect benefit to the
needy, but this is extremely hard to calculate. The SFRC Report sug-
gested such factors as “the appropriateness of the products which they pro-
mote for local mass consumption, performance in the training of workers and
managers, behavior with respect to social policy and wage rates”; etc., as cri-
teria for making this judgment. Clearly, if the Committee were to try to
apply such standards, we would be adopting a standard which we do
not apply to business here at home. That is hard (if not impossible) to
justify.
—If the Committee were to take such detailed factors into consid-
eration, the final results, and the overall policy as perceived by ev-
eryone outside the government, would probably appear even less con-
sistent than it now does.
The Options
As I see it, there are two options:
1. Implement the law literally. This means applying the needy people
exemption—for both direct and indirect benefits—including consider-
ation of the nature of the project, the social behavior of the company in-
3 In the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s June 2 evening report, Tuchman Mathews
characterized the Christopher Committee meeting that day as a “wrenching session”
with regard to implementing the new OPIC legislation. (Carter Library, National Secu-
rity Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Eve-
ning Reports: 4–6/78)
