January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1287 broader settlement. How Jordan talks with Israel about West Bank water is for the future. The project has several stages. They are now working on the second stage, and water that exceeds the second stage should go to the West Bank. They can agree if the Israelis do not have a problem. King Hussein said that Jordan is worried about becoming involved in greater discussions. Then there is a danger. The President said he had no objection to such discussions (laughter)! Ambassador Linowitz said that the issue is discussed under Camp David, concerning water and the West Bank. We feel it is desirable, in determining allocation, that Jordan be represented, along with Egypt, the Self-Governing Authority, and Israel, to get agreement. Is this possible? King Hussein said not now, there is a problem, but maybe later, in the context of movement toward self-determination. Ambassador Linowitz said that suppose there is already a Self- Governing Authority . . . The Prime Minister spoke briefly about Jordan’s use of water. Now, he said, non-allocated water, that Jordan did not use from the dam, would go to the West Bank in the future. King Hussein said that it is an old story, the idea that some water would go to the West Bank from the Jordan River. He is a little worried about the possibility that Israel wants to discuss the future of the West Bank, and then Jordan will have to talk about their taking water from the Jordan River for the West Bank. Therefore this is difficult. Jordan needs to limit the talks now to Israel’s and Jordan’s share of the water, without prejudicing the future water supply to the West Bank. The President said that as more water is taken from the Jordan River, the Dead Sea is drying up. Israel is assessing the possibility of bringing water from the Mediterranean. It is possible that this issue would affect Jordan. King Hussein said that it would require . . . The President said that there would need to be an assessment of the environmental impact. There would be some power generation. This would stabilize the level of the Dead Sea at a proper point. This is not happening now. It is being analyzed; and it involves Jordan. King Hussein asked whether the water would come from the Mediterranean or the Red Sea? The President said the New York Times said the Mediterranean. Ambassador Veliotes said it was possible it would come from the Gulf of Aqaba. We are exchanging technical information with Jordan on a quiet basis.
