408
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
propriate relief within a reasonable timeframe. The procedures for
bringing complaints about unfair trade practices and finding injury in
subsidy/countervail, anti-dumping, and safeguard actions need to be
simplified.
A fast-track opportunity also needs to be included as an option for
those industries who feel totally stymied by the normal time delays and
who feel their businesses are being threatened irretrievably by current
administrative delays. There may also be circumstances identified re-
quiring mandatory reference by the U.S. to the GATT.
Improvements here could go far to underline our interest in com-
bating unfair trade practices on every front, domestically and interna-
tionally. They could also make an injury test in a subsidies code a more
compatible concession because of the side benefits gained for business
in improving injury processes for anti-dumping and safeguard actions.
D. “Buy America” Adaptations: For countries that do not sign the
code or who later do not live up to our international understandings,
we should continue “Buy America” preferences. This would have wide
appeal. Senator Heinz also indicated interest during his recent visit to
Geneva5 that his activities and our aims in the Government procure-
ment code could converge around this theme if the code appears to be
a realistic first step toward opening major foreign markets for U.S.
exporters.
E. Advise U.S. Industry on How Best to Deal with Trade-Related
Problems: STR should provide positive guidance to industry on where
to go and how to proceed within the U.S. Government on trade
questions.
2. An Aggressive Bilateral/Multilateral Program for Maintaining Fair
Trade Relationships
Too many people feel currently that our trade relationships are
flabby, inconsistent, and have not been aggressively pursued on a reg-
ular basis. Certainly we will need the following kinds of efforts:
A. Japan: This will be a continuing negotiation since only by a
process of aggressive erosion can the United States hope to move
toward the realization of a parity of opportunity of the kind essential
for both of our countries. Our steps toward this aim in the Tokyo
Round will need to be constantly policed and reinforced.
B. Advanced LDC’s: These groups are establishing precedent-
setting patterns on a day-to-day basis as they move toward develop-
ment. Many of their industries are increasingly among the more effi-
5 Heinz was scheduled to visit Geneva May 16–19. (Telegram 121386 to Geneva,
May 12; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780202–0485) No report
on his visit was found.
