Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 443 93. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, August 4, 1978 SUBJECT NSC Weekly Report #69 1. Opinion Negotiations/Consultations In our foreign policy we have placed primary emphasis on two different efforts: 1. Obtaining Congressional support for major but controversial (and hence politically costly) undertakings; 2. Negotiating the resolution of genuinely important issues (notably SALT, the Middle East, and Southern Africa). We have done well on the former; we are making some progress on the latter. I believe, however, that we need to engage also to a greater extent in consultations, the explicit purpose of which is to generate mutual understanding and the implicit consequence of which might be also some greater accommodation with the parties concerned. For example, Andy’s2 great success in Africa is based not only on our approach to Rhodesia and Namibia but also on the series of consultative trips he has taken to the region and the rapport he has helped you establish with African leaders. Moreover, I believe it is fair to say that the Chinese would have never agreed to the kind of flexibility and movement that has now developed in our relationship if I had simply put a negotiating proposal before them on the table. Prior to my visit, they were insisting that everything depended on normalization; now they have in effect accepted the segmentation of the relationship into three parts (the process of normalization; the expansion of governmental bilateral relations; consultations on international issues). But that emerged as a byproduct of prolonged discussions (some 15 hours) on broad subjects, which contributed to greater mutual understanding. I think we need to do that also with the Soviets. Nixon himself, using Kissinger in addition to negotiating with them, would occasion- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 126, Weekly National Security Report: 7–9/78. Secret. The President wrote the following notation in the top right-hand corner of the memorandum: “Zbig—more on non-testing of depressed trajectory flights of SLBM’s—J.” 2 Andrew Young.
