462 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I rule” plan a “fair basis for negotiations,” and Sadat will have very much in mind the promises made at Camp David.7 Your best defense against these efforts to manipulate you will be to concentrate on the future choices, on the strategic consequences of success or failure, and on the need for each side to transcend past positions. 11. Sadat is very likely to want to explore the possibility of reaching secret understandings with you and Begin on some elements of a settlement. This is apparently more important to him than a declaration of principles. There are clearly risks in relying on secret agreements, but Sadat’s willingness to be forthcoming on some issues may well depend upon our ability, as well as Begin’s to assure him that he will not be embarrassed by leaks. 12. If Sadat shows more flexibility than Begin, we may be perceived by the Israelis and their supporters as colluding with the Egyptians. This could be politically awkward, and you may want to suggest discreetly to Sadat that he not rush to accept any suggestions we put forward publicly. It will help our credibility if we are seen to be pressing both sides for concessions. While we do want Sadat to accept our ideas, the timing and circumstances in which he does so should be very carefully coordinated. 13. (The number may by symbolic.) If the meetings end in disagreement, we should not attempt to paper over the differences. The consequences of a failure should be publicly explained by you, and Sadat and Begin should understand from the outset that this will be the case. Finally, I summarize below what I consider to be the acceptable minimum that we must aim for on the central issues: 1. Withdrawal/Security on the West Bank/Gaza Sadat should agree to an Israeli security presence during the fiveyear interim period and for an indefinite time beyond; he should agree to defer decisions on the precise location of borders and on sovereignty until the end of the transitional period. In return, he should be able to claim credit for ending the military occupation of the West Bank and Gaza, and for establishing that the principle of withdrawal will be applied in the final peace settlement dealing with these areas. Begin should agree that the principle of withdrawal does apply on all fronts, including the West Bank and Gaza, provided that its application takes into account Israel’s long-term security needs in the area; sovereignty will remain in abeyance until a final peace agreement is 7 Presidents Sadat and Carter met at Camp David in February. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978, Documents 210 and 211.
