1978  331
of the major ones, not only with respect to cost but also the implica-
tions for effectiveness, is essential prior to your decision on what the 
Defense program should be. This whole process—­everything we have 
been doing since last November—­has been designed expressly to give 
you that appreciation, and it is now ready for decision.
With that in mind, I propose to send to you by August 15th a mem-
orandum of between 5 and 10 pages. It will describe the highlights of 
what we could achieve at the basic program level, as well as the effect 
of a higher program level and what that would cost, as well as what we 
would have to sacrifice at the lower program level and how much that 
would save.
Each of the three program levels would be, in my view, internally 
balanced. At the same time, alternative levels for particular categories 
(strategic forces, naval forces, etc.) have been considered in arriving at 
the proper program for each of the three levels. Some of these program 
decisions have sufficient national importance and foreign policy impact 
to warrant your personal attention and guidance now. The memoran-
dum would highlight the items I see falling into that category.
Following your receipt of that memorandum, I would like to meet 
with you during the latter half of that week, before you leave Wash-
ington. After a discussion of the issues raised in the memorandum, I 
would like to make my recommendations to you and get from you at 
least a tentative decision on the budget level for FY 1980 and the pro-
gram through FY 1984. One possibility is an NSC meeting.4 Another is 
to use the breakfast of Friday, August 18th for this purpose.
I know you face difficult decisions this year. Among them are the 
need to respond to the severe effects of a rising inflation rate, to the 
growing costs of domestic programs, and to the massive buildup of 
Soviet military power. I cannot make decisions about such responses 
simple, but I do think you will find that the review of the outcome of 
our programming process that I am proposing will be informative and 
useful. Moreover, I believe it should precede the budget scrub; such 
program decisions are more properly associated with foreign policy 
issues.5
Harold Brown
4 Brzezinski underlined this sentence, drew an arrow to the bottom of the memo-
randum, and wrote: “We propose to use the NSC meeting to introduce this review. Z.B.”
5 Brzezinski sent the memorandum back to Brown under cover of an October 10 
memorandum in which he wrote: “Attached is a copy of your August 7 memorandum 
to the President on FY 1980–1984 Defense Program. Please note the President’s com-
ment.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 5, 
Defense Department: 7–8/78)
