National Security Policy 669 major factors introducing a greater degree of instability is the possi­ bility of impending achievement by the USSR of a substantial ICBM capability. I would stress that the material which we present represents an analysis of one part of our military problem. It is the opinion of the Science Advisory Committee, however, that this analysis, limited as it is, presents certain principles and concepts which appropriately can be weighed anew along with the many other factors involved in formu­ lating military policy. In making this analysis we have been concerned with measures which increase the sureness of our retaliatory power. It is not our purpose to suggest increases in our military budget, even though we recognize the large budgetary implications involved. It is our purpose to suggest that we need to give higher priority to certain kinds of military programs. This could be achieved by reducing the emphasis on certain other programs, or if that is not possible alternately by increased expenditure. I suggest further that any implications for our military budget or for our military policy which may be inherent in this presentation have to do mainly with the future, not necessarily with the present. In the report of the Technological Capabilities Panel in 1955, we presented a time-table which identified a transitional period reflecting our military position relative to that of the Soviet Union when we might find our position changing from one of very great offensive advantage to one in which our situation would be relatively less advantageous. The report described the effects of this period as follows: “Deterrent effect of U.S. power dangerously lessened if Soviet production of multimegaton weapons and an adequate… delivery capability is achieved prior to the development of an adequate U.S. warning and defense system and before we have achieved a reduc­ tion of the vulnerability of our strategic delivery systems. Under these conditions, Soviet possession of such weapons and delivery capabil­ ities would place the U.S. in danger of surprise attack and possible defeat. “The situation might develop as early as 1958. If we permit our military position to worsen to this extent, we will be in a poor position to ward off Russian political and diplomatic moves or to make such moves of our own. “The intercontinental ballistic missile can profoundly affect the military posture of either country with respect to Period III… If the U.S. were to achieve an intercontinental ballistic missile capability first, it could maintain [a]2 position of advantage… so long as the Soviets did not have this missile capability. If the Russians achieve an interconti­ nental ballistic missile capability first, they might gain a comparable position of advantage.” 2 Brackets are in the original.
