a new delicate situation. If Peru and Chile can nevertheless be induced to agree to a partition of the territory, as Mathieu suggested, this arrangement will be in accord with racial majorities in each of the two departments, and may save each nation from mortification of complete defeat. That outcome would be great step forward and we could then afford to leave Bolivian question to the future, especially if great difficulty be met in getting Chile entirely agreeable with Bolivia as well as Peru at present time. I assume that Chile will yield more than Mathieu set forth in his conversation yesterday with me. It is even possible that Chile might be persuaded to settle Bolivian question now or even to consent to independence and neutralization of entire territory as Edwards has suggested. It is reported that ex-President Alessandri would support this way of solution if plebiscite cannot be held; but Mathieu foresees certain difficulties and much opposition in Congress. If Chile really believes that Plebiscitary Commission is going to declare plebiscite impracticable, placing responsibility for this result on Chile, she will naturally yield a great deal, but care must be taken that no formal or written statement be made to Chile to the effect that Commission is likely to take action of this sort, if we wish Chile to accept any other proposition that we may want to make at the time; for it would be interpreted as a threat and, no matter what the peril Chile would run, the Government probably would reject any new proposition and would defiantly challenge indictment Commission would make. When I presented your memorandum to Mathieu I spoke to him personally in strong manner about the conditions in the province. He was much impressed and I believe that my statements influenced Government’s decision to accept our good offices, but last night he told me that he would not have dared tell the Government that I had made any such statement formally, as effect would have been to arouse anger and to cause rejection of your offer. Mathieu also yesterday made some reference to the economic interdependence of Tacna and Arica; he also referred to Chile’s having erected some public works which served needs of the respective departments, possibly, in some instances, both departments. He was of
