1978 313 consolidated with natural disaster functions in an independent agency.4 Civil defense responsibilities are shared with state and local governments. The population protection program is slowly being modified to shift the emphasis from reliance on in-­place fallout protection to crisis relocation planning for high-­risk areas. Either program would take about a year’s “surge” preparation during a crisis period to reach full effectiveness. Essential governmental functions will be protected by dispersal of personnel, some by relocation to hardened facilities; the hardened facilities are relatively few in number and relatively vulnerable to direct attack. Minimum efforts are being directed to the protection of industrial plants and equipment and to preparations for rehabilitation and recovery. Federal expenditures for the above programs are about $140 million per year; state and local governments spend an additional $80 million. Soviet civil defense efforts are much more comprehensive. The Soviet program has established ambitious goals to protect the civilian leadership, shelter a portion of the essential industrial labor force, and evacuate the urban population. The program is centrally administered under military leadership, and civil defense goals are influenced by military objectives. The activities of the Soviet civil defense organization include: the development of evacuation and shelter plans; training for civil defense units, leadership and the population at large; coordination of civil defense exercises; testing and evaluation of command and control; shelter construction; and implementation of general directives from the central leadership. The effectiveness of Soviet civil defense measures is highly dependent on the amount of warning time available. Soviet civil defense doctrine also espouses effective protection of industry through hardening and dispersing, but such measures are being implemented slowly or, in some cases, not at all. It would cost about $2 billion per year to duplicate the Soviet civil defense program in the United States; about three-­fourths of this amount would be for personnel. The most probable results of a massive US–USSR nuclear exchange in 1978 involving an initial Soviet counterforce/countervalue attack on the US and a US counterforce/countervalue response are set forth in Table S–1. 4 Reference is to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), established April 1, 1979, under Executive Orders 12127 and 12148. The establishment of FEMA merged federal planning for both natural disasters and civil defense.
