1978 319 not live to usefully contribute to postwar recovery. Others contend that the great majority of initial survivors have a good chance of eventually returning to useful work. The role and significance of civil defense for escalation control, in the event deterrence fails, needs further examination. In addition, uncertainty exists about the feasibility of sustaining population evacuation for a long time (more than about a month), either in a continuing crisis with no nuclear attacks, or one with nuclear attacks repeated every few days or weeks and so forcing population to remain sheltered. Finally, this assessment of civil defense is based on calculated assumptions about the size, extent, nature, and impact of nuclear exchanges between the US and the Soviet Union. A number of potentially important alternative possibilities have not been carefully examined. They include: 1) The nature of protracted nuclear campaigns; 2) The effects of forward based systems, reserve forces and/or third country forces; 3) Major differences in weapons yield and level of attack from those we postulated. These issues will require further study before their implications for civil defense can be determined. III. US CIVIL DEFENSE POLICY OPTIONS Civil defense policy sets forth the assumptions, goals, and rationale underlying program choices. Four alternative policies were identified in the analysis and are briefly summarized here. 1. The Myth of Civil Defense: This policy option is based on the assumptions:—­that civil defense would be ineffective in protecting population, given the characteristics of the US and Soviet nuclear arsenals and the longer-­term effects of a massive US-Soviet nuclear exchange; that civil defense is neither a significant element of the strategic balance nor a significant factor during a crisis; and that there are no indications that the civil defense postures of the superpowers have a significant effect on the perceptions by other countries of the strategic balance. For some, the implications of adopting this policy go beyond merely eschewing a civil defense program. They would claim that the analytical results presented in Table S–2 are dangerous because they could lead to false conclusions about limiting casualties and thereby weaken deterrence. They would prefer declaratory policy stressing that the massive absolute levels of destruction expected in a nuclear exchange, coupled with the longer-­term effects, make recovery and survival of the two societies a moot question. Such a declaratory policy could also assert the US intention to monitor closely the Soviet civil defense program and to make adjustments in our offensive forces or
