El Salvador 567 Salvadoran General Staff said President Lemus had expressed his disappointment to the staff officer over the failure of the United States Government to invite President Lemus to Washington for a state visit.8 (2) The visit of Ydígoras Fuentes and the proposed visit of Echandi to Washington. While President Lemus has made no public comment on this score, he cannot have failed to be nettled at the extension of the official invitation to Ydígoras Fuentes to visit the United States, especially since the invitation was announced while Ydígoras was visiting El Salvador. It was a front-­page story in all the newspapers and the subject of radio announcement. It is small comfort to President Lemus that these visits have occasionally been referred to as informal or that the visits have been made in an individual capacity since the men in question have gone as president-­elect and not as chief of state. It is impossible to explain convincingly the difference between a formal and an informal visit when the news reels in El Salvador show Ydígoras Fuentes and his wife debarking from President Eisenhower’s plane, being met at the Washington airport by Secretary of State and Mrs. Dulles, and thereafter being escorted to Blair House. Furthermore, the newspapers have played up Ydígoras’ conversations with President Eisenhower and meetings with other high officials of the United States Government. They draw no distinction between the Ydígoras visit and that of other high dignitaries to Washington. Informal comments by private individuals, some with official connections, substantiate the above evaluation. “The forthcoming visit to Washington by President-­ elect Echandi is certain to increase the feeling of President Lemus and other Salvadorans that he is given unequal treatment or inadequate consideration by the United States.” (3) The state visit of President Ibanez of Chile. In this context the long-­ standing intention to invite President Ibanez to the United States loses its proper perspective. While the press-­announced invitation extended to Ibanez may not have been as irritating as the visits of Ydígoras Fuentes and Echandi, nevertheless, coming on the heels of the other invitations, it has served further to disillusion President Lemus with the United States. (4) Drafting of Salvadoran Citizens. Disappointments such as those recounted stir up other problems. We were unable to assure the Government that Salvadoran citizens resident in the United States would not be drafted except during time of war as provided for in the 1926 FCN Treaty.9 The Department agreed that such acts were in 8 No record of this conversation with Lt. Col. Robert S. Ferguson, USA, was found in Department of State files. 9 Reference is to the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce, and Consular Rights, signed at San Salvador, February 22, 1926; for text, see Charles S. Bevans, ed., Treaties and Other
