138
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
to govern the country by armed force. Even this would probably be im-
possible in view of the unreliability of the Iranian armed forces in the
face of angry public opinion. The British pretend to believe that public
opinion is not a vital factor in controlling the situation, that only the
so-called Teheran intelligentsia really counts, that feeling on the oil
question ebbs and flows, and that opposition to the U.K. is only skin
deep. This is completely contrary to our information and constitutes, I
think, the most fundamental British mistake in their entire inept han-
dling of the problem.
3. My own opinion is that it is no longer possible to reach an agree-
ment which would permit the British to retain any semblance of the au-
thority previously exercised in the Iranian oil industry. I have never be-
lieved in the likelihood of such an agreement, but matters have now
gone so far that it seems essential to recognize the political objective of
the Iranians as distinct from economic considerations. That objective is
not to reach a negotiated settlement on the question of profits or man-
agement, but to drive out British influence in accordance with a literal
interpretation of the Iranians’ communication to the ICJ: “in order to
free themselves from the claws of a usurping company which for long
years has served as a disturbing influence in economic, social and polit-
ical fields in Iran.”3 Emotion—not logic—is the controlling factor, and
the sooner the British realize they are not wanted in Iran, the sooner can
we approach a possible solution.
4. It seems to me that the time has arrived for a show-down with
the U.K. if anything is to be salvaged from the situation. I think we
should tell the British that because of our deep concern in this crisis we
must abandon our efforts to play the role of honest broker and take a
strong stand. We should say that we propose that U.S. and other for-
eign technicians should be admitted to Iran to run the industry; that
this would involve the complete removal of British personnel from the
scene; and that an attempt should concurrently be made to work out a
contract with Iran for the sale of oil to the U.K. This would be a virtual
capitulation on the part of the British. But they are finished anyway, as
the AIOC personnel will soon have left. On our part we should say that
we would undertake to make the Iranians carry out the terms of a suit-
able sales contract.
It would be a bitter pill for the U.K., and I doubt that they can be
made to swallow it, but the stakes are so high that unless we try some-
thing of this sort a whole chapter of dangers will presently open up.
Henry S. Villard4
3 For statements made before the International Court of Justice in regard to the
Anglo-Iranian oil dispute, see International Court of Justice, Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. Case
(United Kingdom vs. Iran) Pleadings, Oral Arguments, Documents, Leyden. See also Docu-
ment 76.
4 Villard initialed above his typed signature.
