664  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
growth of Soviet military investment will be reversed or slowed before 
the mid-1980s, if then. Unlike much defense spending on current oper-
ations and maintenance, investment accumulates over time and pays 
its returns in the future. (S)
The study concludes that the US will have to increase its defense 
investment spending markedly if we are to remain a competitive mil-
itary power. This message implies a gloomier future for relative US 
power than the prevailing public view, and a much gloomier view than 
the President now holds. It calls for a major shift of federal spending 
priorities toward defense at a time when, not withstanding its commit-
ment to growth in defense spending, the Administration faces sharply 
competing spending-­related priorities, namely with respect to energy 
and inflation. (S)
However, as a contribution to understanding our defense 
predicament—­which is how Harold describes the paper in his cover 
memo—­the paper has substantive deficiencies. In particular, it under-
rates the US on a number of counts:
—It does not distinguish how much of past Soviet investment only 
permitted catching up with the US as opposed to surpassing us. Nor 
does it address the advantage to the USSR of being able to follow tech-
nological paths pioneered by the US, advantages given up as technol-
ogy gaps are closed.
—It doesn’t appear to give adequate weight to US technological 
developments now in train that serve to devalue Soviet investments, 
e.g., cruise missiles vs. their air defenses.
—It doesn’t attempt to account for the fact that some Soviet military 
investment is directed against China, not NATO. While such resources 
can be redirected and we have an interest in the Sino-Soviet balance, 
some discounting of such Soviet efforts would seem reasonable. (S)
Were these and other substantive problems addressed, the main 
message of the paper probably would not change. But it would be more 
persuasive and the policy problem it poses more manageable. (S)
The paper suffers from being much too long. Harold suggests that 
the President read some 35 pages to get the essence of it; and OSD sup-
plied an “executive summary” not much shorter. We think the study 
can be effectively summarized in no more than 3–5 pages.3 (S)
In addition, the paper contains no policy recommendations other 
than the general admonition to spend more. We believe the Secretary of 
Defense should accompany the bad news with a clear statement of his 
opinion about the message and its policy implications. (S)
The NSC should not block the communication of the message to 
the President. At the same time we should not forward difficult analytic 
3 For Brown’s summary, see the attachment to Document 145.
