1956 849 civilized nations. This was practice of secret police. Question was also whether U.S. would be willing make inquiry into cases he had raised in order remove all excuses for obstructing return these cases. 29. Wang said I had again this morning raised charge regarding 13 Americans imprisoned China and statement American Department State also raised this matter. Now they exactly would like ask U.S. as to how many Chinese imprisoned in U.S. These people being kept in prison. How could they express their desire for return? 30. Wang said if U.S. felt self entitled express concern for impris­ oned Americans, then why did U.S. refuse make accounting situation innumerable Chinese being kept imprisoned U.S.? Responsibility of my side could not be avoided by evasive means. 31. Wang said implementation our agreement was equally binding both parties. It not proper ask one party abide by agreement strictly while other party could break it. From series actions taken by U.S. in violation of agreement, it raised question of whether U.S. actually going to rescind agreement. 32. Wang said in addition 37 names he had given me previously, this morning he had five more names he would like give me, whose return being prevented by U.S. (handed over list; names in following telegram). It stated in this list that all these persons want return but being prevented doing so. 33. Wang said in case Mr. Mai, he was among 32 of 103 who not yet returned and he stated his failure return was due deliberate obstruc­ tion offered by U.S. agencies. There not slightest indication that failure return of these 32 persons was due to change of their minds. Failure their return due to obstructions. 34. Wang said he continued to await accounting by my side of all these questions he had raised. 35. I said he had rightly said that it was question who was in fact carrying out our agreed announcement. As I had pointed out this morning this was not question of opinion or vague charges but very fortunately was question of fact. It question of facts that can be deter­ mined by objective impartial test. Third country arrangement which established by our agreed announcement was established exactly as such test. 36. I said facts were, and he as well aware of them as I, that out of many thousands Chinese in U.S. there not yet been one case in which Indian Embassy had called attention my government any obstruction in departure any Chinese. This a record that was clear and for all world to see. This fully confirmed statements which I had repeatedly made here ever since August 1 last year, that no Chinese was being obstructed in returning his country.
