824 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV to clarify executive agent responsibilities; it has in some respects helped the situation. (U) PLANS AND PROJECTIONS FOR 1980 —The COMSEC Threat Report program to determine and disseminate foreign SIGINT threats to U.S. telecommunications and the vulnerability analysis program of both U.S. civil and military communications will continue and will provide for the subsequent establishment of COMSEC standards and doctrine. (S) —The remaining contractors from the list of 22 “Most Sensitive Contractors” will be briefed on the intercept threat to their communications. (S) —Field trials of the LADNER equipment will be conducted on the terrestrial microwave systems of the Other Common Carriers (OCCs) to verify compliance with a system performance and operating requirements. (S) —Develop a Federal policy concerning the protection requirements for leased, commercial or government-­owned communications satellite circuits. (U) —COMSEC doctrine will be developed for unclassified DES applications; however, the absence of a comprehensive data base on computer security will make progress both difficult and slow. (C) —The Phase I PCZ Pilot Program and the FSTS will continue operation and expansion as various implementation levels are approved. (S) —Procedures to verify compliance of commercial DES equipments with FS–1027 for unclassified national security-­related applications should be finalized. (U) —The position paper on public cryptography will be compiled, coordinated, and submitted. (U) —The security evaluations of the six DES-­based equipments for NTIA will continue and should be completed during 1980. (S) —Complete the DUCKPINS III Program by December 1980. (S) —Emphasis will be placed on the bulk protection of FTS circuits transmitted over satellite and terrestrial microwave systems. Commercial cryptography will be used whenever appropriate, available and cost effective. (C) —Develop an options paper for a Federal policy which authorizes and provides for selected unclassified information which, when so marked, must be protected during electrical transmission. (U) —Complete arrangements for the sharing satellite capacity on two or more wideband systems which will provide FTS protected service for Guam to Hawaii and Puerto Rico to the CONUS communications. (C)
