3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 96 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI fered a naval base there, they would not accept, simply because they knew that if they accepted, they would be facing many more negative consequences than positive ones. That was contrary to their policy. In any case, whether the Secretary believed it or not, he had provided an official, categorical answer to the question asked. He trusted that the Secretary would treat it with respect. The Secretary asked whether he would be correct to say that he understood the Soviet position to be that the Soviet Union would be willing to forego all military bases in the Indian Ocean. Gromyko said: “We have none there, and we have no intention to set up bases there.” He only wished that the United States not have any bases in that area either. The Secretary asked for Gromyko’s views on warship stationing in the Indian Ocean area. Gromyko said he had already told the Secretary that the Soviets proceeded from the premise that innocent passage according to international law had always applied in the Indian Ocean, and should continue to apply. The Secretary said he certainly agreed to maintenance of the right of free passage. His question had referred to limiting numbers of shipdays in this area. Gromyko said this question had not been raised before. It was separate and distinct from the question of naval bases, and was one that should be looked into. Perhaps the two sides could exchange views and look into the possibility of reaching agreement. The Secretary said it was certainly a question that needed to be considered if we talked about a demilitarized area. Gromyko, replying to the Secretary’s question as to definition of the Indian Ocean area and whether it extended as far as the Philippines, said that he was not a geographer and would not want to be one. The Secretary said that certainly if we wanted to talk seriously about it, we would have to define the area. Gromyko thought that if a geographer were present now, he would have an answer. He would ask a counter question: where did the Atlantic begin and end? Did it reach as far as the Arctic, and where was the boundary? Gromyko asked how the Secretary proposed to explore the second aspect—limits on ship-days. The Secretary thought it should be done at less than the ministerial level, and he would have to see if it might best be done on a bilateral basis. Gromyko said he was prepared to listen to considerations on this score, and would himself reflect on the appropriate level.
