1342 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX process. Referring to the Secretary’s earlier comments, the Ambassador said he wanted to be sure what the Secretary meant when he spoke of “sovereign rights.” Evron asked if he could tell Prime Minister Begin that in the Secretary’s view the sovereignty of Israel in Jerusalem is not challenged by the United States and that Israel has the sovereign right to establish its Capital there. Evron said if he understood clearly, the United States does not deny Israel the right to have its capital anywhere within sovereign Israeli territory. The Secretary said this raises two points. First, whether East Jerusalem is part of the West Bank under Resolution 242 and thus not subject to any claim to sovereign rights by Israel. Second is the fact that it is agreed that the status of Jerusalem is an issue that has to be settled through negotiations. Ambassador Evron said this raises a problem that he wanted to be able to report very precisely on. The Security Council called on all states with embassies in Jerusalem to remove those embassies. That involves not East Jerusalem but West Jerusalem, since all the embassies are located on the western side of the city. Ambassador Evron asked if he would be correct in saying that at least in regard to West Jerusalem Israel’s sovereign right in that part of the city is not in question. The Secretary pointed out that he had made clear in his Security Council statement that we do not regard the call for movement of the embassies from Jerusalem as being binding. Mr. Christopher said it was his understanding that the United States had taken the position at Camp David that the ultimate status of Jerusalem as a whole would be the subject of negotiations between the parties, which is the position the President repeated in New York recently. Ambassador Evron replied that he had not been at Camp David but he was quite sure that never once at Camp David had any question arisen regarding Israel’s sovereign rights in West Jerusalem. Mr. Christopher repeated that his understanding had been that the U.S. position is that the whole question is to be the subject of ultimate negotiations. He asked Mr. Korn if this was correct. Mr. Korn confirmed that such had always been our view, and pointed out that we have never formally recognized Israel’s claim to sovereignty in West Jerusalem. Mr. Christopher said what he understood Secretary Muskie to have said was that any country, for example Mexico, could establish its capital wherever it wants if it has the power to do so, but that governments that do this must take into account the consequences for an ongoing negotiation. Ambassador Evron responded heatedly that the United States appeared to be raising new issues here. The American Ambassadors have presented their credentials in Jerusalem, you fly your flag in Jerusalem, your leaders meet with our leaders there, he said. If a question is now raised about Israel’s sovereignty in West Jerusalem, Ambassador Evron said, this will become a big problem for our domestic relations.
