Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII have run into more resistance than anticipated; three additional battalions have been sent to the area since the operation began.** **Other Soviet sweep operations are currently under way in the Panjshir Valley northeast of Kabul and near Soviet garrisons in Ghazni, Jalalabad, Feyzabad, Qandahar, and Qonduz.** Prospects **The last two winters in Afghanistan brought the government no relief from insurgent pressures; in fact the insurgency grew steadily. The coming winter probably will impair the activity of both sides. Soviet forces will confront the insurgents with a kind of sustained military pressure not heretofore experienced. This, coupled with possible food shortages, could ultimately affect the insurgents’ ability to continue the struggle at its present level.** 318. Editorial Note On the morning of September 15, 1980, Soviet Army Private Alexandr V. Kruglov arrived at the U.S. Embassy in Afghanistan apparently requesting that the Embassy provide him asylum until he could depart either for the United States or another country. At the time, no Russianspeaking officials were on hand to communicate with Kruglov. During a meeting in Washington later that day, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs David Newsom told Soviet Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin that the United States wanted to be responsive to the Kruglov case, while at the same time it sought to ensure that the matter would not “unduly aggravate U.S.-Soviet relations.” Newsom further noted that the issue should be resolved under the auspices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and that the United States held the Soviet Union responsible for the overall security and safety of the U.S. Embassy in Kabul. Newsom reported that the Soviet Ambassador to Afghanistan, Fakriat Tabeev, and U.S. Chargé d’Affaires Hawthorne Mills were meeting in Kabul regarding the situation, and should the Ambassador request a meeting with Kruglov, the United States would be amenable under appropriate circumstances. Dobrynin responded that he knew nothing of the Kruglov matter, but would check in with Moscow. (Telegram 245452 to Kabul, September 15; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File,
