238  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
the British, Germans, French and Soviets. Those that are not will be 
explored by my staff, including the one that follows:
—Actively encourage the transfer of weapons and systems which 
would improve defensive and strategic warning capabilities.
[Omitted here is material unrelated to national security policy.]
54.	
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter1
Washington, March 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Consolidated Guidance
During the past four months I have been through the initial stages 
of producing a Consolidated Guidance for planning in the Defense 
Department. Heretofore there had been three separate (strategy, pro-
gram, fiscal) and not always consistent guidance documents.
The process began with extensive discussions during October and 
November among the Chiefs, the Secretaries of the Military Depart-
ments, the OSD staff, Charles Duncan and myself, of what sorts of 
things should be contained in a consolidated guidance. Following that, 
a first draft was drawn up by my staff. I made changes and sent it to 
the JCS and Services for comments. This was followed by another series 
of reviews with the Services, a redrafting, and a further examination 
and rewrite by Charles and myself last weekend with the benefit of 
personal comments from the Service Secretaries and each of the Chiefs.
The result is a 300-­page document2 which I am not transmitting 
to you. Your staff will be provided with that material for their informa-
tion. But if this is to be only a staff exercise, it will fail to realize most of 
its potential value.
I believe instead that the next stage is to get your personal views 
about a few fundamental issues on which you may wish to make per-
sonal inputs, and with which you will therefore want to become more 
familiar. Possible—­and very different—­examples are: (a) strategic 
forces; and (b) the effects on our defense posture and capabilities ten 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 13, 
PD–18 [1]. Secret.
2 Not found.
