396
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
to talk” with the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO). Carter “ex-
plained that we had given our word of honor not to do so unless the
PLO recognized Security Council Resolution 242. In the meantime, we
would like the help of Saudi Arabia and Jordan to be go-betweens.”
Khalid responded that “he and his government would be happy to be
helpful.” He added, “The trouble with the Palestinians is that they are
being pulled in every direction not only by the Communists, but also
by some Arab countries!” “King Hussein,” Khalid continued, “could
have his negotiating delegation made up of Palestinians. Egypt could
have Palestinians in its delegation. This together with the West Bank
and Gaza Palestinian delegation, could be a very good combination.”
In response, Carter commented that this “is why we would be happy to
have the influence of wise counsel such as that offered by Saudi Arabia
prevail.” (Memorandum of Conversation between President Carter
and King Khalid, October 27; Department of State, Bureau of Near
Eastern and South Asian Affairs, NEA Front Office Subject File 1978–
1984, Lot 85D251, Box 3, 1978 Memcons—President)
Following a luncheon hosted by Carter for Khalid and other Saudi
officials in the Family Dining Room from 12:22 p.m. to 1:17 p.m., the
Saudi party returned to Andrews Air Force Base in a helicopter with
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials,
President’s Daily Diary) During the trip, the Saudi Minister of Defense
and Aviation, Prince Sultan bin Abdul Aziz Al-Saud, commented to
Vance that the Saudis were “impressed with the quick U.S. response”
to Begin’s statement about Israeli settlements on the West Bank. Sultan
added that “this is the way to do it—strike while the iron is hot!” Vance
agreed with Sultan, stating that the U.S. response had to be “quick and
clear.” Following this exchange, Khalid repaired Vance’s eyeglasses,
which had broken, and commented, “Pressure, pressure. Sometimes
you can repair things with pressure.” (Memorandum of Conversation
in Helicopter Returning King Khalid to Andrews Air Force Base, Oc-
tober 27; Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs, NEA Front Office Subject File 1978–1984, Lot 85D251, Box 3,
1978 Memcons—President)
On November 2, Carter sent a letter to Fahd summarizing their
meeting in Washington and expressing his appreciation of Saudi sup-
port. The text of the letter was sent in telegram 279224 to Jidda, No-
vember 2. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
rial, Cables File, State Department Out, Box 114, 11/1–11/78)
