82 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV The discussion at the July 7 meeting should provide an important framework for the later consideration of both national strategy vis-­a-­ vis the Soviet Union and the key military and force posture issues to be presented to the PRC. II. Issues For You to Focus On A. The profile of the present balance. The Net Assessment concludes that at present (Era II), the US–SU competition shows a rough overall asymmetrical equivalence exists in military capabilities and significant American advantage in most non-­military aspects of national power. This represents a shift, however, from the previous pattern (Era I) of US dominance in all areas. It results from the growth of Soviet military power, strategic and conventional, in the 1960s and early 1970s. The assessment notes five key developments within the Era II balance: 1. The new incongruence in US–SU capabilities, given increased Soviet military strength. 2. The changing role of military force under rough parity, with conventional strength achieving added significance. 3. The certainty of political uncertainty, particularly in European politics (East and West), in Chinese relationships, and in the Third World. 4. The rise in the importance of the Middle East to US–SU competition. 5. The emergence of regionally influential Third World states which are also active in the global arena. B. The direction of present trends. Current and foreseeable trends are generally less favorable to the United States. Trends in the political sphere (political institutions and leaderships, capacities for political-­ ideological action) and in economic productivity favor the U.S. In some other areas, such as intelligence capabilities and core alliances, the trends are mixed. And in many key areas, the dynamics either favor the SU or are against the US: strategic forces, conventional forces in Europe, mobilization and force projection capabilities, short-­run economic interaction payoffs, and the diplomatic balance, especially in Africa and Latin America. C. The significance of present trends. These adverse and mixed trends vary widely in significance. Categories for discussion are: 1. Trends which will be halted/reversed if planned US and allied improvements are carried out (e.g., in strategic forces, military balance on the Central Front). 2. Trends which do not yet pose significant challenges to the US (e.g., in force projection capabilities, Latin America).
